
66/ 1001
FOR PRESS: ELECT. ED MINISTRY
Statement by the Leader of the Parliamentary Liberal
Party, th Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, M. P.
The question of an elected Ministry was
raised at the meeting of the Liberal Party this afternoon.
There was no proposal that the elective process should apply
to the Ministry about fo be formed. The proposal before the
meeting was that a Committee of the Party be constituted to
go more thoroughly into this question in all its aspects and
to report back to the Party prior to the next Federal General
Election. The view taken by the Party after discussion
was to reject the setting up of a Committee of the Party,
but to regard the matter as open to be raised at the first
meeting held following the general elections, which are likely
to be held towards the end of this year.
CAkBERRA, January, 1966. 


20 January, 1966
MR, HOLT No doubt you have been advised by now that I. have been elected leader of the Liberal Party. For me this is not only a great honour but a tremendous opportunity to do things for Australia which I hope will advance the interests of this country and the wellbeing of its people.
It is the first time in twenty-one years in other words in the whole history of the Liberal Party of Australia that the Federal Parliamentary leadership has changed. That statement is in itself quite a remarkable tribute to the man I have succeeded. Sir Robert founded the Liberal Party and was its Parliamentary leader throughout its history until this point of time.
I can claim to have been a supporter of the party from the outset. At its first public meeting held following its formation, I announced my own intention to apply for membership, and I have been an active member of the party since that time active in the organisational affairs as well as in the parliamentary party, and today the party has done me the honour of electing me to lead it.
The principles which attracted me to the Liberal Party in the first instance are a truly Australian outlook, a determination to preserve for the Australian people freedom for the individual, opportunities and incentives for the individual with the emphasis on freedom of the individual. These things have endured throughout the life of the party, and I believe these principles are the reason why we are attracting at this time so many young people either to our ranks or to our political support.
It is this dedication to principle, the preservation of freedom which I believe has enabled as to deal in a flexible fashion with the great variety of problems which have confronted Australia during our years of existence as a party and more particularly in the years a long period of more than sixteen uninterrupted years in which we have exercised office in Australia.
I believe that by dedication to these principles and their application to the problems which lie ahead we should be able to continue the successful administration of Sir Robert Menzies and face the new problems which lie in the future for us.
In a sense it is the end of an era, although of course by no means the end of a great public career because Sir Robert is a man of not only domestic stature but of international stature; but in a sense it is the end of an era. A transfer of political authority in these circumstances inevitably produces some fermentation and yeasting, some stocktaking, and the new administration will be facing up to the problems and challenges fortified by our friendly association together in the past and inspired by the principles which our former leader has done so much to establish as a fundamental aspect of the Australian character.
You will have learned that this morning's proceedings produced a new leader, but the election for a Deputy Leader resulted in Mr. McMahon gaining that appointment. We were fortunate to have a choice between two very able and sincere men, and the Whip has informed me that the voting was very close.
I am quite certain that the teamwork that has always existed between Mr. McMahon, Mr. Hasluck and myself will continue in the future. As to our relations with the Country Party, I am able to inform you that Mr. McEwen and I have had the most cordial discussions together about a future association. We see no problems in continuing the close relationship which existed between Sir Robert and Mr. McEwen. I have been, of course, closely associated with him for more than thirty years in the Parliament. , ie have been warm personal friends during that period and we have every expectation that we shall have s close and effective teamwork together as the leaders of our respective parties.
I imagine there may be one or two things you would like to know about, where we go from here. I am not proposing to discuss party matters at this point. I would expect to have a full press conference with you some time in the course of the next week. I an not making a full statement about Sir Robert's service at this point. As I mentioned to the party meeting this morning, I will be proposing to my colleagues and also the Opposition party leaders that the Parliament place suitably on record and at some length Parliament's own tribute to this great Parliamentarian when in the course of the first week the Parliament meets. I would also be proposing to have a suitable occasion in the precincts of the Parliament ( which would probably take the form of a Parliamentary Dinner) at which again an opportunity could be presented Tor Sir Robert in turn to meet the Parliament and those associated with it and express himself as he would wish. Quite clearly there must be a Parliamentary recognition for a man whose career was unique in Australian Parliamentary history. Today there were movin7 tributes paid to Sir Robert by several executive members of the joint parties. At the time when we were making these expressions of appreciation I had made it known that there would be other opportunities when this could be done for public record.
QUESTION The Cabinet and the Ministry - when are you going to announce them?
MR  HOLT Well, I will be having discussions in relation to this. It is a large operation of course due to the resignation of Senator Paltridge and the Prime Minister's retirement. These are two of the major portfolios but they affect more than two appointments, quite obviously. Not only will I need to give a good deal of thought myself to this but it will be necessary to discuss wit the personalities concerned and then later to have discussions which are customary between the leader of the Liberal Party and the leader of the Country Party before an announcement is made.
QUESTION Do you think you will be ready by Tuesday?
MR. HOLT I would not expect it to be later than Tuesday.
QUESTION Do you intend to live in Canberra, Mr. Holt?
MR. HOLT I live here now:
QUESTION At the Lodge?
MR. HOLT : Frankly, although I was optimistic, I have not got as far as working out such things.
QUESTION Will you go to the Lodge?
MR. HOLT Not immediately. Sir Robert will be occupying it for a while. I don’t  want to live in the Kurrajong of course. All my family are in Melbourne and I will want to maintain some contact with them. I won't be disposing of my home - we are having an election….
QUESTION Do you plan to maintain regular contact with the Press Gallery?
MR. HOLT I am afraid so! If you can remain as friendly as you have been in the last week I will see a lot of you. I said in the party room this morning that I felt I could claim that everyone present was a friend. I also like to think this is true of the Press Gallery.
 


For Press:  P. M. No. 1/ 1966
Ministerial Appointments
Statement by the Right Honourable Harold Holt
The swearing of the new Ministry will take place at 11 a. m. on Wednesday, January 26. With the authority of the Governor-General, I now announce the appointments which will be made : - 
The Rt. Hon. H. E. HOLT, M. P.  - Prime Minister
The Rt. Hon. J. McEWEN, M. P. -  Minister for Trade and Industry (and Deputy Prime Minister)
The Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.  - Treasurer
The Rt. Hon. P. M. C. HASLUCK, M. P. - Minister for External Affairs
The Hon. C. F. ADERMANN, M. P.  - Minister for Primary Industry
The Hon. A. FAIRHALL, M. P.  - Minister for Defence
Senator the Hon. N. H. D. HENTY - Minister for Supply, and Leader of the Government in the Senate
The Hon. A. S. HULME, M. P. - Postmaster-General and Vice-President of the Executive Council
The Hon. D. E. FAIRBAIRN, D. F. C., M. P. - Minister for National Development, and Leader of the Government in the House of Representatives
The Hon. C. E. BARNES, M. P. - Minister for Territories
Senator the Hon. J. G. GORTON - Minister ofr Works, and under the Prime Minister, Minister-in-Charge, Commonwealth Activities in Education and Research
The Hon. L. H. E. BURY, M. P.  - Minister for Labour and National Service
The Hon. G. FREETH, M.P. - Minister for Shipping and Transport
The Hon. H. F. OPPEIRMIAN, OBE., M. P. - Minister for Immigration
The Hon. R. W. C. SWARTZ, MBE., ED., M. P. - Minister for Civil Aviation
The Hon. B. M. SNEDDEN, Q. C., M.P. - Attorney-General 
The Hon. A. J. FORBES, M.C., M.P. - Minister for Health
The Hon. J. D. ANTHONY, M. P. - Minister for the Interior
The Hon. F. C. CHANEY, A. F. C., M. P. - Minister for the Navy
The Hon. P. HOWSON, M. P. - Minister for Air, and assisting the Treasurer
Senator the Hon. K. McC. ANDERSON - Minister for Customs and Excise
Senator the Hon. G. C. McKELLAR - Minister for Repatriation
The Hon. I. McC. SINCLAIR, M. P - Minister for Social Services  
Senator the Hon. DAME ANNABELLE RANKIN, D. B. E. - Minister for Housing
The Hon. J. M. FRASER, M. P. - Minister for the Army
CANBERRA January 25, 1966 



FOR PRESS 66/ 004
P. I. No. 4/ 1966
EXCHANGE OF GREETINGS 1ITH INDIA
Australia's new Prime Minister, Mr. Harold
Holt has had an exchange of greetings with the new Indian
Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi.
In her message, Mrs. Gandhi said
" The National ay of Australia affords
me a welcome opportunity to extend to you, and
through you to the Government and the People of
Australia, the warm felicitations of the Government
and the People of India to which I add my own.
WIe also take this opportunity to send our best
wishes for your personal health and happiness and
for the progress and prosperity of the People of
Australia." Mr. Holt replied
" I am warmly appreciative of your
gracious message. My own Government formally
takes office on this, the National Day of our
two countries. I hope this is symbolic of even
closer relationship between us in the future.
I send our best congratulations to you
from the Australian people and myself upon your
assumption of the leadership of the Government and
people of India. May health, happiness and
success be yours in the discharge of your heavy
responsibilities."
CANBERRA, 26th January, 1966. 



66/ 003
P. M. Yo. 3/ 1966
PRIME MINISTER'S ME~ SSAGE TO THE aICID FORCES
The i rime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt today
sent a special Australia Day Mlessage to members of Australia's
Armed Forces. IMr. Holt said
" On this ;' ustralia Day as we celebrate
the birth of our nationj there is a special place
in our thoughts for those Australians whose service
abroad is contributing to our security and wellbeing.
On behalf of the Australian Government
and people, I send to Australian servicemen and
womer4 wherever the~ y may be, an expression of our
gratitude and appreciation.
My personal good wishes to you all."
This special greeting, together with Mr. Holt's
message to the nation, was distributed to the Armed Forces
through Defence communications channels.
C kNB= RR
26th January, 1966. 



6 6 00 2
EMBAXGQO I FO REEAS BEORE12 MIDNIIGHT 2TH JANUARY
P. M. No. 2/ 1966
AUSTRALIA DAY MESSAGE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hen.
Harold Holt
This is our national birthday. Birthdays call
for celebration and we of the Australian family find much to
rejoice about. W~ e see in the Australia of 1966 a prosperous
nation growing in stature and influence as it strides steadily
forward, W: e live our lives in a climate of freedom, secured
by laws of our own making.. For us there are the excitements
and challenges of growth, the responsibilities of keeping our
nation secure and of giving out to others as our expanding
economy enables. Here is a country to be greatly enjoyed with all
its unique beauty and infinite variety. Here is a country to
be lovedto be served with devotion. May we all feel it in
our hearts to strive the harder to make this Australia of ours
a country of even more splendid tomorrows.
CAN~ BERRA,
26th January, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 5/ 1966
f
MESSAGES FOR KEW PRIME MINISTER \* j
The new Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt c ntinues
to receive congratulatory messages from many parts of the
world. Among the latest messages from world leaders are
cables and letters from the Prime Ministers of Britain,
Canada, South Africa, New 4ealand, Iorthern Ireland, the
Soviet Union, Germany, reece, Israel, Korea, Malta Japan
and Rationalist China and from the Presidents of Pakistan
and -ialagasy. The British Prime Minister, Mr. ilson said
" I send you my best wishes on your appointment
as Prime Minister of Australia, following Sir Robert
Menzies' retirement. I look forward to working closely
with you on the many important questions which affect
our two countries and I warmly welcome you as a
Commonwealth colleague. I am sure that under your
leadership Australia and Britain will maintain their
strong ties of friendship."
The Canadian Prime Minister, Mr. Lester Pearson
said " My colleagues and I should like to join in
congratulating you on your appointment as Prime
iinister in the Commonwealth Government to succeed
Sir Robert Menzies. From the experience of my
colleagues who have had the pleasure of meeting you
and working with you in Commonwealth and international
bodies there has developed the fullest confidence that
the intimate and warm ties that have existed between
our two governmats will continue and be strengthened.
I look forward to having the same frank
and easy exchanges on mutual problems with you that I
and my predecessors have long enjoyed with Sir Robert.
I hope we will have an early opportunity of meeting.
Please accept my and my colleagues very
warmest best wishes as you assume your new responsibilities."
The New Zealand Prime Minister, Mr. Holyoake,
said " My colleagues and I would like to congratulate
you on the occasion of your assuming office as Prime
Minister and to wishyou sincerely every success in the
years ahead. I am sure that the varm friendship between
our countries will ensure continuing co-operation in
all matters of mutual concern. Towards that end I
should like you to know that you may always rely on
my fullest co-operation. Under your leadership
Australia I know will continue to provide that
forthright influence in Commonwealth and world affairs
which it has had now for many years." / 2 
2
The message from the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the Mr. Kosygin, reads
" Please, Mr. Prime Minister accept my
con. ratulations in connection with your appointment
to the position of Prime Minister of the Commonwealth
of Australia. Permit me to express the hope
that relations between the Soviet Union and Australia
will develop favourably in the interests of the
peoples of our countries and of the cause of peace
In our time."
CANBERRA, 27th January, 1966 



66/ 018
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 6/ 1966
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF THAILAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister of Thailand, His Excellency
Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn, has accepted the Government's
invitation to visit Australia. He will make the visit
from . ednesday, 23rd February to Thursday, 3rd March.
The Prime Minister will be accompanied by his
wife and by an official party including the Minister of
Foreign Affairs ( His Excellency ir. Thanat Khoman) and the
Minister of Lational Development ( His Excellency Mr. Pote
Sarasin). It is anticipated that the itinerary will include
a visit to Canberra, Sydney, Melbourne and the Snowy Mountains
area. Consultations are at present taking place on details
of the programme. The Prime Minister of Thailand will visit New
Zealand for a week before coming to Australia.
I warmly welcome this visit which will do much to
further the already friendly relations existing between our
two countries.
CANBERRA, 28th January, 1966. 



FOR PRESS-: 66/ 0
P. M. 1, o. 7/ 1966
RESUMPTION OF BOM~ BING IN NORTH VIET NAM
Statement by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt
President Johnson has made a statement about the
resumption of bombing in North Viet Na,, a directed against
installations and transport routes used for the conduct of
warfare in South Viet Nam.
The bombing was suspended in December, even though
an earlier pause in bombing last May had evoked no positive
response, and even though there were strong military reasons
for the continuance of bombing. The North Vietnamese authorities
had, for a period of months, increased the rate of infiltration
of armed men to South Viet Nam. In the last six months of
1965, many thousands of North Vietnamese soldiers entered South
Viet Nam as units and equipped for open warfare.
The purpose of the bombing has been not to destroy
the regime in Hanoi or break the economy of North Viet Nam, or
to shatter the basis of the people's livelihood, uit to damage or
destroy those military installations and facilities which enable
Hanoi to supply and support its own forces in the South and those
of the Viet Cong. The suspension of the bombing was of a very subtantial
military and political significance. It meant a self-imposed
denial by the United States of the use of a valuable military
weapon. It was part of a programme of action designed to
encourage North Viet Nam to turn back from its course of
incrc; asingly open military intervention in South Viet Nam. Having
suspended the bombing, the United States undertook active
diplomatic efforts to make knwn its genuine wish for an end to
the warfare and for discussion leading to a just solution by
peaceful means. Governments of communist countries and of nonaligned
countries which might possess some influence in Peking
and Hanoi were approached. Direct contacts were made in some
capitals where the United States and North Viet Nam were both
represented. From Washington and Saigon, the Australian Government
was kept fully informed of these developments. Mr. Averell
Harriman visited Canberra for discussions with us. The approaches
made by the United States were widely welcomed throughout the world,
but regrettably, brought no sign of any disposition on the part
of the other side to modify its determination to continue the war.
On the contrary, the North Vietnamese took advantage of the
respite from bombing to repair and improve their system of / 2 
2-
infiltration. considerable volume of traffic has passed through
this system into South Viet Narn. Certainly in larger volume and at a
faster rate than would have been possible if bombing had been
continued to impede it.
Private contacts brought forth no positive responses.
Peking, Hanoi and the Liberation Front have denounced the United
States efforts, describing them as a manouevre to cover up an
intensification and expansion of aggressive war in Viet Nam. The
Liberation Front pledges itself " to make greater efforts to strike
harder at the heads of the aggressors, deal them heavier punishments,
and make them realise that their only honourable path at the present
time is a quick withdrawal from South Viet Nam."
The latest United States initiatives have-thus been
rejected as summarily and emphatically as have other efforts made in
the past. It has consistently been the view of the Australian
Government that N~ orth Viet Narn must not be permitted to remain a
haven immune from military risk, from which military aggression
against the South can be mounted with impunity. Because we believe
North Viet Namn cannot be left free to mount military operations
against South Viet Namn and against the American, Australian, New
Zealand and Korean soldiers who are helping to defend the country, we
firmly support the American decision as realistic and necessary.
It remains our hope, however, that the North Vietnamese and those
associated with them will recognise that their aggression will not
be allowed to succeed. We must hope that the time is not distant
when they will join in finding a just and peaceful solution.
While the aggression continues, it will be met firmly by resistance
in which Australia will play its part. 1N1kneo w that the United States
will remain alert and ready to explore any indication of willingness
on the other side to move towards a settlement on just terms.
The United States readiness in this respect is
indicated by the request of the United States Government for an
urgent meeting of the Security Council toconsider the situation in
Viet Namn.
CANBERRA, 1st February, 1966. 



66/ 02 1
FOR PRESS: STATEIvNT ISSUED FOLiO.-ING THE CON~ CLUSION OF
DEFENCE CONSULTATIONS IN CANBERRA
Consultations in the light of the British defence
review have been taking place in Canberra during the last
two days between Australian Ministers, Mr. Dean Eyre, New
Zealand Minister of Defence and Mr. Denis Healey, British
Defence Minister. The British Government's provisional conclusions
were explained by Mr. Healey. They provided the basis for
a full, and helpful, discussion in which Australian and
New Zealand Ministers explained their attitudes towards
the future problems of allied defence policy in this area
of the world. Mr. Healey, who has also had discussions in
Washington with United States Ministers, will be returning
to London after a short visit to Singapore and Malaysia,
to report to his colleagues.
Arrangements have been made for consultation to
continue as required through appropriate channels.
CANBERRA, 2nd February, 1966. 



FOR PRESS tY P. M. No. 8/ 1966
PRIME MINISTER TO VISIT QUEENSLAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
It has been my intention to make an early visit
to Queensland as Prime Minister and I propose to do this next
week. I shall take advantage of the opportunity to participate
in the Dawson byelection. I will be flying to Brisbane from Canberra on
Wednesday 16th, and it was my intention to make a call on the
Premier, r. Frank Nicklin. He has now been good enough to
arrange to meet me at the airport.
I shall then go on to Mackay where I will speak
in support of the Country Party candidate on Wednesday
evening. The following day I will make an official vis
to Rockhampton and will stop oTf in Brisbane to record a
" Meet the Press" television interview.
I will fly back to Canberra in the late afternoon
of Thursday, 17th.
CANBERRA, 8th February, 1966 



c~
C, I
~ E 1)&gt; P. M. No. 9/ 1966
VISIT BY U. S. VICE-PRESIDEET
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Vice-President of the United States, Mr.
Hubert Humphrey, will make a short visit to Australia during
an extensive tour of this part of the world.
The visit will take place in the course of
the next week or so but final details are still being
discussed. , e warmly welcome this opportunity for direct
discussions with the Vice-President.
CAINBERRA, 9th February, 1966
FOR PRESS 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 10/ 1966
CHAKGE IN VICE-PRESIDEiT HUMPHRIEY'S ARRIVAL TIME
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Helt, said tonight
that lice-President Humphrey would not now be arriving in
Australia next ednesday.
There has been a review of dates for the Vice-
President's visit involving a delay of two or three days.
C NBERRA, February, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 11/ 966
CHANGEOVER TO DECIMAL CURRENCY
Statement by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt
Tomorrow we arrive, after years of discussion, planning
and organisation, at a landmark in our financial and commercial
history. It marks the introduction of a new system of money
dollars and cents which will finally bring this country into
line with the vast majority of the world's people, 95 per cent.
of whom already use decimal currency.
The change will be closely watched by official
observers from the United Kingdom and New Zealand. New " ealand
will be introducing its own decimal currency system in 1967.
The United Kingdom has understudied a report received from a
special committee set up to report on the advisability of a
decimal system for the United Kingdom.
In Australia, the new currency will carry subst-ntial
advantages in its train. For example
Increased efficiency for Australian commerce and industry;
Methods of teaching money arithmetic in the Australian
schools will be streamlined and simplified. More time
will be available for teachers and students to concentrate
on other aspects of their work;
Our exporters will " speak the same tongue" as most of their
trading partners ana should be all the more welcome
for it;
Many migrants and tourists will be assisted by it.
Not all of these factors will show themselves overnight.
The greatest gains may take a number of years to slhw
themselves fully. To many of us, decimal currency will seem
somewhat strange for a time after the familiar pounds, shillings
and pence. We should not become unduly concerned. Certainly
nobody will automatically lose money in the conversion to decimal
currency. This point seems to be worrying a number of people
who apparently fee they will lose twopence in every shilling
when their savings are converted to decimal currency.
They may set their minds at rest on this point.
It is not true. The misconception arises from the mistaken belief
that because the one cent is the nearest full-cent value to
one penny, a cent and a penny are exactly the same thing. But
in fact they are significantly different one cent being worth
4. ne and one-fifth pennies. This means that ten cents is worth
exactly one shilling and not tenpence as some people seem to think.
One shilling will be converted eyaotly into ten
cents and ten shillings will be converted exactly into one dollar.
There will be no loss to anybody on these conversions. / 2 
-2-
Gains from Decimal Currency
The nation has already made three important gains
from decimal currency. First we have introduced much-needed coinage
reform, which has 6rought a completely integrated set of coins
of common sense size. We are going to find them much more
cenvenient for our daily cash transactions.
Secondly, we now have new and distinguished designs
for our notes and coins, which more faithfully reflect the
spirit of the nation.
Thirdly, we have built a highly efficient Royal
Australian Mint to help produce the new coins. Its performance
is well up to expectation but it is proving an asset in another
useful direction. In keeping with our " new look" coins and
notes, the new Mint is a notable tourist attraction in Canberra,
and is the enly Mint in the world which freely opens its front
door and observation areas to the general public.
The Cost of Decimal Currency
Progress has its price and decimal currency must
be paid for, particularly in the short term. Machine conversion,
for example, will cost 54 million ( E27 million) the bulk of
the changeover cost. However large though this figure appears,
it is some LOmillion below the original official estimate of
cost. There are some 500,000 machines to be converted to
decimal eperation. They range from cash registers to taximeters
from petrol pumps to adding machines. These will be
converted in carefully planned, nationally co-ordinated programmes.
This work is estimated to take up to two years,
according to the business machine companies which have contractCd
to carry it out. We believe however that the companies will be
able to speed their worf and we Aepe that Australia will be
operating solely in decimal currency some months before the twoyear
period is up. We shall be doing what we can to achieve this.
Tomorrow's Events Changeover day may produce some temporary inconveniences.
Thesemay prove unavoidable in a change of this
magnitude. The careful planning of the Decimal Currency Board,
supplemented by parallel and co-ordinated planning in so many
important sectors of the community, from banks to business houses,
from retail stores to government departments should do much to
minimise these. Changeover day should go smoothly, even quietly.
If it does so, it will be a tribute to our maturity
as a people who can welcome progress and can co-operate
successfully for its achieement even when it brings the need
for adjustment in our daily routines.
CANBERRA, 13th February, 1966 



FOR PRESS P. M4. No. 12/ 1966
SUCCESS OF DAY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Australia has taken decimals in its stride
and Australians can feel proud of the way in which they
have co-operated to make this a smooth transition.
I have been receiving reports today from the
Chairman of the Decimal Currency Board, Sir J,. Valter Scott,
the Reserve Bank and the Commonwealth Treasury. The
enquiries made by these three sources have covered a very
wide field and they have all been able to report to me that
the smoothness of the changeover has exceeded our best
expectations. As anticipated, there have been a few isolated
and minor problems but nothing has emerged so far to cause
any real concern. Satisfactory reports have been flowiing
in from banks, retailers, transport services and all sections
of the community in all of the States.
Based on the first day's results, we can have
full confidence that Australia will readily adapt itself
to its new currency and soon reap the many substantial
benefits that we expect to flow from this more efficient
money system.
C AllBERRA1,
14th February, 1966. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 14/ 1966
REFERENDUM~
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, said today that
Cabinet had further considered the course to be followed in
relation to the holding of a referendum on the two proposals to
amend the Constitution which were passed by both Houses of
Parliament towards the end of last year.
The major purpose of the first of these proposals
was to remove the requirement in the Constitution that any
increase in the number of Members of the House of Representatives
would automatically produce an increase in the number of Senators
to the extent of half the increase in the number of Members of
the House of Representatives. The second proposal was to
remove the provision which prevents aboriginal natives from
being counted when the population is reckoned. Before these
proposals could become law, they would have to be approved by
a referendum of the people. The referendum was to be held on a
date to be determined by the Government not less than two months,
nor more than six months, after the Bills containing the proposals
were passed by both Houses of Parliament that is, before the
2nd June, 1966. Mr. Holt said Cabinet had decided to inform the
Parliament-that the Government would recommend to the Governorin-
Council that he does not issue a writ for the holding of a
referendum this year in relation to either of these proposals.
The decision of Cabinet will be conveyed to the Chief Electoral
Officer of the Commonwealth, who in the absence of this notification,
would proceed as required to the posting to some six
million voters of the arguments for and against the proposals.
In explanation of the Government's decision, Mr.
Holt said this. " We have given a great deal of thought to the
course to be followed in relation to these proposals. We remain
strongly in support of both of them. But ours is a new Government
which will, in the normal course of events, be conducting a
general election later this year. We have taken office at a time
when the Australian Government finds itself heavily occupied with
a great many important and pressing matters arising both at home
and abroad. We see ahead of us a crowded and unusually active
political year. We feel that, in addition to performing an
increasing volume of administrative tasks, we should, as a new
e / 2 
-2-
Government, make a thorough review of current policies. In the
swiftly-moving world of today, some changes may well appear to us
to have become desirable. We wish to be able to concentrate on
all these matters without the interruption and distraction that an
active referendum campaign of several weeks would create.
" We believe an intensive referendum campaign of this
dimension would be necessary if the Australian public is to be
made fully aware of the need for the first proposal in relation to
the Parliament, and to counter uninformed opinion and misleading
propaganda already evident, which have adversely affected public
support for this proposal.
" There is no urgency about the proposal becoming law
this year, because no action is intended arising from it in the
course of the remainder of the life of this Parliament. On the
other hand, we believe that the proposal will be better understood,
and more widely supported, if it is presented after the general
elections in the context of a programme of specified increase in
the number of Members of the House of Representatives without there
having to be an increase of Senators. This increase would be
linked with redistribution proposals to be presented in the life
of the same Parliament for the purpose of remedying the present
unsatisfactory and inequitable distribution of population in
existing electorates. Some metropolitan electorates, for example,
currently include less than 40,000 voters: others are stretched
well beyond the 100,000 mark.
" The Government, when informing the Parliament on its
resumption early in March, of its intention to defer the holding
of the referendum proposals, will also indicate that it intends,
early in the life of the next Parliament, to introduce the
necessary legislation to enable a referendum to be held on the
proposal to break the nexus, and it will, at the same time, give
a general indication of its intentions in relation to redistribution
proposals should the referendum prove successful.
" The Government will further indicate that the proposal
relating to aborigines would be presented at the same time as
the " nexus" proposal. This proposal about aborigines has been
supported by all political parties, and, indeed, no-one has come
forward to present a " Negative" case in opposition to it. Any
delay in passing the referendum in relation to the counting of
9jborigines will have no adverse practical result because, in fact,
the Commonwealth Statistician does count the aboriginal natives
in the community and makes the figure public. The provision in the
1 
Constitution does not amount to an impediment against this
counting, nor does it prevent aborigines voting. Many of them
do. We believe the provision should be taken out of the
Constitutiin because it is outmoded and misleading, and gives
cause for criticism both inside and outside Australia by
people unaware of the actual situation.
" IRather than incur the additional expense of
holding two separate referenda to cover the proposals, the
Government intends to hold them together as soon as practicable
in the life of the incoming Parliament after the next election.
" Throughout its discussions, the Cabinet has been
sensitive to the fact that the Parliament has supported in
both Houses the referendum legislation which the Menzies
Government presented to it. We believe, however, that the
Parliament will recognise the reasons which have influenced
us, and will approve our decision to defer the proposals for
the time being. Wie are convinced that what we are now putting
forward is not only the sensible course in current circumstances,
but will strengthen, rather than weaken, the prospect of success
for both proposals."
CANBERRA, February, 1966. 



PUBLIC MEETING AT MACKAY, QUEENSLAND
DAWSON ELECTION CAMPAIGN 16th FEBRUARY, 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Chairman, Ministerial and Parliamentary Colleagues:
Mr. Fordyce and Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am, as my colleagues have expressed themselves to be, very glad
to be able to take a personal and active part here in this electorate of Dawson
in the by-election which is being contested on behalf of the Government parties
by a splendid candidate to whom you were listening a little earlier in the
evening. In John Fordyce we have the kind of candidate who can speak the kind
of language and represent the interests which Dawson traditionally has hoped to
see served in the national Parliament of the nation. He doesn't come to you
as a crusader with a fanatical gleam in his eye, thinking of one topic only and
regardless of the rest in which you are concerned. He comes from a background
of diversified interests in the great industries and the varied activities which
constitute this rich and diversified electorate and I am quite certain any of you who
have not previously heard him in action have seen him in the flesh and heard him
tonight, will feel that in John Fordyce, carrying the banner of the Government
parties you have a candidate who will serve this electorate well for many years
to come. Now I come to you tonight, not for the first time in Mackay and
certainly not as a stranger to Queensland, and I am not speaking of interest shown
in this State in more recent years, but it is perhaps appropriate that my first
visit to Queensland should have been made as a young member of the Federal
Parliament just thirty years ago when at that time Australia not being then so
conscious of the problems we face today and certainly with nothing of the economy
we possess at this time, concentrated on what we would regard today as perhaps
as not such large issues on which to wage a political controversy, but I can assure
that at that time the hottest issue in my own electorate of Fawkner as I then
represented was the price of sugar to the housewives of Victoria. And so I came to
Queensland to see for myself whether the people I represented were being
exploited in the fixed price being charged to us for sugar from this State, and. I
was able to see as I travelled North through the rich sugar areas and into that
beautiful country which constitutes in my own judgment the most picturesque
and attractive part of Australia. I was able to see that here were an industrious
people working in tropical conditions which in past years it had been said that
people of European race could not successfully handle, and here was the most
efficient sugar industry in the world being developed by my fellow Australians
under conditions which the rest of Australia should applaud. And since then I
think I can fairly claim to have been a good friend of the industry and a good
friend of this State. I am glad to say that this judgment anyhow is that held by
my old colleague, Sir Arthur Fadden whom you knew so well in this city and by the
present Premier and former Treasurer of this State, Mr. Nicklin and Mr. Hiley. 
So I come to you as a friend and in confidence that what I have been
able to do in the past and express on behalf of this State its development
potential and the place it occupies in the national scene will have demonstrated
my own good faith in what I have to say to you in the course of my remarks here
tonight. I have come tonight also as the political head of the nation and I say
that very proudly, and at the same time conscious of the sort of responsibility
it creates in the holder of that office. Mr. Whitlam, I see, was reported in the
press today as having said that the leadership had been handed to me on a platter.
Well I can understand the envy in his tone having regard to the current problems
but really what he was saying was that having served my distinguished leader
loyally and with devotion to the policies and principles we had worked out
together for some ten years, when he saw fit to retire, my party paid me the
honour of electing ine unanimously. Now perhaps if Mr. Whitlam had exercised
the same degree of patience, it might have been handed to him on a platter too,
but you can't have it both ways and he' s trying to get it rather quicker than I
sought to do. But I am sure that there can be few countries in the world in which
the democratic tradition has become so firmly entrenched and in which over
sixteen or seventeen years of office we have been able to build up a much more friendly
and co-operative community spirit than existed in the early years when I first
came into Parliament, that as a result of these things there has been as smooth a
transition of political authority as any country could hope to experience. Here
we are going along steadily much as we have before but with a new Government
feeling it to be its own responsibility to turn its attention to the policies of the
day to see to what extent these should be varied in the national interest.
I want to talk to you tonight not just as the electors of Dawson, not
just pointing to domestic or parochial issues and seeking to persuade you to vote
for our side of government because you have responded to some direct appeal
which goes to your own immediate self-interest. I don't decry that as a means
of campaigning or indeed as forming an important part in the campaign now
undertaken but I do believe from what I have read of the speeches of my colleagues
that they have covered those aspects very thoroughly indeed before I came to the
election. And I would therefore prefer to speak to you tonight as a fellow Australian
interested in the large national questions, not academic questions but questions
which bear on your own security, your own prosperity, your own position as a
citizen in a country growing in stature, growing in influence, growing in prosperity
and strength, and these things are of tremendous importance to us all, and it is
fair for us to put it to you that if you believe that we have had any substantial hand
as a government through our experience, through our judgment, through our
capacities in bringing Australia to this level of eminence which has attracted the
admiration of other countries in the world, then it is fair for us to say to you when
the time comes, " Support the candidates we present to you" so that this process
can be strengthened and so that it can continue to your advantage and to the
national advantage. Now this is what we put to you in the course of this by-election.
We can't say to you, " Look contrast what we are doing with what the Labor Party
has been doing" because we have to go so back into the past in order to point to
what the Labor Party did in that day and time that to many of you, particularly a
younger generation of voters, it seems somewhat unreal. And yet there it was
the record stands cn the board and I would hope that at times when you feel critical
of your own government of the day, you will not be unmindful that we are facing up
to situations and problems which earlier governments found themselves incapable of
dealing with adequately. 
If I may mention just one matter which I know troubles those of you
who rely upon stable prices for competitive capacity in the export markets of
the world, and we are grappling with this problem year in and year out. Not
an easy thing in an economy t-hat seeks to maintain full employment for its
people through every State in the Commonwealth, to keep a stable price level.
We have to contend in Australia with conditions of drought, other climatic factors.
We have to contend with the fluctuations that occur so dramatically at times, ' as
you learnt to your loss in respect of sugar in recent periods. We have-to contend
with these things and at the same time try to maintain some stability of price
levels. I don't imagine that the Labor Party found this easy. When we took over
at the end of 1949, the price level was rising at the rate of 10 per cent. per annum,
and here for most of the period of recent years, we have been able to maintain a
comparatively stable price level and it is only in the last year or so that these
pressures have reasserted themselves, coming though, now, we believe, firmly
under control. So we would put it to you that here is a government in office for
seventeen years, not made up of the same people because we haven't clung
to office as individuals. There has been a steady movement out of the Ministry
with fresh faces and fresh vigour coming to build up the strength of the Cabinet
that is left behind, and in point of fact there are only two members of the present
Cabinet who were there when we first took office at the end of 1949. Those are
the Deputy Prime Minister and myself. All the rest are men and in Annabelle's
case, a very disti-nguished woman who have come to us since we came back into
office ir. 1949. But there we've been. We are, as I say, a reinvigorated team of
Ministers, refreshed by new recruits from time to time, for seventeen years, and
no-one in their senses, if they had a successful business conducting their affairs
and showing substantial profits year by year would think of tipping the whole
management out in order to put in its place, a completely untried set of executives
who have had no active experience of running that business at all. There is not
one member of the Labor Party who will have administered a Government Department
at any time over the past seventeen years, not in the national field at any rate,
so that this we think is a matter of some importance.
Now, let us look at this next question, as it has been presented in-this
electorate, of development, but I am going to ask you to look at it also in
association with defence, because if there is any area of Australia which has more caui
to wish to see a strong and balanced defence programme, it is the community that
lives in the north of Au stralia which is conscious as we all should be of the fact
that we have 100 millions of restless neighbours to our immediate north, we have
700 million Chinese at present led by a government devoted to a philosophy of
world domination, and exeiting its pressures around South East Asia today to such a
degree that we have had to meet it as a physical threat of war in the South Viet Nam
area, and we years ago spent many years in Malaysia, trying to clean up the
Communist guerrilla activity there. Now for Australia this problem has to become one
of balance. It would be plainly, however serious we might regard our necessity,
it woul d plainly be of great detriment to us to attempt to devote too large a
proportion of our resources in the defence field, Of course, there has to be a
substantial proportion going there, and œ 400M. and more of defence expenditure
a year is no trivial figure for a country of this population to undertake. But
development itself is defence in the long term because it is out of the growth of the
nation, the growth of its population, the growth of its industries, that we draw the
future strength in terms of manpower and resources for our own security and the
contribution we make in this area in alliance with powerful friends for the peace
and stability of the area as a whole. It is worth recalling that the United States of
America in 1776 that's a long time ago the Declaration of Independence, had four
millions of people, four millions only, and that was only twelve years before
Australia ha its first settlement. Now in that period, they have grown from four
millions to 19 3 millions, while we have been struggling to get up to 11 millions,
and the secret of their success was instead of involving themselves in footling
arguments about overseas investment, they took the people, they took the capital
and they built the most powerful nation in the world in an area the same size as that
of Australia and with resources certainly apparently greater than ours, but who are we
to know at this point of time just what the resources of this continent will prove to be. 
We have discovered in recent years literally treasure hou. ses of
resources for this continent, and they wouldn't be developed today at the rate
they are or to the extent they are unless there was capital coming to us from
overseas, joining in part with Australian capital for this purpose, bit I know
there are people who cover this problem with all sorts of emotional overtones
and lose a sense of perspective about it. They ask, " What's the Australian
equity in this kind of enterprise?" Let me tell you something of the Australian
equity. In every million pounds that is made or say dollars that is made of
profit by an overseas investor in Australia, we take $ 425 000 from that million
in direct company taxation. Now in practice, a company having paid its tax,
ploughs back half of what's left into its own further development; in other words,
more equipment, more job opportunities, more development for the nation. Now
let us assume that there was $ 575,000 of this $ lM. left and that $ 275,000 of it
went back into the business, leaving $ 300,000 for remittance overseas. Now even
on the most favoured terms, other than in the United Kingdom itself, the overseas
inve stor will have to pay a withholding tax of 15 per ce nt. So out of that $ l1M.
of profit, we would have attracted to the Australian Treasury just cn half a million
dollars, some $ 300,000 or thereabouts would have been ploughed back into the
business, creating more job opportunities for our fellow Australians and the rest
would have gone in remittance overseas. Now, with what comes into us as a
result of this enterprise we finance the business of goverrnment, defence expenditure,
the social welfare expenditure, the payments to State Governments, the advances
for roads, the great variety of things which the Commonwealth Government these
days has to undertake. So whatever views you may develop about overseas
investment, don't let anybody convince you that we don't have an Australian equity
in every successful overseas enterprise which flourishes in this country. Ninety
per cent, of all the investment we make in Australia comes from our own Australian
savings, but there are important areas in which new techniques, new enterprise,
new development in areas remote which have not experienced that development
before. All these things add to the national strength and it is largely because in
recent years we have been securing an investment of great dimension from the
United Kingdom, the United States, and now to a growing degree from Europe
and other parts of the world, that we have been able to sustain a migration
programme which is giving us a population growth rate of 2 per cent, or more a year.
Now, in England, it is less than one per cent. In the: United States, it is 1.3 per
cent. and this extra percentage of population growth means we have to build more
houses, and on the same scale, America, if it had our population growth would
have to build an additional half a million homes a year; the United Kingdom
170, 000 homes a year, and this is an indication of the sort of weight which rests
on our own economy as we seek to cope with the problem of growth and with this
great problem of defence. Now again, it calls for considerable experience, a great
deal of judgment to maintain these things in reasonable balance so that the economy
can move steadily forward and not become too top heavy in any one particular
direction. Now as to the offer which comes to you from Mr. Fordyce's opponent
that he will carry for Dawson the Labor banner as your representative for the future
and I say for the future because I don't think that there are people in this electorate
who would be so mean-minded as to say, " Well, we are going to take a poke at
the Government this time. It doesn't matter very much, They won't be put out of
office. It willkeep them on their toes" knowing that for Dr. Patterson to be
elected on this occasion and then rejected when we come to the general election
later this year would for him, at any rate, be virtually the ruin of whatever prospects
he might have under the rules which apply of re-engagement in the Commonwealth
Public Service. And, therefore, I say, if you are to be fair to him, if you elect
him this time, you should be doing so with the thought i n your mind that you are
going on to elect him at the end of this year. 
Now, will he be able, if elected not merely now, but to continue
as your representative, to give Dawson what Dawson wants in the national
Parliament? In the first place, what private policy will he be able to express
We have see illustrated vividly for us over recent days that no Labor Member
of Parliament can regard himself as free to vote and act the way his own
judgment tells him to do, not even the way that the Caucus, after discussion by
majority decision determines to do, and s3 what confidence can he have whatever
policy he wants to put up, even if he can persuade his Caucus colleagues, will he
finally secure the endorsement of those outside the Parliament who dictate policy
for it. When in the last election, we talked about 36 " faceless" men, the Labor
Pa.-ty rejected our charge and said it was totally unfair and untrue. Mw we are
told that there aren't merely the " 36 faceless men"; Mr. Whitlam has descr~ bed
his associates as the 12 witless men" of the Federal Executive. Where is Dr.
Patterson to go with them?"
Now in addition, Mr. Whitlam went on record yesterday and this he would
not deny because he said it quite deliberately, as declaring that he wanted t o be
the leader and I quote his actual words " of a radical and socialist Labor party'.
Now that's fair enough. If you want to be the Leader of a " radical and socialist
Labor party" then it is a very proper thing to say so. It is about time that we
did learn from the Labor Party just what it was that it wanted to be, but do you as
voters in Dawson want a candidate I gather that Dr. Patterson has already
thrown in his lot with Mr. Whitlam ( I hope I state that correctly) but do you want a
" radical and socialist party' to be speaking for Dawson and putting before the
community policies which reflect that radical and socialist spirit. I think most
Australians today want policies which give them the opportunity co take advantage
of all that Australia offers and what country has wider opportunities, more abundant
and varied opportunities for the free expression of choice than we have in Australia
at this time. The Australian people had a taste of regimentation during the wpir years.
They've never wanted it again and any party which would seek to reimpose it on the
Australian community is doomed to electoral disaster. But in these brave words
of Mr. Whitlam, one finds echoes of the regimentation of the past. With the full
choice of every other word he wanted to use, he declared that the party he wanted
to lead was to be a radical and socialist Labor Party.
And so when I read aboutMr. Whitlam fighting the Left Wing of the Australian
Labor Party, I wonder where the Right Wing has got to. If he's the Right Wing
then I think back to the time when he said that ideologically he was closer to
Dr. Cairns than to the Right Wing of his own party. So there must be a bit of
jostling in the Left if he represents the Right and Dr. Cairns, Senator Cavanagh
and Tommy Uren represenL the Left Wing of the party. Now Dawson doesn; t
want that kind of electorate representative, I am quite certain. You have in John
Fordyce a candidate mh-can express the kind of policies which Dawson wants
to see espoused and w'io will stand for the kind of Australian way of life which has been
built up over these seventeen years and which has commended itself to the
Australian people at every election held since that time. True, you gave us a narrow
squeak particularly here in Queensland in 1961, but I hope that we have demonstrated
since then that we too can learn from experience and that the Australia of today
which stands so high in the rest of the world will stand equally high in the eyes
of the electors of Dawson when they come to the poll on the 26th.
Now ladies and gentleman, there are a great many things one can say,
but you have certainly given me a very warm welcome here tonight and it must be
becoming considerably warm even for those of you who are accustomed to the
climate of this very delightful part of the world. My good friend, Ian Wood I
haven't been here, I think, for ten years and at that time we had quite a bit of
difficulty on the waterfront as some of you will remember it almost as vividly as I
do, but I don't feel I've been away from you very long because you've got the
greatest travelling salesman for Mackay in the person of your Senate representative
that any city in the Commonwealth can hope to possess. 
And so, ladies and gentlemen, the choice should not be a
difficult one for you. Here you have a country proceeding vigorously with its
national growth under policies of free enterprise, still providing three out of
every four jobs in Australia. I will close, perhaps, just on one reference which
comes back into my mind as I mention this. I said earlier that I made my
first visit back in 1936, and I can remember the excitement I felt about this
wonderful part of Australia which I discovered for the first time, and the
amazement I sensed at what seemed to be the wonderful opportunities, the
potential of what could be the richest State in the Commonwealth of Australia.
And I went back to Melbourne and talked to some of the men I knew in business
a nd commerce there and I said, " Look, here's this terrific State with all its
potential. Why aren't you putting more of your resources into investment In
projects in Queensland? And the answer I got was, " Not on your life. This is the
highest taxed State in the Commonwealth and if you make a success of the
business you stand a very godd chance of . having it taken over by the Government"
Now that was the period when governments took over all sorts of things including
butcher shops to try to run them as a State enterprise. But you had then the
highest rate of tax applying anywhere in the Commonwealth, and this was under
Labor Administrations of those days, and when you wonder now why you don't
have as many employment opportunities in Cue ensland as in some of the other
States, you have to go back to a period when the investors of that time were
discouraged by the circumstances they found in the State discouraged from coming
here and building the job-giving enterprises which they turned to other States to
carry oat. Now I believe that Queensland is launched on a new wave of expansion
because it is creating again a climate of incentive, a climate of attraction before
people who are prepared to risk their capital and their skills in a State which offers
much to them, and that climate will continue to exist while those who put their
risk of investment here feel that there is a favourable environment, a favourable
political stability. We are getting investment from around the world today because
of the political stability people perceive in this country and when they come to
individual States inside Australia, they look to the State which seems to them to
offer the most attractive climate and the greatest area of political stability.
Now you are achieving that and I would hate to see a vote in Dawson
which could'nt be a true expression of the long-term political sentiment of this area
being given to a Labor candidate just to teach the qovernment a lesson and certainly
n1ot see it when you have a fine young candidate who will, I am sure, serve
this electorate with devotion and ability if you will only get behind him and
give him your support. We ask you to do so. 



FOR PRESS P.. No. 13/ 1966
VISIT BY VICE-PRESIDENT HU1MPHREY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Advice has been received that the Vice-President
of the United OStates, 11r. Hibert Humphrey, and other senior
American officials, will arrive in Canberra late on Friday
afternoon. It will be the most high-ranking U. S. delegation
ever to visit Australia. In addition to the Vice-President,
the party will include the U. 3 Ambassador-at-large,
Governor iverell Harriman, a Special Presidential Assistant,
Mr. Jack Valenti and eight other officials. Mrs. Humphrey
will also be accompanying the Vice-President on his Australian
visit. Mr. Humphrey and his party will be flying from
Delhi via Darwin, and will remain in Canberra until Sup-day
morning. The Vice-President will have talks with the Foreign
Affairs and Defence ( ommittee of Cabinet on Saturday morning.
This will be followed by a Government Luncheon, and a press
conference will be held in the afternoon.
There will be a dinner in his honour at Government
House on Saturday evening. The Vice-President is expected
to leave Canberra at 10 a. m. on Sunday.
As I said earlier, Mr. Humphrey will be most
welcome and I am sure that these direct discussions will be
of considerable mutual value.
CAl BEIRRA,
16th February, 1966. 



t LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF 1IT. HUBERT HUIVPHmEY,
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE U. S.
AT CANBERRA 19th FEBRUARY, 1966
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER MR. HAROLD HOLT
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Vice-President, your Excellencies,
1Ministerial and Parliamentary Colleagues, Distinguished Visitors
from the United States and any ct. 1, ers of you tL-hat I may have
omitted: It's a very great pleasure and privilege for the
Head of an Australian Government to welcome to this country
a distinguished leader in the Administration such as we have
here today in the person of Mr. Hubert Humphrey. It is, I -think,
more than ten years, 11r. Humphrey, since we had a visit from one
of-ycDux Vice-Pr esiderri's. In fact, it w I tUhink the only visit
we had ever had at that point of time from a Vice-President of the
United States. In a sense, therefore, it's been a long time
between Vice-Presidents, but if today's talk is any indication
I think vie will be seeing each other much more frequently in
future than perhaps wie h-ave in the past. Because, as is evident
enough, your country and ours are fi. nding each other increasingly
involved in the problems of Asla and in particular of South*-East
Asia There is no occasion to dwell at length before an
Australian audience or public on the close and warm relationship
between our two countries. We have inherited a common tradition,
a common democratic-tradition from the 1Ilother of Parliaments in
the United Kingdoi7., you adapting in your own wvay the Parliamentary
system to your own needs, we in Australia with a Parliarnuntary
democracy serving ours. And we have in the space of the last fifty
years fou-ht together in the cause of freedom, twice together in
two great world conflicts. We were the first country to declare
ourselves with you in the cricis of Korea, and we are one of the
few countries serving with you in a military capacity in Viet Nam
at this time, and the warmth of our friendship has cemented the
mutuality of interest which exists for us in this part of the world.
We across the other side of the Pacific Ocean have
watched admiringly the growth over the years of the mightiest power
that the world has ever known. It has been something of an
inspiration to us. We have a great land mass to develop, roughly
the size of the United States itself if you leave Alaska out of the
picture; and we recall that it was only twelve years after your
own Declaration of Independence that Australia had its first
suttlement. What is not always realised in this country is that
you were only four million people when our first settlement
occu-rred in Australia, but over the intervening years you
have grown to something over 190 millions of people, establishing
the most powerful nation that the world has ever seen. We
believe that by the same principles, by the same encouragement
of enterprise and initiative which has marked the American story,
we too can grow to be a great sister nation in the Pacific and
we are heartened by the example that wie see in you and we are
assisted very greatly by the encouragement, by the flow of
American investment and citizens to this country from time to time.
But more immediately, of course, we are caught up together in the
problems of South-East Asia, and for our part, recognising the
contribution you made to our own security in the darker days of the
Second World War, wie are grateful again for the firmness of
purpose and the resolution which your President and the American 
people are showing in relation to the issue in Viet Nan~.
We, with you, view this as part of a great international
conflict. We see this as one of the critical struggles in the
history of the free peoples everywhere. This goes far deeper in
our judgement than the preservation of the people in South Viet Nam
against intrusion and aggression from those who would wish to
destory the integrity of that country; important though that is,
we see this as part of the menace of Communist expansion throughout
the world and what happens in South Viet Namn is in our eyes not
merely of interest1, to the people of that country, niot merely of
interest to us in relation to our own security here in Aistralia
although I believe that too to be involved, but we see it as
of significance for the cause of free peoples everywhere, and I
know that is how your President and your Aidministration see this
struggle. Nowi, Sir, we have watched with admiration, too, the
way in which your President has looked upon this not merely
as a matter of military achievement, not merely as a goal to be
gained by military means and then the rest of the story forgotten.
He has, from the outset, and you have devotea so much of your
own energies to this aspect, seen the necessity for social and
econz: mic aasistance which wul bring to the peoples of this
area and, in tine with an improvement in standards throughout
the area generally, victory also over those age-old enemies of
mankind to which you referred on your arrival in Australia
yesterday. We know that these great evils of hunger, of disease,
of illiteracy, of lack of employment opportunities, that these
things in an enlightened community can be met successfully and
conquered. It has been an enlightened and imaginative attitude
on the part of the President and members of his Administration
like yourself that they have seen * the totality of this problem,
that they have seen its relationship to the world scene generally,
and we would hope that as this becomes more clearly perceived
around the rest of the free world that others will join with you,
as we in our own small way have done, not merely to give moral
support to your cause but to assist in a material way either in
a military capacity or perhaps more generally in terms of
economic assistance throughout this area.
You, Sir, come to us as a very welcome visitor and you
bring with you the most distinguished and influential delegation
from the United States, I think, that this country has ever
known. iewelcome w,, ith you an old friend in Ambassador Harriman.
I would like you to know that he has given us great assistance
from the information and advice he is able to bring so freshly
from discussions himself in various parts of the world. Whenever
any of us go to Washington, we know that we have a warm friend
awaiting us there in the person of yourself, Mr. Ambassador.
And speaking of ambassadors, we would like you to
report to your President that we arc grrateful to him for sending
to us that splendid representative of your country, the Aimbassador
of the United States here in Australia, M. r. Ed Clark. He and I
established a warm basis of friendship from the outset. I know
this has been a general experience of any who have come in contact
with him and America could not wish for a more effective represen-
tative in this country nor we for a warmer friend of Australia.
You in the various capacities you undertake, Mr.
Vice-President have interest in space research and aeronautical
matters and you will be aware that here in Australia there is
another tangible link of our friendly cssociations with you -through
the tracking stations which have now been established at various
points in Australia. But just as in -this and in so many other
ways we find it useful to maintain together the friendly and
fruitful links of co-operation, we believe that it is in the years
ahead perhaps that our greatest contribution together will be made
to the welfare of a significant area of the world, and through this
a contribution to the peace, the stability and the prosperity
of the world as a whle. 
We, for our part, in A'ustralia would welcome early
talks and discussions with you and with Great Britain and Novw
Zealand on somo of the problems of the area. I don't mention just
those four countries in any excluding sensec in trying to keep
anybody else out of the discussion, but to face the matter
realistically in the sort of problems that vie have to meet here
in the years ahead. Here are countries which can make a significant
material contribution together and I believe it is of first
importance that we should be able to co-ordinate efforts to
discuss together problems which arise and to which, by mutual effort,
we may be able to bring some assistance or somc solution.
This is particularly true in the economic and social field.
We in Australia frequently can perform a useful service by the
technical advice v.' c can bring to countries that are themselves
passing through a developmental phase, and in those and other
ways, Australia, limited though its resources may be in a country
of less than 12 million people, Akustralia can make its own valuable
contri but ion.
Sir, you have come at a difficult time through a most
arduous and exacting journey in key areas of South-East A* sia
and A.' sia generally, but I am quite certain that if the Australian
people had been a~ ble to share our experience of this morning when
xhad the most stimulating and heartening and illuminating talk from
you, they would have no hesitation in their mind as to the justice
and good sense of our cause or the strength of the support they
would bring to it. I believe, Sir, that you will find in this
country support as strong as you will find anywhere in the world,
even perhaps including your own country, for what you are doing.
I can speak to you as not merely the Head of the Government, but
as the Leader of one of the two Governme~ qnt Parties and tcll you that
there isn't one member of the Government Parties who does not
subscribe wholeheartedly to the policy which the United States is
adopting in relation to Viet Nam. I think, Sir, I can claim that
that is a rather bctter scoring record even than the Congress can
deomonstrate for you.
Well, gentlemen, you are not here to have me speak at
length and we are all anxious to hear from the Vice-President.
We have established already, I would hope, in your minds, the
warmth of the welcome here in Australia, and shortly I shall be
asking all to join me in honouring the toast of our distihguished
guest, but as ovidence that that warmath of welcome is general
throughout Aiustralia, I san going to ask Mr. Calwell, the Leader
of the Opposition, to join in supporting me in the toast which I
shall shortly be submitting. Arthur, would you please speak. 



JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE
by.
VICE PRESIDENT HUBERT H. HUMPHREY AND PRIME MINISTEF.
HAROLD HOLT
CANBERRA. FEBRUARY 19, 1966.
AMBASSADOR CLARK: Gentlemen it is indeed an honour and pleasure for
me to introduce the Vice President of the United States of America, the
Honourable Hubert H. Humphrey who has come to Australia on a special
mission for President Lyndon Johnson following the historic Honolulu
Conference. Prime Minister Holt, of course, needs no introduction.
Gentlemen, the Vice President of the United States.
MR. ROBERT-ABERNATHY N. B. C. What is the attitude of Australians
towards the war in Vietnam, the conduct of that war and Australian
involvement there? Then what are your comments on the demonstrators we
have seen today?
MR, HOLT: Gentlemen, you heard me say at the luncheon that the Australian
people and I speak as the Head of this democracy, fully conscious that in
a democracy you speak for a majority and I believe in this case an overwhelming
majority. The Australian people are firmly behind the administration
of the United States in the stand that it has taken in Vietnam. We understand
fully the reasons for your presence in Vietnam. And because those reasons
were so magnificently stated for us today by the Vice President, because of
those reasons we are there with you as we have been over the years in other
causes where Australians and Americans have been together in the cause of
f reedom. You mentioned the demonstrators here today. Well, they're
entitled to demonstrate in the kind of democracy we have. But I thiz* a
truer indication of the state of opinion is that in the government parties, and
these are men and women responsible to Australian electors and having
to carry the responsibility of their judgments and their decisions into their
electorates. But there is not one member of the two government parties in
both Houses of the Parliament who has not been fully in support of our
intervention with you in Vietnam and in support of the American policy there.
I believe and subscribe wholeheartedly to the statement that the Vice President
has made. I only wish that what he has put so compellingly and movingly and
clearly to us today could have reached out to every household in every free
country of the world. And I hope that the message that he has given us today
will spread throughout not merely the free world but even reach into the darker
recesses of the Communist world because there was a great statement coming
from a free people directed to freedom-loving people throughout the world.
And we are greatly indebted to him for this heartening statement of the
American attitude.
ALAN REID Sydney Sunday Telegraph A defence question: Release
yesterday in Washington of an Armed Services hearing of January 20 reveals
that Secretary McNamara has asked for more troops from Australia. I ask
you, Sir, have you discussed this with the Prime Minister? And I ask the
Prime Minister what is his reaction to this request.
MR. HUMPHREY: In response to your question, Sir, I have not made any
request to the Government of Australia for additional forces in Vietnam. I
read on the press wires the matter from Washington, the release of certain
testimony from the Armed Services Committee in Washington. The Government
of Australia will do what it feels it can do and we Americans have faith and 
confidence in their judgemnent. I said today in my remarks in the other
room that Australia today is a participant in a host of activities in many
countries including her commitments to the defence of Malaysia, her foreign
aid activities in the Colombo plan countries, her emergency assistance to
India, her help in Pakistan, her great contribution a very generous
contribution to the Asian Development Bank, and her forces now in
Vietnam. You would expect, I am sure, that the Government of the
United States would encourage every country that it can to make some
contribution, and greater contributions in Vietnam. This would be a very
natural thing for our government to do. But may I say we are very
grateful to have as our partner in Vietnam, amongst other partners, Australia
and the New Zealanders and the Koreans and ourselves and other countries
that are indeed some 30 of them in activities of a non-combatant nature.
We're hopeful that there will be more, particularly in that other sector
of the non-combatant services.
MR. HOLT: Could I supplement that, Mr. Vice President?
You know we are in almost daily, certainly close and continuous
discussion and consultations at some level or other with the United States of
America. What the Vice President has said about our talks today I
confirm completely of course. He has raised no question with us which
implies or presents any pressure of any kind to this country. But we are
engaged together in Vietnam. We are engaged together in some of these
other activities of an economic and social kind to which the Vice President
has referred. There need be no mystery about the fact that at a time when
American forces have been increased very substantially in a conflict in
which we are both involved but along the line in service discussions and in
various other ways we've talked together about what one country can do and
what another can do, and what we can do ourselves. It's well known, as the
Vice President has just put it to you, that Australia has obligations in a
number of directions. We are trying to help against Malaysian confrontation.
We are helping to a degree in Vietnam. Wc are helping in the aid field. We
are trying to secure the situation of New Guinea for which we have accepted
great responsibilities. And we have here a continent, as I said earlier, the
size of the United States. In two states of this continent of ours Mr. Vice
President, you could contain the whole of France, Germany, Italy and the
British Isles and in one of those States there is less than a million people
and in one of the others there is less than 2 million people. And so we have
in Australia a great variety of responsibilities to discharge. We are capable
of coming to our own judgement. As to what contributions Australia should
make, whether it is of a military kind, an economic or social kind, in any
particular area or issue and in anky part of the world. And I can say with
entire sincerity and frankness that at no time has any pressure been put upon
this country of an improper or irregular character by the Government of the
United States or any representative of it. But we are grown people, we can
think and speak in realistic terms about these things. And what a remarkable
world it would be if at no point in discussions in either service quarters or
administrative or governent quarters that the question hadn't been raised
as to whether Australia could do a little more here or a little more there.
Sir, you have stated the position quite accurately from our point of view
and I'm glad to be able to confirm it.
HERSCHEL HURST Melbourne Sun: I'd like to submit a question a
supplementary question to the one asked by Mr. Reid. And that is; what
answer, if any, has our government given, or you yourself given to Mr.
McNamara's stated request for an increase in troops?
MR. HOLT: We have been considering for some time now what more could
usefully be done in Vietnam. We have had discussions as you know with
the Defence Minister of the United Kingdom quite recently, and it was
important for us to be clearly aware of British intentions and of forming 
-3-
some judgement ourselves of the future picture in that particular area
of the world and, indeed, of the British contribution in this area of the
world, because quite clearly that had a bearing of what Australia can do in
one part of South East Asia or another. We've since had the advantage of
the talks with the Vice President and our discussions at various levels in
the administration and at the service levels. We have come to no conclusion
as yet but this matter is actively under consideration. I hope we shall
soon be in a position to what extent Australia feels able at this point of time,
having regard to our commitments in all these other directions I mentioned,
to supplement our present scale of forces in Vietnam.
TOM WICKER New York Times: Mr. Prime Minister, is it possible that
some time in the near future you may be able to augment activity in Vietnam
on the civilian side? For instance, those similar to the medical teams
you have there now, as well as perhaps things like military.
MR. HOLT: Well, I shall certainly hope that we will be able to play an
increasing role in these and other directions. As the Vice President has
pointed out to you, Australia has recently made a contribution to the
Asian Development Bank quite disproportionate to the size of our population
or our resources. There is to be a United States contribution of
S. 200, 000, 000. There is a Japanese contribution of $ UJ. S. 200, 000, 000
and an Australian commitment of $ A85, 000, 000. There are a variety of
directions in which economic and technical assistance is being given by
Australia. Not merely in South Vietnam but throughout this whole area. You
may have read that only in the last week, or was it earlier this week, we
have announced an Australian grant of w'-eat to a value of S. 9, 000, 000
to India in order to assist that country. In a variety of ways, we are trying
to give effect to the sort of spirit which resulted in Australia pioneering
international aid activities in this part of the world through the Colombo Plan.
And we have welcomed the imaginative approach, the constructive approach
of the President. And we have watched with appreciation the drive being given
to this effort by the Vice President. This approach which sees a military
victory as being only a part of the purpose which lies ahead for us; and
before the military victory has been achieved we would hope to be well on
our way with work that can be done in this constructive economic and social
improvement through South East Asia. But don't overlook the fact that we are
still only a country of something under 12, 000, 000 people inhabiting a vast
continent with all the problems that distance and scarcity of population make
for us. But you will find us not an unwilling ally a country which has
contributed something under just under half a million casualties in two
World Wars when we had less than eight million people in Australia is not
a country that is laggardly in its recognition of international responsibility.
MR. HUMPHREY: I might add to what the Prime Minister said, that in
every country that we have visited we have found the heads of government to
be enthusiastic and in full support of the Asian Development Bank. I believe
with the exception of one country where the resources were entirely too
limited I believe it was Laos. There has been a generous contribution
on the part of those countries to the Asian Development Bank which offers,
I think, a great hope for economic and social development in the Asian areas.
SAM LIPSKI The Bulletin: Mr. Vice President what are the needs of
Vietnam Would you care to give us your assessment of the kind of time
scale that's involved in military activities? By this I mean, how long do
you think the present phase of military activities is likely to go on? And are
you able to say whether in one year or in two years there is likely to be
some major change in the present strategy of the United States purely
in the military field disregarding for a moment whatever other social or
economic activities the United States might undertake. 
MR. HUMPHREY: Sir, I don't think it is possible, nor would it be even
reasonable to try to project what the time scale will be on military
activities. I can only say this: that whatever is required and that whatever
amount of time is needed that the people and the government of the
United States are prepared for that. We realise that this is a difficult
assignment but we do see encouraging developments. The forces of the
allies, the government of Vietnam, the United States, Australia, New
Zealand and Korea, those forces are on the offensive. They are winning
every engagement in which they are coming in contact with the enemy. the
forces of the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese are suffering defeats and
heavy casualties. I believe that this spells for us the hope of a military
success. But I want to make it quite clear that military success alone
does not mean the accomplishment of our objectives, because the objectives
must be a stable government and a viable economy for Vietnam and that,
Sir, to me is the most difficult assignment. Actually I really believe that
the military capability for what people call military victory is there, and
it can be assured'. But the economic and social progress that is required
will test us very severely and will take considerable time, energy and
resources, but to this we are willin&amp; to give ourselves and we find othe rs
willing to do the same.
LEN BICKEL A. B. C. ( Australia): Following the general tenor of your
statement, can you give us any idea of the shape or the pattern or the type
of form of government that you would find acceptable both in the United
States and to South Vietnam that might ensue following a settlement with the
communists? And secondly, what would be the role of the Viet Cong
in the long term administration of that government?
MR. HUMPHREY: Well, Sir, our purpose in Vietnam is to thwart the
aggression, to stop the aggression, so that the people of Vietnam can make
their own choice as to what kind of a government they want and what their
future will mean. I do not think it would be proper for a free nation such as
the United States, and I am sure my Australian friends agree, for us to
outline the character of government that the people of Vietnam should have.
What we are trying to demonstrate by our efforts in Vietnam is the right
of free choice and that includes ' die freedom to establish a government of
their own choosing, the freedom if they wish, to have a united Vietnam
whatever they wish to do. But we are not going to tolerate conditions, if
we can prevent it, of having force and aggression design the future of a people
or a nation. And your second question, Sir, I forgot, Sir.
MR. BICKLE: What would be the role of the Viet Cong in a settlement?
MR. HUMPHREY: Well, the Viet Cong is not a government and I want to
make it quite clear and that in any negotiations that may take place our
Government's position has been that North Vietnam, which does mastermind
the military operations of the Viet Cong, is the sovereign, is the regime
that is recognised for purposes of negotiations. And whomever they wish to
bring with them as friends and associates to the conference table is their
business. But the Viet Cong is not a government institution; it is not
recognised as a government entity, and it will not be recognised as a
government entity.
STUART HARRIS London Times: I am not quite clear who I ought to
address the question to, if you forgive me, because I really want to get an
answer. The questiorn would like to ask either of you is this; is whether
the American Governent has taken the Australian Government fully into
its confidence-on the contingency planning in Vietnam both of a political
and a military character on the basis of the Australian government was not
represented in Honolulu, and I would like to feel that from the American
point of view that the American has taken the Australian government fully
into its confidence on the possibilities and the possible responses by America
to those contingencies, and I'd like to feel that the Australian government from 
its point of view feels completely happy with the American government, and
be quite sure that its comrnital is certain, provided the contingencies
have been foreseen.
MR. HOLT: Mr. Harris, I don't know that I follow the latter part of the
question entirely but I can say this: that the Australian government
believes that the co-operation, the supply of the information and discussion
from the United States Government to the Australian Government could not
be closer. I don't know of any direction in which we could have closer
consultation or discussion the awe received at aUl levels from the United
States and those who serve it.
MR. HUMPHREY: And may I add that the prime purpose of my visit with
the Prime Minister and the Ministers of this government is to answer any
questions that the Ministers may have and to fill in any or all details
relating to the Honolulu conference, and to advise and consult with the
members of this government relating to plans and programmes that our
government has in mind. We do feel that the continuing consultation is
essential and in fact we have discussed today even the improvements and
methods of such consultations and discussion.
MAXAMILLIAN WALSH Australian Financial Review: You're a friend
of India Sir, and I know Indians enjoy a greater measure of diplomatic
contact with Hanoi than does the United States. I was wondering, Sir, whether
the Indians were able to indicate to you whether Hanoi's attitude to
negotiations is any less intransigent than it has been in the past? Or the
other way?
MR. HUMPHREY: The Indian Government has been very helpful in this
matter. The President of India, who is a highly respected statesman, as you
know, offered his good offices and the good offices of his governent to
bring about negotiations and discuissions leading towards peace. I'd been
assured by representatives of the Indian Government that they would intensify
these efforts. I have spoken to the representatives of the Indian Government
about the desirability of having the co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference
reconvene a Geneva Conference. Regrettably the information from Hanoi is
not at all encouraging and I think it should be clearly understood that the
Indian Government, because of the aggression of China upon its frontiers and
borders, is not, does not, have the kind of contacts that it would like to have
in Hanoi, and surely not in China; but the Indian Government is being helpful
we are in close contact and consultation with the Indian Government.
President Johnson has been in personal consultation by letter and communicating
with the Indian Prime M~ inister. On two occasions I have spent a considerable
period of time with the President of India and we have nothing but feeling of
gratitude towards that government for what it is attempting to do.
STAN STEPHENS Adelaide Advertiser: Mr. Vice President, is it
the intention of President Johnson despite the mor~ k-than somewhat
discouraging signs emerging from Hanoi today to continue his peace efforts?
MR. HUMPHREY: Yes, Sir. Bi-laterally, through normal diplomatic
channels through the United Nations, through the extension of good off ices
on the part of friendly nations and non-aligned nations, and any at all. And
we have been getting, we have had efforts, from sources that are as varied
as the Commonwealth Nations, Nasser, the President of the United Ar ab
Republic, the President of India, the 17 non-aligned countries. We will
pursue any avenue, any honourable avenue, towards a conference table
discussion lending itself towards negotiations and we will continue to do so.
RICHARD CROLL Channel 7, Sydney: Since you have been here to
answer questions of the Australian Government on the subject of the
Honolulu Conference and since Australia is fighting in Vietnam: 
-6-
a two-part question. No. 1 Do you think in any future conferences
Australia should take part? And, do you think that it would be fair to
say to make a gesture of increasing its troops in Vietnam that the
Americans would welcome it?
MR. HUMPHREY: I am sure of that, Sir. Let me just say a word
to you about the Honolulu Conference to put it in proper perspective.
President Johnson had intended to go to Honolulu in October to meet
there with our representative General Westmoreland and the head of
CINCPAC, Admiral Sharp and other officers of our government, including
our Ambassador, Ambassador Lodge. Because of his operation surgery,
he could not go. He spoke to me about it then. A little later on in the
month of Januaiy, I don't think this has been spread on the record particularly;
he spoke to me about my possibility of going, and then when it was
discovered that Secretary McNamara was meeting with General Westmoreland
and since President Johnson had not as yet had a cbance to meet with
General Westmoreland since he had been assigned in Vietnam, and
Ambassador Lodge had not returned to Washington since he had been
assigned to Saigon, the President felt this gave him an opportunity on a
weekend to go within the jurisdictional limits of the United States, Hawaii
being the 50th State, to meet with our officials and at the same time to
meet with the government leaders of Vietnam whom he had not met. Our
President believes a great deal in personal diplomacy. He likes to know the
men that he talks to. As he has indicated in the past, you can get the
measure of the man when you have a chance to be with him and talk with him.
This was a meeting that had as its purpose the co-ordination of activities
between the government of Vietnam and the United States. Every government
that's friendly to the United States that is involved in this matter was
notified and was informed by letters from the President. I am sure that
without indulging without violating any rule of secrecy that the Prime
Minister the former Prime Minister of Australia, and the present Prime
Minister of Australia had been in personal communication with the
President of the United States.
RICHARD CROLL: -That would be an internal matter in the United States.
MR. HUMPHREY: -Yes. I do think, Sir, that the suggestion that you have
made, which is one, by the way, which has been discussed by some of us
on this journey, is very meritorious. Mainly, that in due time the allies
involved in the struggle in Vietnam will want to consult in a much broader
framework than the Honolulu Conference.
ALLAN REID Sydney Sunday Telegraph: Have you had any concrete
assurance in detail from the present South Vietnamese Government they will
produce the social re form that is so obviously necessary for the success
for the outcome, of your military effort.
MR. HUMPHREY: Yes, Sir, indeed we have. Now the assurances have been
given by the Chairmen of the Government, the Council of Ken, that is known
as National Unity Council General Chu, and by the Prime Minister Prime
Minister Ky, and his Ministers. Frankly we have been impressed,
favourably impressed, by these gentlemen This is a relatively new
government but it has been empowered for better than seven months and
has exhibited considerable stability. The Prime Minister, Prime Minister Ky,
made a very favourable impression upon the President and indeed upon myself
with the sincerity of his purpose in advocating and instituting the necessary
economic political and social reforms. The question of the ability to carry
out is one that only time can tell. We are working with them. It is our view
that our Australian friends, our New Zealand friends, and the Koreans and
others that will be working with us will have to be of help to the Vietnamese
government in terms of technicians and specialists to help carry out these
reforms. But we have already seen the reforms in action. I have visited, Sir,
on the spot, at least two areas in the Saigon district where I witnessed some 
-7-
of the reforms underway. I believe candour and frankness is the only
way to deal with these men. It is an uphill fight. It will be difficult. But
these men seem determined to make the effort and Prime Minister Ky
told me, he said that had we been at this 12 years ago much of the trouble
we have today would not be here and he said, " I am determined to have
honesty in my government; I am determined to have a social revolution.
I do not intend to let the Viet Cong say that they are the revolutionaries.
I am the revolutionary, said Prime Minister Ky to me. He said, " I will
carry out these reforms. Akid I've noticed since we've left that he has
acted, and, for example, on the black market a new code new law and an
Inspector General to pursue the black market violators, the violators and
the black marketeers. The appointment of a new Director of Docks and
Harbours things that were needed manpower that was needed. The
establishment of a training school for the training of cadres the training
of cadre personnel to go into these villages and hamlets. We believe that
there is a sincerity of purpose. We also know that there is a limitation
of trained manpower, and that' 9 why I said to you earlier that the
struggle for the reconstruction of the country which has been literally
decimated by the Viet Cong, that that's the long-term battle. Actually
I am much more optimistic on the military front. I find that the real
challenge ahead is going to be in what we call the programmes of
pacification and world construction.
ALAN REID: Thank you, Mr. Vice President. 



ADDI S OF VIQE-PRESIDENT HUBERT H. HUPHIREY
AT PRIME MINISTER'S LUNCHEON
Canberra 19th February, 1966
Mr. Prime Minister and the 111inisters of the Government of
Australia; my good friend Mr. Calwell, the Leader of the Opposition,
but great Australian, great citizen, my friend that has been
conversing with me during these moments of our luncheon; the great
presiding officer of the Senate of the Australian Parliament, Sir
Alister Mc½ ullin, we've settled most of the problems over here; my
esteemed friend, the Ambassador of the United States, 11Mr. Clark, and
of course all of the many good friends that we have that are here
from other nations; your Excellencies the Ambassadors and Ministers,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I must say first of all that I have been touched by the references
to the Vice-Presidency. I have been told and I was aware of
the fact that this is the second time in ten years that Australia has
been visited by a Vice-President, which shows the gentle nature of the
American public and the great consideration that we have for your -: ellbeing
here. You can only take one of these Vice-Presidents about
every decade. I also have been reinded as to the uncertainties of
the political future of the Vice-Presidency and I've been well aware
of it, and I've been making the most of every day that I have.
I can't help but say, since the other visitor from the office of the
Vice-Presidency was Mr. Richard 111N. i xon, that I have always patterned
mj life and tried to emulate a gentleman by the name of Richard IA.
Johnson Vice-President under van Buren. And I want you to know that
Van Buren was a Democrat; the only partisan reference that I shall
feel free to make.
Mr. Prime Minister you have mentioned so rmany things here that
I would like to cornent upon that i'm afraid that you've touched the
favourite nerve cell in my body, namely the talking cell. You
ought to be waare of that. But I've been told by Ambassador Clark,
and by you, Sir, and others, that in Australia you just get up and
give forth as much and as long as you want. So lean back my friends
and start to enjoy what you haven't intended.
First I want to say to Ambassador Clark that we're very proud
of his work here. lie's been entertaining a host of visitors from
the United States, and he's been able to manage Congressmen and
Senators better than he did the Speaker of the House of Representatives
or the Presiding Officer of the Senate, and they've come in substantial
numbers. Time and Life and Newsweek have arrived to be able to guide
you in matters of foreign ane, domestic policy; and I understand that
Ford and General Motors have made their appearance or will. And
you will even have my good friend George Moore of the First National
City Bank of New York.
With this combination, plus the Vice-President once in every
ten years, you ought to be able to survive. In fact I think you'll
do well even if we hadn't have come. But the fact is that we're
very, very pleased that we've received the kind of gracious, warm,
friendly, home-like reception that you have accorded us.
Mr. Prime Minister, ou mentioned that I had some resoonsibilities
in the field of Space. Well isn't it good to come and see friends
who are with you both in heaven and earth. And you are here in
Australia. I recall one of the first flights in our Gemini programme.
We Americans listened on the radio to the broadcast of how the citizens
of Perth were turning on their lights so that the Astronaut ight know
that he was over friendly territory in Australia. We never had any 
doubt about that even if your lights Were out we knew that there
would be a friend waiting for us with a warm hand of friendship.
I must say that our relationships have made us feel like
brothers and sisters. And today you went the extra mile I just
can't tell you how much I've appreciated everything that has
happened. Last night when ve set foot on your precious soil and
I lo6ked about it seemed like the sunset, in the great Mid-West as
I would say if I were not under some constraints, but as I wo. uld
say, as it were, in South-Western Texas.
One can't say in Australia that it was a miniature because this
country is so big. This is one of the few countries that mke the
Texan feel like that he has an inferiority complex. You gave us a
beautiful, beautiful entrance to your lovely and dynamic country and
then this morning as I awakened and looked out and felt the crisp air
I knew then it was almost like 1 nnesota, my State. And then when
I came from the Parliament Building just after the noon hcur and
I looked out front and there were the placards and amateur sign
painters and all the demonstrators, I said; " 4hat this Prime Minister
,-ill do to make me feel at home:" I just can't properly and
adequately express my profound. gratitu e to him for this feeling of
ease and adjustment that you give me as I stand on foreign shores.
But I want you to know that my investigation indicates that while you
went to great lengths to get that demonstration No. 1, it is not as
large as we can produce at Berkeley. And, No. 2, the Leader was
from America. One of our exports. We do it up well and the exchange
programme continues.
Next time vwe find a group of protestors in America I am going
to ask if there is an Australian, and if there isn't, why, we are
going to have to call off the protest. We believe in quid pro quo
you laow, " fifty-fifty".
Now in all seriousness, I do rant to say to all of our good
friends here, the High Conrnissioners that represent members of the
Commonwealth, to our friends of the Press of Australia and other areas,
to the good citizens of this great country, and to my fellow: Americans,
that it is a very re-assuring and gratifying and energizing experience
to be able to exchange viewers with the Government people such as I've
met here today in Australia.
We have been able to talk frankly, candidly, expressing our
points of view 7-ithout any fear or without any concern as to their
being properly understood and accepted as the honest expressions of
people with an integrity and sincerity of purpose. And I can say
that in every free country we have opposition and it is the opposition
which in a very real sense keeps us on course. Opposition in a
democracy is as vital, may I say, as the seasons in a full year.
And to Mr. Calwell, the Leader of the Opposition, may I express
to you my personal thanks for your gracious remarks and for your
presence here at this luncheon.
I hadn't quite known ", hat I should say to you today, and I've
decided that the best thing to do would be to talk to you as friend
and neighbour. Last evening after having had the opportunity to go
to the Ambassador's residence to unpack our cases and to just settle
down, we placed a telephone call to a great anad distinguished
statesman, not only of Australia but of the world, Sir Robert Menzies,
and ve had a delightful hour and a half with this remarkable nan. 
Sir Robert is a friend not only of the people of Australia and
a leader in this great nation but he is a friend and leader for all
of us. He has come to our country, the United States, on repeated
occasions and he is accepted as a brother, almost as a fellow citizen.
Yet he is so devoted to his own Australia that he would not want anyone
to dilute his patriotic devotion to his own citizenship by even
a remark that might be misunderstood or misinterpreted. \ Ve respect
his judgment. We admire his patriotism, his courage, and we enjoy
his wit. President Johnson considers him one of his close friends.
And may I say to the distinguished new Prime Minister, Mr.
Holt, that we look upon you, Sir, as a continuing friend. As one of
whose counsel and advice we welcome and whose friendship we, too,
cherish. And ve know that in the days ahead that the Prime Minister
of Australia this Prime Minister will have in the hearts of the
American people that abundance of affection and respect which was so
evident for Sir Robert Menzies.
So we feel at home, and I want to talk to you now as just
neighbours. Australia, as the Prime Minister has so well noted, has
been with us in peace and war, and we with Australia and Australians.
Our sons and men have come here to meet you and marry your daughters
and sisters. Our nations believe in parliamentary democracy.
We have common ideals and in a very real sense common traditions.
But our traditions and our ideals are not unique to ourselves. This
principle and this belief in human dignity is no monopoly of Americans
or Australians or the English. There are people of every race creed
and nationality that believe in human dignity. And there are people
of every region of this world and of every race, and every ethnic
group, and of every persuasion, that believe in freedom. And
I believe that most of mankind longs for peace.
So that we have many things in common. And when we speak of
consultation amongst ourselves Australians and Americans, the
United Kingdom, and New Zealand. We do not speak of that consultation
as an exclusive club. But rather we speak of it as one of the
approaches to be of help to others, and to broaden that great community
of free men and free nations so that we can work together in common
cause and common purpose.
The great need today of the freedom-loving peoples of this
world is to recognize, No. 1, the problems that confront us, and agree
upon those problems; and No. 2, the necessity of united purpose and
the united effort in meeting those problems.
A great American statesman and a great human being, Dr. Benjamin
Franklin, once said that " We either hang together or we hang separately."
And I might say that those words of wisdom, colloquial as they were
have a universal application. And all through Asia and Africa and
Europe, Latin America, North America, South America, wherever you go,
free men and free nations and those who aspire to freedom had better
rec nize that there are powerful forces arrayed against them. That
there are difficult problems that yet beset mankind the problems that
we spoke of here of poverty, of illiteracy, of disease, of despair,
of hopelessness, of frustration that these are the common problems
of most of mankind. and that we should unite in a common effort to
overcome them.
We should also recognize that the forces of tyrrany which are
at work in the world today, while different in their methodology, are
no different in their purpose than all of history. Tyrants are
tyrants. Despots are despots. The method, however, and the
strategy and the tactics of the 20th century tyranny are far more 
sophisticated far more complicated than those that mankind has
known in other cent ries.
And it is because of this compleity of both the problems
and the opposition, or the enemy, that we sometimes fall apart;
that we sometimes have differences even though there need be
none. It's because . we haven't as yet quite understood individually
and collectively how best to approach this new set of
circumstances that confronts us.
President Johnson asked me to journey to Asia, South East
Asia, and the sub-continent, and then down under to Australia and
New Zealand. Not to tell people what to think, but to let you
know that we're thinking about in our country and to try to find
some common denominators, and to share in your wisdom, your
observations, and to give you some of our observations and our
considerations on these problems that affect our world. And
I have reported today to this government, as I have to others,
on the observations that w-e have made on this journey.
This distinguished American statesman that is with us
one of our seasoned diplomats a great public servant Governor
Averell Harriman, Ambassador-at-Large for the President of the
United States we have reported what we have witnessed in Vietnam,
in Thailand, in Laos, in Pakistan, in India and we have shared
views and thoughts with the leaders of your government.
And how happy I am today to say that we see these things
very much the same way. When I listened to the Prime Minister
in his remarks, I said, tthealtl', s what I want to say." This
is what I tried to say. But how well he said it.
In my visit this morning with the Ministers and the Prime
Minister I believe that I expressed about as clearly and w-ith as
much articulation as I am capable of, .1what was said here today
and what I hope now to be able to say to you.
First of all let me say this: we must look upon Southeast
Asia and the sub-continent as regions. We cannot afford
to direct our energies toward individual nation-states if the
problems of those nation-states were unconnected with other
nation states. South-east Asia was looked upon by President Johnson in
his memorable address at John Hopkins back in April as a region
for economic development regional economic development.
I submit that it is also a region in the conflict which is
now under way. In that region we are fighting two wars and we're
allies in those two wars. The Australians and the Americans,
the New Zealanders and the Koreans, standing alongside of our
good friends, the people of South Vietnam, -ho are bearing the
brunt of the battle. Who have been pummelled, who have been
attacked, who have been abused, whose leaders have been assassinated,
who have been the victims of terror and subversion and
propaganda the likes of which few people have ever been able to
withstand or to take. 
Let me say that we all owe a debt of respect to the people
of South Vietnam. For years they have been under merciless attack
not conventional war not with the rules of war as civilised
nations have known them, but a new form of war the wars of
National Liberation they call them from Peking. What a play
on words: How the communists have destroyed the meaning of words.
They speak of liberation when they mean oppression. They
speak of a people's republic when they have no regard for the people
and no definition or understanding of the world republic. They
speak of the people's democracies and there is not a single
democratic thought or institution thatTs been developed. The
communists have polluted and adulterated the meaning of words that
decent humanity has known for centuries.
I think it is about time that we understood that fact. They
not only fight us with weapons; they not only use every conceivable
device that is known for the purpose of human destruction; they
destroy the meaning of language. They destroy the meaning of the
precious word. Words like " freedom". Words like " democracy".
' Words like " liberty". Words like " justice". These are words of
the spirit. These are precious words.
The communists not only destroy the village and the hamlet in
South Vietnam he not only attacks established government and tries
to discredit it in nation after nation. He destroys the very
meaning of life as one interprets it in the written word and the
spoken word. So we have a newr war that we battle that we fight. We're
really trying to save the moaning of our language. We are trying
to save the legal definition of our constitutions. We're trying to
protect if you please the territory and the geography of our land.
But above all we are trying to save a way of life.
Not the way of life in terms of the past but a way to approach
life where mankind can be liberated from disease and from poverty,
and from hunger.
We are the revolutionists not the communists. Wie are the
liberators not the communists. We are the agents of justice and
reform not the communists. I for one don't intend to let them
get by with claiming the honours that are due to the people that are
in this room and other people around this world that believe in
freedom and justice and independence.
So, we find ourselves in conflict today in Vietnam. But
. may I say quite frankly that we've also faced other dangers. The
conxmunists would like us out of Berlin. And isn't it interesting
that the very same people who advocate that we stand firm in Berlin,
deep in the land of communist control, in an area that is militarily
difficult to defend the very same people who would pledge all of
our resources, as we said in our Declaration of Independence, our
lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honour the very same people
who say we must stand firm in Berlin regardless of the cost, can
turn around and advocate that you forget Vietnam?
I guess they may feel that somehow or other, whatever is
going on in Vietnam, that the Viet Cong, represents a sort of an
international reform movement. Frustrated social workers who
believe in human progress: 
Well lot mo assure you that that is not the Viet Cong. There
may be those in the Viet Cong that are the victims of frustration
and bitterness over the iany years of colonialism and the lack of
opportunity and justice in Vietnam. But the Viet Cong is no social
reformdo-gooder outfit. It is made up of a hard corps of
disciplined warriors, backed by Hanoi and backed by Peking. Just
exactly, mpy I say, as East Berlin is backed by the Soviet Union.
So we have met the menaco of couniasm before. We mot it in
Berlin and we didn't flinch. And because we didn't there's peace
in Europe. We have met the nnace of com. munism in Greece. And some people
said it was just a little civil war. But isn't it interesting that
when Yugoslavia broke with the Soviet Union, or Marshal Tito broke
with Stalin, closed the border then the lifeline from Moscow to
Belgrade into the hills and the mountains of Greece when that lifeline
was chocked off that the Greek Civil War came to an end?
It wasn't a civil war as such. To be sure, there were Greeks
involved. But it was one that was : master-minded in those days from
Moscow, it was supplied from Belgrade, and it was fought on the plains
and the mountains of Greece.
Harry S. Truman, President of the United States, was the author
of the Greek-Turkish Aid Programe. General Van Fleet from the
United States xvent to Greece. W'e met the communist threat in Greece
and by the strange developments of international politics over which
we had no control the supply line and the efforts of the communist
powers were cut off and the Greek Civil War ended.
People say that you should be careful of these comparisons
because they don't alrays add up the same. That's true. There are
details that are different. But the fundamentals are the same.
We met coimmunist power in Korea. We did not seek a battlefield
in Korea. In fact we have said that we had no interest in
Korea, or little interest. And that was the warning. That was the
alert. The communist forces from the North struck South Korea,
violating every international pledge and every international
agreement. And we met the communist power in Korea.
We met it in Berlin. We met it in Korea. We met it when
Mr. IKhrushchev tried to put his missiles in Cuba, and now wre are
meeting it in Vietnam.
It's different this time. A new communist force. A very
militant communist force. An aggressive militant regime in Peking.
It has no regard for international law. It speaks with disdain of
even its commnunist associates. It has little or no regard for
standards for international conduct.
What you see in Vietnam today is not a civil war, but you see
the projection of a massive international communist doctrine at work
wars of national liberation being tested in the test tube of Vietnam.
The pilot project of cormmunist strategy. Peking to Hanoi bo the
rice paddies and the mountains and the valleys of Vietnam. 
And we have to meet it. We didn't choose the battlefield.
We never will choose a battlefield. We can't as free people. We do
not believe in attack. We do not believe in aggression. We do
not believe in preventive war. We cannot select the time or the day
or the enemy or place. It is impossible. We simply have to meet
the attack where it comes.
Now the lessons of history teach us and surely Australians
have known it more than almost any others because even though you are
far removed from many areas of the world you were among the first to
recognize that the trouble in North Africa was your danger. The
trouble in Korea thousands of miles away was your trouble. You have
not failed to understand international responsibility and international interdopendence.
And so today, Australia finds herself in Vietnam.
Not only because of Australia, but because it understands that
aggression unckecked is aggression unleashed. It understands that
te aggressor's appetite is insatiable. It understands that
aggression if left without being stopped can become a pattern of
international conduct. And there will be no little nations left.
The powerful will consume the small and the w; eak.
So the United States of America and others, our good friends
here in Australia, stand shoulder to shoulder. Not because there is
an immediate threat to Australia. Not because of an immediate threat
to the United States. In our lifetime we could maybe forget this and
be buried in the knowledge that nothing had hit us as yet. But men
in public life have a greater obligation than to think about the
immediate. You must take a look at the future.
And if there is any one lesson in history that should have
been drilled into the minds of contemporaries it is this that you
can never let the aggressor have his way. If he has his way then
there is no way for free people except the way of despair and
destruction. So, my message to you today is the old simple message that we
must work together and we must work together not only militarily, but
we must work together in the good works of mankind. We're not
warriors. My country does not want to be known as a nation of
warriors. We want to be known as a nation of healers, of educators,
of engineers, of builders. We w-ant to be known as strong in spirit,
not in flesh. We want to be known as a nation whose wealth and
power is not for luxury or self-indulgence, but rather for service
and for protection for the weak.
That is the purpose of power, and that is the -purpose of wealth.
We're blessed in our country with wealt' and with power. And I think
that the real tribute to the United States of America and to Australia
is that with our high standards of living we seek not to keep it just
for ourselves. We ve abandoned selfishness and indulgence, and self
indulgence. And we have recognised that there is a brotherhood that
needs us and we need them. So we engage in the good works and that
was the purpose of the Honolulu Conference.
President Johnson went to Honolulu to revie. w, indeed, the
military situation, but more importantly he went there to work with
the leaders of South Vietnami in designing a social revolution for
South Vietnam. To heli rebuild the villages and the hamlets that
had been systematically decimated and destroyed by the Viet Cong
the communists. To give the people hope the politics of hope.
To lift their sights from the battlefields to the construction of
new homes and villages and schools and hospitals. And it is in this
part of the war, this other way, against man's ancient enemies that
we need a great deal of help. 
Everywhere I have been I have found Australia. I found Australia
in India. I found Australia in the Colombo Plan in the Colombo Plan
countries. I found Australia in Pakistan. I found Australia in
Vietnam. I found Australia in the generous contribution to the Asian
Bank. We have found Australian docLors and hospitals in Vietnam.
' ie found Australian soldiers on the battlefield.
And, may I say to you Australians ve are proud of you-proud
of you as friends and allies. You imake our hearts grateful and warm
and lad because this is real international responsibility. This is
the real strength of a nation.
The strength of a nation is not in its armament alone. The
strength of a nation is in its people and their purpose. And, you
have demonstrated that strength of people and purpose.
Now I come away from this tour with what I said this morning
was restrained optimism.
I cannot say that all is going well because all is not going
well. But, I can say in Australia that in the year 1942, in the year
1941, you could not say that things were going well either, but you
did not quit. As a matter of fact anyone that was looking at the
realities of the time in 1940, just the sheer dark realities, would
have said we are whipped.
The difference was in spirit and determination. The English
did not have a chance after Dunkirk logistically, in equipment and
supplies, but they had a chance because they refused to give up.
The Australiarsdid not have much of a chance either after Pearl
Harbour, but you did not give up. And we did not have much of a one
either but ve did not give up.
So, to the doubters and we have plenty to those who feel
somehow or other that this struglo in Vietnamo cannot be won I say
to you it can: What is m. ore important I say to you it must.
You cannot afford to lose it, because the first time that Free
Nations lose a con. test with militant coim1munist aggression, the first
time you retreat, the first time that you fold up your tents, the
first time that a people are sold out on that day no one will over
believe free men again.
If I seei to be overly enthusiastic a I'm sometimes accused,
may I say that I have history on my side. History on the side of
human spirit. History on the side of people w ho love freedom.
If you love it enough and if you stay united; if free nations
will understand across this whole underbelly of Asia, and throughout
the : orld, that there are poweful forces that would destroy every
institution in which you and I believe, those powerful forces that work
the free nations : ill understand that we have a coi7mmon cuse, and we
have a coimmon purpose; that we need each other those forces of evil
and destruction cannot win.
The Indians in India have tasted communist aggression across
their borders in the movement of armies from Communist China.
The Thai are tasting infiltration and subversion now as even
I speak to you.
The Laotians have been plagued by the Pathet Lao now fortified
the North Vietnamese regulars. 
And Vietnam has been going through fire and devastation for
years. lWhat more do we need to tell us that there is a great effort
being made on the part of the Cormunist Chinese to exert its influence
and its power and its control over the rice fields, the grea. t natural
resources of the sub-continent, and South-east Asia, and the people
thereof? Either direct control by conquest or control by fear and
terror. And yet, this force need not win and it : ill not win and I will
tell you why. Because the United States of America, in concert with
its allies, will not let it win.
And this is why freedom loving people everiyhere have a stake
in South Vietnam.
Maybe your contribution will only be a laboratory; maybe it will
only be a Doctor, maybe it Jill only be a few people to help with the
refugees. But in South Vietnam there ought to be on the part of
freedom loving people some symbol of the unity of free nations on the
part of every nation that loves freedom. If that symbolic unity is
there, mark my words that Communism, the communist juggernaut, will
be halted just as it wlas in wejt Europe when free nations banded
together when 1IATA was designed, when the Marshal Plan went into
action, when UN. Pii was applied, when one operation after another was
brought to bear to unite the people to rebuild a continent and to
revitalize nations. And it did not bring on a world war it saved
a world from a world war.
I conclude in this thought: Many people have said what we want
is peace. May I say to you that the President of the United States
is a man who believes in peace with a passion politically,
spiritually, morally.
But we wanted peace in 1939, in 1940 and in 1941. We did not
fight Hitler for conquest or Tojo, nor did you. You fought in
World War II for peace.
We arc not fighting in Vietnam for conquest or for territories.
We are fighting there for peace and we are prepared for peace. We
have offered peace negotiations for peace, and conferences for
peace. We have offered economic assistance to friend and foe alike
if there be peace. We have been rebuked. We shall pursue the
course for peace. We shall not be restrained because Hanoi and
Peking have arrogantly cast aside our offers of peace. We shall
pursue peace relentlessly and we shall also pursue the enemy relentlessly
because I happen to believe that you will gain peace when the
enemy finds out that he cannot gain his objectives by brutality and
force. And as soon as it is crvstil clear that force is not to
achieve the objective, then the hope of peace is all the better.
Until that day peace will be elusive if not impossible. So
may I thank you once again, our comrades in arms and our comrades in
peace in Australia. Thank you for what you are. Thank you for what
you've been. Thank you for what you will be, because your leadership
in the Pacific, your leadership in the Indian Ocean area, and your
leadership in Asia, is vital and may I urge upon you to work diligently,
ceaselessly with those of like mind, wherever they may be, try to find
the paths of peace and make those paths of peace the paths of the
hearts of men. Thank you. 



I EMBARGO
NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA UNTIL 10.50 PM
SUNDAY 20 FEBRUARY. 1966
TEXT OF PRIME MINISTER'S " MEET THE PRESS" TV INTERVIEW
SUNDAY, 20TH FEBRUARY, 1966
Following is the full text of the interview given by
the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, in the " MEET THE PRESS"
programme telecast by BTQ Channel 7 in Brisane tonight.
The Prime Minister recorded the programme while in
Brisbane last week.
Introduction by the Chairman, Mr. Reg. Leonard
Way back in the 1950' s when Mr. Lyons was Prime
Minister of this country, the reporters in the
Parliamentary Press Gallery at Canberra ard I
happened to be one zf them were writing rather
glowing phrases about an athletic young lawyer who
had entered the House in 1955 as Member for the
Melbourne metropolitan seat of Fawkner in succession
to a blind barrister named Maxwell. Well, looking
tack, I suppose in retrospect some of those phrases
look a bit corny now references to the baby of the
House and so on but there was a prediction made frr
a shining political future for this young man and
that certainly was right on the beam, because today
he is this nation's leader, and I am sure that all
you people after such a long association will
appreciate my pride when I Tintroduce to you the Prime
Minister of Australia, Mr. Harold Holt.
MR. HOLT Thank you, Reg. Good evening to you all.
MR. LEONARD Your Panel tonight: Alan Underwood, Elgin Reid
and Lionel IHogg.
And even with the Prime Minister, you know, there
must be a message or two from th; se who pay the bills, and
here they
MR. LEONARD Well Sir it's been a lng climb to the top.
This is the first time that we have had the honour of
a Prime Minister in our studio and with that we are very
pleased. Now, will you submit to this grilling of ours? ./ 2 
-2-
MR. HOLT Certainly Reg. It is not the first time you have
taken me apart and I on't imagine it will be the last.
Chairman: Thank you. Well, now, Mr. Underwood,
Q. _ dIr. Prime Minister, when you announced postponement
of the Referendum a day or two ago, I think you said that
Cabinet felt there should be a thorough review of current
policies. Now, can we take this to signify that you meant
changes, modifications or even departures from Menzies
Government policies.
MR. HOLT: Not necessarily at all, but each government has a
character about it which is very much influenced by the person
and policies and thinking of the Head of the Government, and
here after a long administration of 16 uninterrupted years,
we felt it appropriate or at least I did when I began my
own Government, to take a look at some of the things we had
been doing. I would think that i. the main they would be fully
confirmed, but we live in a changing world. Australia itself
has been striving vigorously forward, and we are looking now to
a future which, as Denis Healey, the Minister for Defence from
Great Britain when he was out here was . aying, took him in his
thinking to the 1970' s even to the 1990' s. Now, a review of
policy looking forward doesn't necessarily connote dissatisfaction
with what was done. Indeed, I was part of what was done
and very proud of it, but I am sure the Australian people would
want us to take a fresh look at some of the basic policies we
have been pursuing to see whether they adequately meet the
situation we see ahead of us or whether there should be some
modification. I wasn't implying anything more than that.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, are you satisfied that you and Mr.
McEwen will be able to reach the same satisfactory relationships
that marked the Menzies/ Fadden and the Menzies/ McEwen Government?
MR. HOLT I am completely confident on that point. What seems to
be overlooked by some is that Jack McE., en and I have been close
colleagues now for thirty years, for more than two-thirds of that
time in office together. Even in Opposition, we sat on the
Opposition Executive together. We are good warm personal friends
and I am glad to say that the new administration has opened in
terms of complete cordiality and full co-cperation.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, the latest ALP upheaval. Do you
really think this stems from State Aid . r do you think it is
a revolt by the Parliamentary Party against the dictation of
the Federal Executive?
MR. HOLT: I think it is a product of the disintegration and decay
that has been going on now for many years inside the Labor
Party. Here is a party, once a very great party, which had
conviction and cause over years, which followed the gaining of
many of its more important goals. I think that spirit has
gone from it. It was a socialist party and, nominally, still
professes to be a socialist party but 1+ s own members realise
that the Australian community of today doesn't want a socialist
programme in that doctrinaire sense, and yet there it is. They
haven't found something which they can substitute which would
meet the needs of the modern Australia, and sa lacking a cause,
lacking conviction, then their attention, I think tends to be
turned more to personalities and to organisational problems.
Q. Would this be the split again the DLP split, do you
think? With the same source? 
-3-
MR. HOLT: Well, there you did have this major split. Certainly
there were important policy elements but the division is more
likely to occur because there is nothing to which any of them
can point as firm Labor policy which they in their Caucus have
evolved. Indeed, their rules don't enable them to do that
unless they have gained the approval of the group to which
Mr. Whitlam made this ra~ her unkind reference of the " witless
12". We at least were rather mere polite when we talked about
the " faceless 36".
Q. Do you subscri. be to the theory, politics apart, that it would
be a better thing if the quarrel were patched up and you had a
stronger Opposition on the basis that government is better
when opposition is strong?
MR. HOLT: I think the Parliament functions better when there is
a strong Opposition, but in my experience when the Opposition
is weak, there tends to be rather more internal opposition
developing inside the Government's own ranks. We found, for
example, when we only had a majority of one, there was closer
cohesion and unity of action on the part of our own Government
parties than has been the case since we had a majority of more
than 20, and at a time when the Opposition was weak. I don't
think a government can ever relax and feel things are so good
or so comfortable that it doesn't have to worry about the
future.
Q. You don't really think that where you have a large, thumping
majority that the Heads of the Government tend rather to neglect
the insignificant members who are supporting them?
MR. HOLT Well, that's not the way it works out in my experience,
because the insignificant members that you speak of have
significant votes on issues which arise inside the party room,
and in my experience Ministers, however highly placed,
( and this went for tAe former Prime Minister, ir Robert
Menzies) are very sensitive to the feelings of their backbench
supporters. No, I don't think you need worry on that
score, but I do aree that it is not a healthy t1' ng for a
Parliament to lackan effective Oppisition. But this is up
to the Labor Party to produce it. We will naturally try to
win as many seats as we can.
Q. You are not actually plugging, Sir, for a one majority again
in the next election, are you?
R. HOLT: Certainly not! I would hope to improve on the twenty-add
that we have at the present time.
Q. What significanue do you see Sir, in the ALP's having
elected five Left Wing members to its Foreign Affairs Committee?
MR. HOLT: This is the Federal Executive?
Q. Yes.
MR. HOLT: Well, I think the significance of this is where the
source of power currently lies inside the Australian Labor Party.
The Labor Party has been the voice of the trade union movement
in Australia and for some years now, the more significant of
the unions nr several of them have been under strong Left
Wing leadership. Now this has made its impact on the thinking
of he Caucus and quite obviously it is reflected in the
Federal Executive. / 4 
-4-
Q. What do you think, Sir, of this State Aid plan for education
that Mr. Calwell has put out 10/-for
MR. HOLT: This dollar-a-week plan? -ell, obviously it was a
hasty product designed to offset the argument in the other
direction, and it doesn't require very much analysis to show
how unsatisfactory it could be in practice. Certainly, those
who received an extra dollar a week would be glad to have it.
People are always glad to have some extra money. But what
about the parents whose children are under the school age and
who are no included in this benefit but who have to pay
increased taxation in order to finance the 80 million dollars
which Mr. Calwell estimates the new proposal to cost.
Q. Would yuu say it is a child endowment policy rather thai
an education policy?
MR. HOLT: Well, it is not even a general child endowment policy.
This is the Point I've just been trying to make. It would apply
to some children but not to many others who, for the parents
concerned, represent a family burden.
Q. Do you think there could be any guarantee that the dollar
would be devoted to education and not to other purposes?
MR. HOLT: I don't think there would. I think ours is a much
more practicable approach, but as I said earlier, this has
all the atmosphere and mark about it of improvisation to meet
a political situation.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister we notice that housing construction is
down, car sales have been down and the effects of the drought
are still with us. Could you give us, please, your oomment on
the state of the economy?
MR. HOLT: Well, Mr. Underwood you have picked on some of the
weak spots. There are, fortunately, a good many strong spots
and you may have noticed that Professor Horrie Brown, who
Mr. Calwell said had helped him with his last Budget Speech,
recently went on record as saying that the economy was currently
in excellent shape. The soft spots that have been referred to
have been receiving consideration frnm us but it is about this
time of the year that Cabinet makes a thorough review of the
economy, and we shall be doing this before Parliament meets.
I prefer to reserve any more specific comment until we have
done that. We do intend, of course, to maintain a full
employment situation and a buoyant economy throughout the year.
Q. Just to clear up one point on this Cabinet review Sir.
Would that by any chance point to a supplementary budget?
MR. HOLT: In practice this doesn't occur unless the drift in the
economic si uation has reached a degree that seems to call for
some abnormal action. It has occurred in the past, but I
don't see anything in the current situation which could call
for mere than marginal treatment.
Q. For some months now Mr. Holt, economists have been warning
of the drifting payments position with our import and export
balance. Are you worried about this at all, unduly? 
MR. HOLT: Well, Australia always has to be concerned to some
degree about its balance of payments situation. We are
affected by fluctuating climatic conditions. We are
affected by fluctuations in the prices we get for our export
products, and we im prt heavily * or the requirements of an
affluent society and for a growing economy, but there is
nothing, in the current situation which us cause for, ives
alarm. Indeed, over recent weeks as I. ve seen the figures,
the balance has tended to rise rather than fall. This is
largely because there is a tendency now f~ r imports to steady
down and there is a very strong and 2ustained inflow of
capital.
Q. There is no chance now 6f another squeeze, another tight
sqaeeze like the last one, coming up?
12. HOLT: Well, that should not be necessary.
Q. I don't want to embarrass you by asking you for exact
figures this is a snap question but our overseas reserves
are healthy at the moment, are they?
MR. HOLT: Yes, very healthy in historical terms. I mean there are
not all that many years when Australia could p int to external
reserves as high as they are now plus the fact that we have
drawing rights which constitute our second line of reserves
with te International Monetary Fund, and these have recently
been increased as a result of us taking up the opportunity
available to us in expanded reserve availability which the Fund
had decided upon.
Q. Sir, this would mean that neither the level of our
reserves or the trend nf our balance now would be likely to
cause your Government to have to take any emergency action.
MR. HOLT: No, but what we have been doing for some time is trying
to bring the economy into a better state of balance. I thifik
that's been effectively achieved.
Mr. Chairman: Well, now, could we change the sub ject, perhaps. There
is a lot of territory to cover. Ihat about our commitments in
the near North?
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, what is your short answer to the
eo~ le who tell you that we ought not to be fighting in Viet
am.
M2. HOLT: Well, I don't encounter very many of them, I am glad to
say. I think most Australians recognise that what is happening
in South Viet Nam constitutes a great struggle involving
eventually the security of this country, that here we are
meeting one of the critical challenges in the history of
mankind, and that is the way we see it, and this is why we
are there in Viet Nam, helping to strengthen by our presence,
not necessarily by the size o our forces, the United States
which has undertaken tremendous burdens on behalf of the free
world in this context.
Overseas, Mr. Holt, a lot of eople apparently see this
as a national war of liberation in ie Nam in whic Australia
and America are interfering. 
-6
MR. HOILT: liell some people see it th-, t way. There are some
people in kustralia who see it that way, but I have studiied this
as closely as I can. I have been present at discussions
between men of the highest authority in these matters from
the United States and from our own Departments of advice
Service Departments, External fffairs, and I have studied a
good deal of the evidence which come2 to us, and there can
be no doubt that this goes far beyond the sort of civil war
that Mr. Calwell has been talking about. There is clear
evidence not only of infiltration, of subversion from the
North, of the supply of equipment from the North but nowt, of
course, military forces as wiell, m-d behind it, the guiding
hand of the Chinese communists with their goal of world
domination.
Q. There have been constant rumours of more troops,
Australian troops, being sent to Viet Nam. Is this correct?
MR. HOLT: Well, these are rumours, and I am not able or prepared
to comment on those matters. Normally, when the Govecrment
has any announcement to make of this sort, it involves
simultaneous announcements with other governments, or some
notification of other governments. I couldn't make a comment
on that.
Q. Should Australians accept the probability Sir, that we
will be maintaining troops in Viet Nam -for probably some years?
Or do you have a hope of an earlier peace?
MR. HOILT: Well, nobody can say with ayauthorityr hcw long this
struggle will be drawn out, or whether negotiations are in
the picture. Certainly the United States has been maintaining
thoe stactve eace of fensive that any country could i l
sincerity, be maing, but it took us a long, time in Maiaaa
it then was to tidy up communist guerrilla activity in That
country and a much less complicated task than the one which
is faced. in South Viet Nam. On the other hand, of course,
the forces which have been supplied are very considerable
indeed, and the pressures and sensitivities arouind the world
are very much greater th ~ n was the case in the Malaysian
situation. 71e can only hope while at the same time making it
firmly clear that we are not departing from the safeguarding
of what seemed to us to be essential conditions, essential
principles as we see them from Australia.
Q. Excuse my asking this, Sir, but it relates to your
previous answer that simultaneous announcements are made about
such matters as sending more troops. I am oing to ask this
because I think a lot of viewers out there will be asking it.
Doesn't that at once indicate that more troops are to be sent
because you would not be making simultaneous announcements
if nothing was...
MR. HOLT: I say this is the practi. e, and therefore you don't
answer a question of that sort just off the cuff at even the
most respectable of television sessions.
Q. I gather that you are not going to answer.
Q. Mr. Holt, I have two very short questions about the
first battalion in Viet Nam. When will it be relieved,
and ( b Do you intend to strike a special medal for the troops
for Viet Nam service? 
-7-
MR. HOLT: I c-n't give ynu a precise date en the first question,
but I can say it is the intention that there should, in
respect of the troops who go there from time to time, be a
programme of relief and the Service people wild have this
matter well in hand. As to a special medal again I am not
able to give a decisinn, out I can say that this matter has
been engaging my attention that there is a document which
has recently become available from the various Departments and
Services involved and now available for the Cabinet, which
will be discussing it, I hope in the next fortnight.
Q. Can I just get in this questien? You have said, Sir
that this is a battle against communism and its encroachment.
Could I ask a question that has been puzzling us a littl3
while what happened to the Government's promised I don't
know whether it was promised, but indicated White Paper on
communism in Australia?
MR. HOLT: Well. again, we have had a look at this one on more than
one occasion, but we haven't as yet decided to release such a
White Paper. I am not going to canvass nc'w the arguments
which run pro and con bn this matter or the difficulties
which arise in relation to it. It would take more time than
we have available here. All I can tell you is that it has
engaged the attention of Cabinet more than once over recent
years.
Q. It indicates that, at any rate, it is prepared
MR. HOLT: Not in any final form. There have been earlier draftings
of the sort of thing that could be released if the Government
decided that this should be done.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you have had, very recently, talks
with the British Defence 1Minister, Mr. Healey. Are we right
in gathering that you feel reassured that British Defence
Forces will be staying in the Indian Ocean and South East
Asian area longer, perhaps, than you had first thought, and
that we can expect UK defence co-operation?
MR. HOLT: We were able to impress, I am sure, Mr. Healey with the
importance that Australia, New Zealand, and, I would think,
the United States, attaches to a British presence in that
area, and the assurance which apparently Mr. Healey gave the
Premier of Singapore recently would be in confirmat ion vf
what I am now putting. And therefore we can expect the United
Kingdom to hola on f~ r a considerable period cf time in
Singapore. But discussing the matter quite realistically
and remember, our talks with Mr. Healey were looking many
years ahead, I repeat, he got as far as the 90' s of this
century, and that is, although a long way away, still not too
far away for us to be thinking and planning for contingencies
which could arise, and we felt it would be useful if our
Service people could talk over together ways in vhich if we
were, for example, establishing some service establishment
here, either Army, Navy or Air Fyrce, that we might have in
mind that a situation could arise in which British servicemen
would be wanting to make some use of that facility also.
But there is no commitment, and no firm decision zf detail
6n this matter.
Q. Does this mean Mr. Holt, that if these forces you talk
about do come here when and if Sinapore is given away by
Britain, that you will give bases to Britain in Australia? 
-8-
MR. HOLT: There has been no decision on this point, but it is
clearly in our interests, and we would hope in the common
interests, for the closest collaboration and Service cooperation
between ourselves and the United Kingdom and New
Zealand, and we would hope that, so far as the area generally
is concerned, this could extend to the United States of
America. They have, together, an interest with us in the
stability and economic progress of this region.
Q. ~ ould yau agree, Mr. Holt, that it is to America, and
not so much To Britain these days that Australia has to look
primarily for defence aid?
MR. HOLT: We have our arrangements under ANZUS and SEATO with
the United States. Of course the United Kinordom io a party
to SEATO, and this assurance we've had from the United
Kimgdom about their continued presence East of Suez in
substantial force is an indication that they will be playing
a part in the security of the area. I don'l think I would
want to be distinuishing publicly as between one or the
other; in some situations we will be involved with the United
Kingdom to a greater extent than, say, we would be with the
United States. This is what is happening in respect of
Indonesian confrontation. On the other hand, in Viet Nam,
there we are involved with the Unite4 States.
Q. It would be realistic, Sir, would it net, to imagine
that in the event of a crisis for Australia Britain couldn't
provide massive help on the lines that the United States
might be able to?
MR. HOLT: Well I don't think we are expectin-Great Britain to
fight our tattles for us. On the other hand, Australia, at
this stage of its development, can't meet every challenge which
could conceivably be directed against it entirely of its own
strength. That is why we have these alliances, but I wouldn't
like to pursue against suppositions or contingencies too much
public discussion on a matter of this sort. I thin we have
robably covered it about as widely as I feel I wish to at
his point. Mr. Prime Minister, the Defence programme is expanding,
and this money has to come from somewhere. Does this mean
that eventually there will be new taxes? You must raise
this money somehow.
0. HOLT: This of course depends on the degree of growth.
Certainly fhe possibility is there of some increase because
of the growth in the Defence programme. On the other hand,
we have an expanding economy, returning increased revenue to
the Government, year by year. It becomes a matter of
judgment as to where any increase which comes to us from the
r owth in our national product and the taxable income derived
rom that, , ihere this should be directed, and this is one cf
the teasing aspects of government, this problem cf balance cr
the distribution cf resources.
Q. This revolution in Indonesia, Mr. Holt, do you think
that this has given Australia the chance to improve relationships
with Indonesia and vice versa? 
-9-
MU. HOLT: Australia wants ta be a friend of Indonesia. We've
demonstrated that many times, not merely because they are
our nei hbours immediately to our North 100 million of
them ut because it is our general disposition as a people
to want to be friends with the countries that lie to the
north of this country indeed, friends around the world.
But at this stage, I think it is rather too early to say what
the prospects are of an improved relationship. I may say
that I had a very cordial message from the President of
fndonesia, Dr. Sukarno, when I became Prime Minister, and
also on Australia Day: a message also from Dr. Subandrio.
And I did have the pleasure of meeting General ñ, asution when
he was out here and was very much impressed bi him. I would
hope that he has a growing influence in the affairs of that
country, and that this could be a contribution to better
relations betwnen us.
Mr. Holt, just how seriously do you regard Indonesia's
confrontation with Malaysia at the moment?
MR. HOLT: Well it is a serious matter for us and for the British.
Apart from anything else, it ties upa considerable body of
servicemen from our respective countries and is very costly
on that account if on no other, but it creates tensions for
us all; it is disruptive in respect of Singapore and
Malaysia. V ' e would certainly look to see an endto it,
hopefully, but there is nothing in sight which would encourage
us tt be lieve that this was going to happen.
Have there been any indications of Indonesian trespassing
in Australian New Guineai
MR. HOLT: None that has come to my noti~ ce.
Do you think that Indonesia will allow West Irian to
make up its own mind eventually? Will the go to the people
there at all, or do you think They will just take over?
MR. HOLT: Oh, I wouldn't wish to comment on that one at this stage.
I think we are getting into the realm of possibilities. There
is nothing specific on this before us at the present time.
Q. Then perhaps the Asian nation which we would have reason
to fear most, if we have to fear a nation, that would be, of
course, China.
MR. HOLT: Well, China has made known its intention to go to world
domination with its philosophy, if it can achieve that goal,
and the Chinese are a patient people, but they have shown a
firmness and a resolution on this matter quite unwaveringly
since they took office. Now, we have learnt to our cost in
the past that it is dangerous to igmore what dictators say
about their intentizns. This was so of Hitler, this was so
o Mussolini this was so in the case of the Japanese general
who stated te Japanese intentions. And the Chinese gave
set out their gols clearly enough, I think, for us to know
where they inteni to go.
Q. Well, gentlemen, would you care to change the subject
now 
10
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you were Minister for Immigration
at one period. ihat is your viewpoint to-day on immigration?
Do you think our present immigratinn policies are liberal
enough?
MR. HOLT: You are speaking of the restricted aspect of immigration?
Q. Yes.
MR. HOLT: Each country, of course reserves to itself these days,
the right to the content of its population, and all countries,
in our neighbourhood anyhow, maintain quite restriotive
immigration policies, but in Australia, we have maintained
the policy, over recent years anyhow, with what I described
when I was Minister myself, humanity and good sense. Now
there have been changes in the scene around us which, while
not going to some fundamental change in our own policy, might
indicate to rs that we should be reviewing the conditions
which operate in respect of certain classes of migrant or
settler in this country. For example, we do currently have
a difference in the period required for naturalisation between
the European settler and the non-European. Now this is a
matter which, I think should be looked at. There may be
powerful reasons why the distinction was observed at the time
the rule came into effect, but it's one of the matters I am
having currently Qxamined.
Q. Just to make it clear Sir, you were in this referring
we are talking about Asians, no doubt.
MR. HOLT: That is so.
Q. Would your review include the possibility of allowing
Asian students to remain in Australia?
MR. HOLT: I don't think we would be doing any service to the country
from which they came if we were to do this. I know that our
own students at the universities form strong friendships with
many of the Asian students who go through the universities,
but they have come to Australia with the primary object on the
part of the country whence they came bf strengthening the
economy and administration of that country, and if Australia
was to reap by some change in its present rules, the cream of
those who pass through the university here from Asia, I don't
think we would be very popular with Asian governments.
Q. Would it encompass such matters as that which many
people thought was inhumane the deportation of a little girl
named Nancy Prasad? Cases like that I mean. I don t know
the background of the case, and I make no special pleadings
in it.
MR. HOLT: Well, I was long enough in the Department of Immigration
to kncw that it is unwise to condemn a decision on what can
be stated publicly. There are frequently personal, private
family reasons which have a bearing on these matters, and
I am not familiar with all the details in the Prasad case,
but I do have the confidence in the warm humanity which the
Immigration Department displayed over the years since the
war while this programme has been in effect, so that I am not
prepared to prejudge the matter without a full awareness of
all the circumstances. 
' ii
Q. Mr. Holt, can we infer from all of this that there is
certainly not going to be any wholesale rescinding of the
White Australia policy?
MR. HOLT: Well, we don't have a White Australia policy. You
mean restrictive immigration policy.
Q. That's the public service term for it, perhaps, but
perhaps you will allow us to use our term.
Q. I think we shouild get away from it as much as possible.
Chairman: In any case, the question is clear.
MR. HOLT: Yes, the question is clear. The current policy is
supported by the great majority of the Australian people,
but there is scope at times for liberalisation of conditions.
This was done by us in the case of marriages to Japanese
wives. This has been done in a number of-other instances,
and we shall have coming to Australia as our trade builds up
with the countries of Asia an increasing number of technicians,
executives; the will want to bring families with them.
Some of them will find themselves settled here for a number
of 4ears. The point I am making about review is that we
donyt necessarily go to the fundamentals of the policy when
we make such a review; but there may be aspects of it that
we should -e looking at in the light of what we see, the
circumstances with which we are likely to be confronted in,
say, the next decade.
With great respect, Sir, don't you think that the
majority of Australians are taking a mere liberal approach
an immigration now than they were say ten or fifteen years
ag?
MR. HOLT: I think they are.
Q. Mr. Holt, we have had an encouraging preliminary report
from Sir William Hudson on the Northern Development. I t ink
he dealt with irrigation. Can you tell us, please, if we
can expect, Sir, any new kind of breakthrough in northern
development?
MR. HOLT: I think a very great deal is going on in the way of
northern development. ' dhat is overlooked is the commercial
activity, the industrial activity of the private operators.
I heard a fi ure mentioned I think I am right in quoting
this one aT $ 800 million of development expenditure
currently going on north of the Tropic of Capricorn. Now
don't hold me to that, because I haven't got this precisely
in mind, but there is, if you take the programme as a whole,
the private programmes and the Government programme...
Q. Including the West
MR. HOLT: a great dell of activity going on at the present
time. Yes, but Queensland is also saring this and
certainly the Northern Territory.
Q. Talking of the North, this week in Dawson. What
makes you think the Country Party can hold this against the
very strong ALP onslaught? 
12
MR. HOLT: Well, first of all, the ALP itself is not very strong
at the moment, and I am sure that this is % ell recognised in
Dawson, jadging by some of the comment I heard while I was
up there. But as to the confidence we have in our capaoity
to hold the seat, our own candidate is a practical man, an
enterprising younger member of a sugar-producing fami lya nd
sugar is a vital commodity in the Dawson electorate. Hte has
been overseas as a member of the Young Farmer group, he has
shown an intelligent and modern approach to the pro lems of
the area the farmin roblems, agricultural problems, and
I think Ae will spea he language of Dawson much more
realistically over the years ahead than a man who is
crusading very commendably for one particular line of activity
but hasn't so far taken a battleground other than that of
northern development; and a representative of Dawson will
have to involve himself in a great many more iesues than this.
And of course, I would believe that the electors of Dawson
would like to feel they had a voice in the Party Room of the
Government.
Chairman: I ask you that because we did have Dr. Patterson here
a couple bf weeks ago, and we did nit have Mr. Fordyce, so
I thiink now we have presented both sides.
Q. A bit further north than Dawson, Mr. Prime Minister
New Guinea. In your reviews of policies, are you having
a look at the likely time it will take for New Guinea to
reach a stage where it will be independent, whether you will
have to change policies in New Guinea to any extent?
MR. HOLT: No, we have got a very active programme of development
g~ ing forward with our assistance in Nw Guinea. This is
not only in the economic sense, but in the sense of governmental
administration, constitutional development; we have
been making reviews from time to time of the pace of constitutional
development with the idea of leading or guiding the
people in New Guinea to a point of viable indeendence. The
interesting thing is to see how they caution themselves
against too rapid a pace. They want this to be done in a
way which will leave them sufficiently strong when they assume
independence to be able to stand on their own feet, and to
be able to conduct their own affairs in a proper fashion.
Q. Do you favour a recent suggestion Mr, Holt, that the
New Guinea people be given an opportunity of a referendum
to cast their own vote as to whether they would like to
become in fact a seventh State of Australia?
MR. HOLT: Surely this is a very involved matter which would require
far more than a casual comment from me at this point. I am
not sufficiently well-informed on it to make the comment.
Chairman: Look, with time running out, you know that before the
end of this year, Mr. Holt has to take on a job he has never
had to do before. He has to lead a government in an election.
Would anybody like to touch on that facet?
Q. Yes. Mr. Holt, in the next, in the coming election,
would you rather do battle with Mr. Calwell than with Mr.
Whitlam? 
A t 15
MR. HOLT: After all I have been involved in many elections since
I came in in 195. Indeed, I cut my campaigning teeth in
1954 against Mr. Scullin. So I am not
Q. Obviously you weren't leading the Government then. It
makes it a much more difficult task.
MR. HOLT: No, but I have been in a senior role in Government for
many years now, and there have been times in particular
campaigns when I have been leading the campaign ef the Government
in a particular State. I am not troubled by the prospect
of going into a vigorous electinn campaign, and, Tfrankly,
I think we will win handsomely regardless ef what emerges
from the present disarray of te Labor Party.
Q. Do you think the will vote for the Government and not
worry about the Opposition?
MR. HOLT: I don't think the Oppesition can produce even if it
could find the complete answer in terms of leader, I don't
think it can produce in that time the policies needed for the
Australia of to-day. They w6uld have to scrap so much of
their existing policy structure in order to achieve that result,
and I don't think they will achieve it in the time.
Chairman: Well, we will regard that as the first shot in the next
election campaign, . and our forty-five minutes is up, and I have,
to my great regret to close down, but I am coming back again
to the Prime Minister after this message
Well, Prime Minister, I didn't think that so much ground would
be covered in the forty-five minutes that we had at our disposal,
but it has been covered and a great deal of useful information
given. I am quite sure that our viewers recognise that there
were some curly questions to which you had to play a straight
bat, and as a former inquisitor at Canberra, I can certainly
appreciate it. All that remains for me now is to say thank
you very much. We are greatly privileged that you have come
o Queensland for your first full-scale interview of this kind.
We do hope that we will see you again. Good night, Sir.
MR. HOLT: Thank you Mr. Leonard. Thank you to you all. 



LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
BOX HILL, VICTORIA FEBRUARY, 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
( Introduction not recorded)
and in full dignity of robe and office have given
me this warm and cordial welcome to the Municipality of Box Hill.
I don't think that the Mayors of either Malvern or Uaulfield would
have done it with any more grace and dignity than you have done.
( I had tn get in a plug for Higgins. Even Prime Ministers have to
watch their electorates, ladies and gentlemen:)
Mr. Chandler I sat enraptured while I heard you
introduce me to this audience. There is only one problem about
hearing delightful thirs said about yourself and that is that
somehow you are expeoted to live up to them and it is not always
easy to measure up to the specification which one s friends
expound on your behalf. But I do appreciate what you have said
about my long service and apprenticeship in this party service
to this party and apprenticeship to that very great man who in
the judgment of all of us here, has been the outstanding political
figure in the history of our nation. And what a model for any
successor to have before his gaze and in his mind as he goes about
the tasks of government.
Well this particular task this morning is a very pleasant
one. I left Canberra and its rain and cold and here we come into
this beautiful late summer morning in Melbourne amongst friends
and colleagues serving together the principles we hoid in common
as fellow Liberals ann oining for the common purposes of policy
that we have presented io the nation. And so I take advantage
of this opportunity to talk over with you some of the things cf
course not more than a selection of the things which could be
discussed mn an occasion such as this, but some of the things in
which we have a mutual interest.
Now first, the Liberal Party itself. Its strength
vigour and vitality I think, is admirably reflected here. It's
not every party that could hope to secure on a Sunday at 1 p. m.
the sort of attendance that I see stretched out before me in this
hall. It's not only a very acceptable tribute to myself I don't
place that by any means at the top of the list-but it is certainly
a reflection of the strength and of the vitality of the Liberal
Party. And this is as it should be because the Liberal Party
carries tremendous responsibilities for the Australia of today,
ad perhaps even more importantly, for the Australia of the years
Ours is a young party as political parties go. It is
only last year that we were celetrating our 21st birthday, We
came into being in 1944 at a time when the non-Labor par ies had
fallen into a sort of state of decay which we see reflected in
the Labor Party at the present time. Sir Robert Manzies and
others of like mind assembled together and they built what has
become the greatest arrty on our side of politics in the history
of the Federation and a party which is as yet in its infancy in
relation to the contribution it is going to make to the national
development, the national strength. But here in the 21 years, / 2 
-2-
we have occupied 16 of those in national leadership and this has
been associated with the grofitest era of development and national
qowth and growth in international influence and prestige that
his country has ever iknoan, and of course the thin s have gone
together. it is the leadership under the distinguished head of
the party, Sir Robert Menzies, that has carried us to this
situation. But Australia has need of the Liberal Party. We had
reached a point in our affairs when we needed a party which
would stand for all sections of the Australian community which
would cast aside once and for all, the old hitter concept of
class warfare tAe stru le between employer and employee; that
would see in the needs of Australia a neea for a party of unity,
a party which could develop a co-operating democracy, with the
national Parliament linked in friendly co-operation with the
Parliaments of the States; not trying to make a Federation work
by imposing authority from the centre or by so construing the
Federal powers that the States were reduced to nothingness, but
a true Federation based upon a spirit of co-operation rather than
on a strict definition of powers. And I believe that we can
claim in Australia today that no country can present a picture to
the world of closer national co-operation at al levels of
government than will be found in the Commonwealth of Australia.
There was a need when we took office for a party which
would lead the country into a reat era of growth. Here we were
in Australia with something under 8 millions of people with a
land mass approximately the size of the United States of America,
if we leave Alaska out of the picture, and with tremendous tasks
if with this small population, we were to develop the resources
of the continent and to set briskly about the business of
populating a country by immigration as well as our on natural
inorase agan is a storyof etrendou3 succesa, the
way in which dooSTe ail I i cul. a bsTe n
fliictu. tin of Io tune 7hich inevitbly . ffic a7 country which
depenL muchh-on . he fortunes of the sraorn, filict at, hs of
pries os : xr any rone st&gt; eadily ahead v; with o.: r : reyramme
of ana wi: l. i. rluc. turautitonn s
wiith ; i rcee f na;-crai grCw1t h. ind tlid , Dacv ohich was
bcorno g:-ret t phhiil c phy of freedom to enbhrine in
policies incntI% f-or t'e Indlvi. dua, encouragement to enterprise
and a freer way of life for a peopie which had through the years
coaf rrwiaerd etxhco; aonr errtiineee cdy! e aar sr eogo : ; iepvn atLic . Thtehseey dwJii; dedr e nnototht e wwic-esisaha steso wsvee ewere
creeatec&gt; ser b . dn .1 bll-avu f: e tafly, after this
21 y,. irs of lite a Liberal Paty tht cojectives have been
largely realised and the kind of Autralia we set about to create
has been brought into being and suZ-tined.
owi' whether we can SUtin2l iso into the future
depends very largely onr, the co. ntribution, the akill, the judgment,
that you and I as your national leader of the party can comoibne
together to effect. I confidently believe that we of the Liberal
Party are going on to geater strength in the years ahead. Our
best years are ahead of us not behind us, proud though we may be
of the achievement of our hirst twenty-one years.
Now one of the encouragin'. ti ngs for someone in my
situation is to see ho; this Autraian torv of Liberal leadership
is now, reachin: into t he pain. 1cw loeg-er ation of people in
other part of the wld and n in quite receLt \ 7eeks, it
almoot Sems as though tnere has been a fresh discovery of this
country of ours. S* */ 3 
I could perhaps illustrate this process for you by my
own experience of the latter part of this week. I spent a great
deal of time at the United States Embassy because it is through there
that these visitors have been passing, but on Thursday night I dined
there with the management group of " Newsweek", the geat weekly
journal in the United States which ranks with the " Time" publication
as one of the mass circulatin weeklies of the world, and " Newsweek"
is following in the wake of " Time" in setting up its own edition
published in Australia for this part of the world. And the next
day at lunch, there was the management group out here, top-ranking
people from " Time", " Life" and Fortune", and they having established
te " Time" edition in Australia are now turning, I understand to the
publication of an Australian edition of " Life" as well. The following
day, there was the visit of Vice-President Humphrey and this is only
the second time in our history that the Vice-President of the United
States has come to this country. The very fact that he chose to do
so, after the most strenuous tour which he had just undertaken, aain
is a mark of the importance which the United States attaches to what
is occurring out here. On Monday I shall be meeting the Chairman
of the largest bank in New York, the First National ity Bank.
Now I mention these things just as topical illustrations
of the sort of process that is goin on week by week in the Australia
of today. The Ambassador of the United States put it to me this way.
e said, " It is as if our people have just discovered the existence
of Australia and all that E can mean in terms of potential".
My Press Secretary tells me that there are fifteen
interviews with the foreign press lined up when I can get round to
carrying them out, so the interest is not confined to the United States
of America. Now contrast the situation of our own party in all its
vigour and vitality with the unhappy and dolorous situation of the
official Opposition. It is not easy at the moment to sort out just
what form the Opposition takes. Is it an Opposition of the Right or
an Opposition of the Left or just a general scramble? I ask this
question because I was interested to notice that when Mr. Whitlam was
so elaborately pointing out the Kind of Labor Party that he would be
leading, he said he wanted to make it clear that he sought to lead a
radical and socialist party. Now he was making a bid for leadership
somewhat to the right of the Left ' ing, the Left Wing having installed
some of its Parliamentary colleagues, not themselves supported by
the Caucus for those positions, into posts which others who had been
supported by the Caucus posts from which others had been displaced
as the result of the action of the Federal Executive of the party.
The group, not described by me but described rather unkindly b
Mr. Whitlam as the " twelve witiess men", yet I understand two of them
support.. him quite strongly. But those who took up or were supported
to these new posts are said to be men of the Left. Now Mr. ' itlam
by deduction would be regarded as a Labor leader of the Right but
even a Labor leader of the Right feels that the offer he should make
to the electorate is that of leadership of a radical and socialist
party. Now does anybody in their senses, looking arnund the
Australia of today, believe that what Australia wants is a radical and
socialist party. If only the Labor Party would proclaim that quite
frankly and firmly and I was indebted to Mr. Whitlam for doing so
because it hasn't been easy to sort out of their own disarray just
what it is that they do stand for at this time. But if the Right
Wing of the Labor Party declares itself to be for a radical an
socialist party for the Australia of these times, then it is as well
that the Australian public should realise this and reject it as
opportunity offers, as I am quite certain they would wish to do / 4 
-4-
Well, I don't intend to spend a great deal of time this
morning on the problems of the Labor Party. I don't rejoice in
a weak Opposition but certainly I am very glad to have the current
majority we enjoy in Parliament, and it will be my objective when
we come to election, to increase that majority as handsomely as
I can succeed in doing. But it is for the Labor Party to either
make its own omelette or unscramble the eggs as best it can.
The incident through which we have * ust passed however,
or are passing, is illuminatng in one important respect for us,
and that is the demonstration it has given to where the centre
of authority lies in the Australian Labor Party under its
Constitution. Now when we spoke in the last election about
" 56 faceless men" di6tating to the Parliamentary Caucus as to
what lines of policy they should follow, we were attacked for
misrepresenting the position as the Labor Party saw it; but we
were clearly right because immediately after the election, Mr.
Whitlam got busy himself in trying to effect some improvement
in the oosition. He has returned to it in this last week or so
and has'gone even further in outlining the embarrassing position
in which the Parliamentary party finds itself. And can any
Parliamentary party in the history of this country have ever been
treated so contemptuously or in such humiliating fashion as the
Parliamentary party of Labor in the Federal sphere.
Now I am glad to report you know it I report it
publicly that from the outset inside our own organisa ion we
adopted firmly the principle that it was not for any outside
organisation to dictate to the elected representatives of the
Australian people as to how they should record their vote inside
the Parliament. Policy discussion certainly; and we have inside
the Liberal Party our own important annual Council meetings and
we have the meetings of the Joint Standing Committee on Policy
and from these discussions and from discussions with the State
Council meetings and the Branch meetings there flows up to the
Federal leadership recommendations of policy which the
Parliamentary Leaaer is able to take into his consideration and
bring before Cabinet as in his judgment he deems it desirable to
do. But nobody seeks to dictate to him or to his Parliamentary
colleagues. The proper role of a Parliament in a democracy is
fully recognised inside the Liberal Party and completely safeguarded
by our Constitution.
Now let me turn from the Labor Party to the problem of
development and defence. I put these two together because they
are linked and it is important that we should clearly see the
relationship the one has to the other. This gives me the
opportunity to state the position in my own terms to a great
audience from the Liberal Party itself and I welcome that
opportunity because, perhaps from the distortion which occurs
when statements are abbreviated in the press I have found that
repeatedly over recent times what I have said on this matter
has been interpreted as a statement by me that there can be no
increase in the Defence vote. Well that, of course, is absurd.
We have increasing obligations as our own resources grow, so
our capacity to do more will grow and we are already currently
co ing with a build-up in the Defence vote a doubling of the
budgetary provision over a four-year perioa and a sizable
increase ahead of us in the next financial year. So we are not
talking in terms of no increase in the Defence vote. What I am
trying to ensure is that the process of development, having so
painstakingly been got under way and sustained through all the
difficulties we have encountered, that this process shall go on
strongly and firmly and itself make, over the years, a contribution
to our capacity to do more by way of defence or to do more
by way of international aid and in the kind of world in which
we live, these things are also linked together. 
The talks we have had in recent times have been
extremely helpful to us in helping to form our own ideas as to what
we should be doing. First there was our discussion with the
Minister for Defence in the United Kingdom, Denis Healey, and there
had been rumours that you would have read about in the Press; there
had even been a statement somewhat along these lines from the
shadow Minister for Defence in the Conservative Party to the effect
that the British were withdrawing their forces East of Suez. We
were not prepared to take final decisions about our own defence
planning until we had a clearer view of the British intention and
also a clearer view of the future as seen by the United States in
respect of Viet Nam. But the talks of the last few weeks have
cleared our minds on both these matters and now enable us to go
forward firmly with our own planning. And the discussions that
have taken place over recent weeks in relation to the contribution
we can make in one theatre or another these will be pursued now
quite speedily to a conclusion and I hope then to be able to make
some early announcement about them.
But we were able, as a result of these discussions
with Mr. Healey, I think, to have some substantial influence upon
the British thinking. We were able, as I know the United States
felt it desirable to do also, to emphasise the importance we
attach to a British presence in that area of the world, not
merely for purposes of military security or making a military
contribution against such a matter a, Indonesian confrontation,
but for the moderating influence which the British presence has
there in a restless undecided and uncertain area of the world,
and for the strengthening of morale which results from all this
throughout the South-East Asian area generally. If there were to
be a British withdrawal in this area, I am sure it would have a
quite seriously damaging effect upon morale and, indeed upon the
general security of the area as a whole. Well, fortunately, that
view has been accepted by the United Kingdom. We have been assured
that they will remain in Singapore for as long as they find it
practicable to do so. But it flows from this that with the kind
of contingencies that have to be guarded against it is a sensible
thing to be planning against the possibility that other arrangements
may have to be made at some future point of time. So our
Service people are exploring these possibilities and will be
canvassing them in due course with the representatives of the
United Kingdom. Now in the case of the United States, the value of
Mr. Humphrey's visit could hardly be exaggerated. I don't know
whether any of you had an opportunity to hear him speak yesterday
but his was one of the most powerful and moving public statements
that I think I have heard in a political lifetime. For any
waverers as to the need for us to be in Viet Nam or any who
retain some naive notion that what is going on tAere is some sort
of a civil war which we should be keeping out of and minding our
own business, then the powerful statement of the Vice-President,
has set the record straight. He clearly brought home the
circumstances under which Peking direction, Hanoi direction, are
influencing the course of events in Viet Nam the supplies, the
infiltration, the troops that are moving from The North into that
area the discovery of the underground trenches, cells fully
stocked and equipped with weapons of communist origin and obviously
requiring some years of construction in the thoroughness with which
they have been prepared these things mark the purposefulness, the
determination to expand communist influence throughout that area
of the world. And we believe that not merely is the security of
South Viet Nam involved in this issue but the security of the
whole of the South-East Asian area anA, indeed, properly understood,
this forms part of the challenge, the world challenge which in one
form or another free people have had to meet repeatedly over the
years since the end of the Second World War. To meet in Berlin, 
-6-
ti meet in areas of Greece when the civil war, so-called, was
being waged there. As the Vice-President ointed out, it was a
remarkable thing that when Yugoslavia cease to be an area through
which supplies could move to Greece, the civil war collapsed.
Here was a war which in substance was a reflection of the communist
programme of infiltration and subversion which so skilfully has
een carried out in so many parts of the world.
And so we have a clear recognition, in the minds of
the Governments, anyhow, of the United SYates and of this country,
that in Viet Nam is being fought one of the criitical battles for
free peoples throughout he world everywhere. I would hope that as
this real isation spreads amongst those countries, they would find
themselves able to do more than they are doing now if not in the
military field, then in making a contribution to tAe second phase
of the programme there, that of building up in a positive and
constructive way, the community so that there can be a peaceful,
stable and prospering South Viet Nam in the years ahead of us.
Now, the United States has undertaken tremendous
responsibilities in this area. It has felt at times the loneliness
of leadership and I know that it has valued the Australian presence,
the moral support which Australia has brought to it, the comfort
and assurance that Australia sees this issue in the same fashion
and with the same clarity that the President of the United States
has seen it. We are all indebted to him, or should be, for his
resolution, his firmness of purpose his determination to see this
thing through, when in his own country, as in ours, and indeed in
any iemocracy the voice of dissent can be raised. There have been
the critics who have sought to undermine his position because he has
made his own clear decision as to what has to be done in relation
to this threat. Now let me just mention in passing that this small
country of ours we are small in terms of population; sometimes
this tends to be overlooked by nur friends an allies outside. The
Americans tend to see what we are doing in Viet Nam but not pay
very much heed tc what is being done in relation to confrontation
in Malaysia. The British are conscious of the effort we are making
in collaboration with them in respect of Malaysia, but know comparatively
little about what we also in one form or another, are
contributing in Viet Nam. NeitAer of them seem to be very well
aware of what it means to a country that has to develop its own
resources, what it means in terms of national effort to house and
give the amenities of a modern community to the larger population
growth rate that Australia possesses. Uur population is growing
at an increase of 2 per cent. a year. The United Kingdom .8 of
1 per cent. The United States 1.3 er cent and I have been pointing
out to our friends from the United States that if our rate of
population growth were occurring in their country at this time,
hey would Fave tn add to the number of houses built year by year
mnre than 500,000 additional houses. In the United Kingdom, they
would have to add 170,000 additional houses. So that these are
facts of life for us. We can't afford to overlook that growth;
population growth and development create domestic problems for us
ana make heavy demands upon our resources.
Now why we believe that we must go firmly ahead with
this development, this process of population must be regarded as
fundamental to the policies of the nation, is because Australia
has not always enjoyed these opportunities for growth. We sustained
nearly half a million casualties in two world wars. ie encountered
the disastrous depression of the thirties and it is only over the
last twenty years that we have in recent history been able to
embark on a period of sustained growth which must continue if
S. / 7 
-7
Australia is to build its own strength and from that strength,
make an increasing contribution to the security and well-being of
others. And we want to have this clearly understood by those
with whom we are associated in friendly alliance in our treaties
and in great tasks together of a humanitarian kind in the various
directions in which we undertake them. Australia has not looked
to a relativity between its contribution and those of its allies
when it comes to international aid. We are a capital-importing
country. Despite this, we rank about fourth amongst all the
countries of the world in the per capita provision we make for
international aid.
Recently there was established an Asian Development Bank
and capital sought was $ 1,000M. to get this institution going so
that finance could be available for projects of a helpful kind
in the countries of Asia. The United States was to contribute
200M.; Japan $ 200M, and Australia is contributing $ 85M., a quite
disproportionate commitment on our part, measured in terms of
population or resources. I mention these facts because we need
not feel when one looks at the record that Australia is failing
to respond in the variety of directions in which around the world
today, people expect to see us making a contribution.
Now when we were established as a nation in 1788, the
United States was then twelve years after the Declaration of
Independence. At the Declaration of Independence, there were
less than 4 million people in the United States of America so
that just 12 years before Australian establishment occurred, there
were less than 4 million people in that mighty country. Today,
while we have been growing, struggling along to get to our 12
millions of people the United States has grown to 190-odd
millions, constituting the most powerful and prosperous nation
on earth. And they have done it by taking in people, taking in
capital down through the years until they are now at such a
position of strength that they in turn have been sending capital
out for investment around the other areas of the world.
We have had a lot of argument in one form or another in
Australia about overseas investment and I hope that at least in
the Liberal Party, we have a clear mind on this matter. I believe
we do from the discussions at the Council Meeting in Canberra
I think it was in the course of last year. We recognise that there
are problems that come when you bring in capital from overseas,
but there are great gains for this country in the diversification
of industry it brings us, the additional techniques which come in
aid of our industrial rowth in the capital equipment which comes
in as part of the capital inflow, and finally, if the enterprise
is successful, and quite apart from the addition to job opportunities
which are created in this way, finally if the enterprise is
profitable and successful there is an Australian dividend from
he taxation of the profits thus earned.
I can illustrate it for you by pointing to the fact that,
say, $ 1M. of profit would carry taxation at the ordinary company
rate of the order of $ 425,000. Of what remains, if the normal
practice were followed and this is how it averages out over the
field of companies about half the remainder would be ploughed
back into that business, providing additional job opportunities
for other Australians or for the migrants who come here seeking
jobs in their turn. And of the balance that might be remitted
overseas then except in the case of the United Kingdom there is
a withholding tax to be paid which on the most favourable basis
would be 15 per cent., and for many companies is of the order of
per cent. And so you can say that out of this $ 1M. of profit,
we the Australian people, have our dividend of just on half a
million dollars, which goes to the purposes of government defence / 8 
8-
social welfare, education any one of the many tasks which
governments have to undertake, and as tomost of the rest, it is
tloughed back into Australian industr~ widenfing our industrial
aeas the process goes on. iihen I Low of the pains that other
countries go to in their endeavours to attract capital investment
into their economies, I marvel that our own Australian people
aren't the more appreciative of the benefits which this process is
conferring upon us.
We shall be a stronger nation, a better-equipped nation
as a result of these processes than if we had to rely entirely upon
our own savings. We go save and save well, Ninety per cent. of
all the investment in Australia is of our own internal generation,
but the remaining ten per cent. i~ s a very welcome addition and
provides some of the key industries some of the major projects of
a mineral kind. Take th field of the search for oil here it is
the oversea investment; when Australians would be reluctant to
lay nut funds in any dimension in such chancy propositions, it is
this oversea investment which is helping to resolve whether
Australia has the fuel oil resources to sustain itself over the
years ahead. Now I hope when the arguments develop, as they do fiom
time to time, these facts can be kept in mind by our own supporters
in the Liberal Party. It would be very pleasant if we could do
all these things for ourselves but if we try to rely solely on
what we can do for ourselves, t~ hen we must be prepared to accept
a much slower rate of growth and defer for greater peripds of
time, the widening and strengthening of the industrial base of
the nation. Now the final thing I wish to say, Mr. Chairman, is
that just as I mentioned earlier, there seems to be a new disco ery
of Australia taking place around the rest of the world, so also
I believe that par of the reason for this is recognition that we
are on the threshliold of a new chapter of our national history.
WNe have seen the beginnings of it in the dramatic growth of our
trade with Japar and in the view being taken by so ma-ny overseas
industrialists tAat Australia is to be looked to not just as a
domestic market for the suipply of the goods of their manufacture
but as a launching place in order to penetrate the markets and
the customer capacities to be found in the countries of Asia.
That is why many of these overseas concerns are establishing
themselves here. A market of a prospering 12 millions and upwards
is a comparatively small thing against the potential as Asia
industrialises, as the standards rise, as consumption capacity
increases; then here in Australia is a stable base which can be
looked to as a launching point for the markets of this excitin new
area of the world. There is a focus on Asia today such as has
never existed before and in that spotlight Australia is showing
up the more clearly the significant role it has to play.
It is certainly flattering in our ejes, but it is a
reflection of the judgment they make that the Heads of Government
such as the United Kingdom and the Uhited States maintain the
closest contact with us. They honour the Head of an Australian
Government not only with warm friendship but with the closest of
communication and we are in reyular and continuous communication
with the Governments, both of Ce United Kingdom and the United
States. I stress them in particular because quite clearly those
are the countries of the geatest significance for us, and we can
all take some comfort in the strength of our friendship and in
the effectiveness of our co-operation; but for Australia this
opens up a new era of opportunity, a new era of responsibility.
With growing nationhood, we have growing obligations
( Next portion lost while tapes were being changed) / 9 
9
the more determined we must be that the job of
national leadership will be performed effectively and as the
nation would have it performed.
Now here, you, and those of us in the Parliamentary
party come together for the formation of policies for the
development of a national teamwork which will enable this great
country of ours to take full advantage of the exciting vista that
opens up ahead of us. I for my part feel completely confident
that the Liberal Party will eamsure up in full degree to the
responsibility that falls to it and look forward proudly to
carrying the banner of Liberalism as your leader for many
successful years ahead. 



F OR P R 3S "' COG'. QIC C0 . SUTATO
STATEMEN~ T BY Tig frl~ i1I1j; Siz. ;. ITHRLDH
ThQ' Commnonwealth Government will hold a further series of
Economic Consultations with representatives of industry and commerce
in Canberra next Tuesday ( 1st March).
The Government has been much assisted in the past by such
discussion which afforded a valuable opportunity to Ministers to
obtain at first-hand the views on current and prospective developments
in the Australian economy of those directly engaged in
business and industry.
On Tuesday morning Ministers will have discussions first
with representatives of the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council, and then with representatives of the ExportDevelopment
Council. In the afternoon they will confer with representatives
of the following national organisations:-
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
National Farmers' Union.-. of Australia
Australian Primary Producers' Union
Australian Wool Growers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Bankers' Association
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Australian Council of Retailers.
Ministers will meet representatives of the Australian
Council of Trade Unions on Thuirsday, 10th March.
CANBERRA 22nd February, 1966: P. L. lio. 15 / 1966 



FOR PRESS 66/ 015
P. M. No. 17/ 1966
FURTHER DROUGHT RELIEF MEASURES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
Although there have been some beneficial rains in many
parts of the country over recent weeks, the position of people
suffering from the rought is still acute in many areas and the
States o? New South Wales and Queensland are still finding it
necessary to continue measures to relieve the situation o those
primary producers who are still affected by this unfortunate
position. The Commonwealth Government made it clear some time ago
that the Premiers of the two States could take it that Commonwealth
financial assistance would cover whatever deficit they might have
in their budgets as a result of drought relief measures their
Governments might take.
Both States set up several months ago schemes of concessional
loans of up to $ 6,000 for essential carry-on purposes for drought
affected primary producers who are in necessi tous circumstances
and are unable to finance their essential carry-on requirements
from their own resources or through ordinary commercial channels.
These loans are being made at 5 per cent. interest per annum and
advances are re ayabie over a maximum period of 7 years with
repayment of interest and pr incipal de erred for the first two
years. In addition, the States instituted other schemes which
included advances through the banks for fodder purchases, grants to
local councils for special pur poses associated with drought
problems in particular areas, local unemployment relief work and
rebate and subsidy schemes for the carriage of fodder and stock
by road and rail.
The Premier of Queensland wrote to me recently saying that
in addition to these measures, his Government intended to
introduce rail and road concessions to facilitate the return of
stock from agistment areas and the re-stocking of properties
which have suffered from the drought, and he asked whether these
measures would fall within the scope of the Commonwealth's
assistance to the State on account of the drought.
I informed the Premier that the cost to his Government of
these measures will be accepted as drought relief expenditure 4nder
the arrangements for the provision of Commonwealth financial
assistance to Queensland. I also advised the Premier of New South
Wales that the advice I had given to the Queensland Government'
would apply equally in the case of his State.
The Premier of New South Wales also took up with me the
question of whether advances made for fodder purchased by the
lairying industry will be accepted by the Commonwealth as falling
within he scope of its offer of assistance and I assured him
that this would be the case.
We are looking forward hopefully to good Autumn rains and
if these come, it wil1 be a very encouragin be inning to what
could be a record wheat sowing and the rehabilitation of drought
affected pastoral areas. In the meantime, the new measures taken
by the States with the financial bakdng of the Commonwealth
Government should assist in bringing some relief.
CANBERRA 23rd Febr'uary, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 17/ 1966
FURTHER DROUGHT RELIEF MEASURES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
Although there have been some beneficial rains in many
parts of the country nver recent weeks, the position of people
suffering from the arought is still acute in many areas and the
States of New South Wales and Queensland are still finding it
necessary to continue measures to relieve the situation of those
primary producers who are still affected by this unfortunate
position. The Commonwealth Government made it clear some time ago
that the Premiers of the two States could take it that Commonwealth
financial assistance would cover whatever deficit they might have
in their budgets as a result of drought relief measures their
Governments might take.
Both States set up several months ago schemes of concessional
loans of up to $ 6,000 for essential carry-on purposes for drought
affected primary producers who are in necessitous circumstances
and are unable to finance their essential carry-on requirements
from their own resources or through ordinary commercial channels.
These loans are being made at 3 per cent. interest per annum and
advances are repayabie over a maximum period of 7 years with
repayment of interest and principal deferred for the first two
years. In addition the Slates instituted other schemes which
included advances through the banks for fodder purchases, grants to
local councils for special purposes associated with drough
problems in particular areas, ocal unemployment relief work and
rebate and subsidy schemes for the carriage of fodder and stock
by road and rail.
The Premier of Queensland wrote to me recently saying that
in addition to these measures, his Government intended to
introduce rail and road concessions to facilitate the return of
stock from agistment areas and the re-stocking of properties
which have suffered from the drought, and he asked whether these
measures would fall within the scope of the Commonwealth's
assistance to the State on account of the drnught.
I informed the Premier that the cost to his Government of
these measures will be accepted as drought relief expenditure Under
the arrangements for the provision of Commonwealth financial
assistance to Queensland. I also advised the Premier of New South
Wales that the advice I had given to the Queensland Government.'
would apply equally in the case of his State.
The Premier of New South Wales also took up with me the
question of whether advances made for fodder purchased by the
dairying industry will be accepted by the Commonwealth as falling
within fhe scope of its offer of assistance and I assured him
that this would be the case.
We are looking forward hopefully to good Autumn rains and
if these cnme, it will be a very encouraging beginning to what
could be a record wheat snwing and the rehabilitation of drought
affected pastoral areas. In the meantime, the new measures aken
by the States with the financial baking of the Cnmmonwealth
Government should assist in bringing some relief.
CANBERRA, 23rd February, 1966. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 16/ 1966
BRITISH DEFENCE REVIEW
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I am pleased to see the affirmation in the White
Paper of the British Government's belief that Britain should
continue to maintain considerable strength in the Far East and
South East Asia. In particular, I welcome its recognition of the
importance of the retention of the Singapore and Malaysian
military bases. The Australian Government believes that preservation
of the defence situation in the South East Asian area requires
common effort. Consultations will continue on various matters
related to our mutual co-operation, including the exchange of
information at military level on the question of military
facilities in Australia in certain contingencies.
To a very large degree, the principles relating
to this area given explanation in the Wdhite Paper were discussed
and taken into account at the time of the visit of Mr. Healey,
the British Defence Minister.
CANBERRA, 23rd February, 1966. 



FIRST ANNLUAL CONFERENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN DIVISION
OF THE INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS
SYDNEY N. S. W. 24TH FEBRUARY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME IINISTER TIR. HAROLD HOLT
Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Ministerial and Parliamentary Colleagues,
Ladies I understand there are some brave ladios with us here
tonight and Gentlemen;
I don't know what the scene appears to you in the
background there but I can assure you that this is about as
impressive a gathering that any public loader in this country could
ever hope to address and I confess to being singularly impressed
from the outset. I am sure that our two distinguished visitors
from the United Kingdom, Sir Paul Chamnbers and Sir Richard Powell,
both of I hav:: had th-: plcasure of mo ting at gatherings of the
Institute in London, also fool stirred as I am by this spectacle
of what Australia is able to contribute in the way of distinguished
directorial talent. But I gather there are something over 600
directors here tonight and, looking around the room, I think there
must be at least 500 who are personal friends of mine from my many
years in public life at least I like to think they are personal
friends of mino, and certainly they have exhibited the greatest of
goodwill to me this evening, and for the most part, the greatest of
goodwill through the long period of apprenticeship I have served.
After all, it says something for the charactorictic Australian
quality of tolerance and m-toship that after seven years at the
Treasury I can still face you, looking to you as friends and
receiving such a respectful and attentive hearing as I am, at least
up to this point.
Gentlemen, we are getting used gradually to the idea
in Canberra that there has been a change of management. Every now
and then my officers and I refer to my distinguished predecessor
and say, " Well, the BI is doing so-and-so" or " the EI is doing this
or that". I do it. My officers do it. After sixteen years'
association with a great political leader, it is not easy to adjust
one's thinking to the fact that he is not there to carry those great
responsibilities that face us at this time. But in a tremendously
busy month, we have been rapidly accustoming ourselves to the fact
that we have to stand on our own feet now and exhibit to the
Australian people that Australia is able to produce leaders,
and as one great leader moves on, then we hope that the team that I
have assembled around me will enable me to continue to give Australia
the sound, progressive, imaginative government that we have been
favoured to enjoy for so many years under the Prime Ministership of
Sir Robert Menzics.
No Australian Prime Minister could take office at a
more fascinating or interesting time in the history of his country.
I am sure that even those of you in this room who have had to
accustom yourselves to the rapidity of change in the years of
phenomenal growth we've known since the end of the Second World
War will have been struck by the rapidity of these changes
around us, not only in the domestic scene but more particularly in
the international scene in our own immediate neighbourhood over the
period through which we are now passing. To us in Canberra, they
are occurring with almost dizzying rapidity. Where once in my own
political lifetime, Australia was an isolated outpost down under,
now we are invaded in hordes almost with people who have discovered
Australia perhaps for the first time but who are learning that here
is not only a country of tremendous resources -nC creat potential,
but here is one of the significant landmarks in thi2 aerea of the 
* world capable of exercising a significant influence upon the destiny
of this area of the world. Nov': that may bc rather a large mouthful
to claim, but even in my own short term as Prime Minister I have
been conscious of the fact that great national leaders in the United
Kingdom and the United States are -2nxious to hear what the Government
of this country feels about the particular developments in
which we have some special knowledge in this area of the world.
And not only anxious to hcar but giving respectful weight to the
views that we put to them, and this, of course, imposes a tremendous
responsibility upon us, not only a responsibility for careful and
considered thought and judgment but the sort of responsibility which
has us vweigh where we come out in all of thse situations. And at
times, although it is rather flattering to be treated on a bcis
of equ. rlity, one ondors whether the larger countries with which
we enter upon discussions still realise that w; e are loss than
12 million people trying to build a grant continent when they,
in their turn, arc countries of great population and with many
decades of national development behind them.
Vle in Australia have boon jolted by events to adulthood
in circumstances of such complexity as to call for a maturity and
understanding pc-rha-ps has not been ex-ected of us in earlier
periods of our history. So the for. mation of this body of which you
are euicL nd v---ry one of you, is not only i-orta. nt in
the national sense, but in my view could hardly be more timely
because Australia will have to form a judgr'nt, nationally, upon
many matters going well beyond our shores, matters which will involve
us in some exercise of responsibility, some provision of military
assistance, some provision of international aid or guidance,
technical capacity and equipment, a whole host of matters which
would have been foreign to ea rlier governments in Australian
history. It is true we have been doing something along these
lines over recent ycars. It is quite obviously the fact that more
will be demanded of us, expected of us, end indeed needed from us
as the years go on. Nowv it struck me so many times during my own
long period in public life as rather strange that we hadn't
developed amongst the leaders in commerce and trade and industry
a greater willingness on their part or might I say your part
to participate in the national dialogue on these great questions
of policy which arise from time to time. I am not suggesting or
hinting that you should involve yourselves in the day by day material
of party politics; perhaps that can be left to those of us
who are in the political scene as your Parliamentary representative.
But I don't think we can afford to go on indefinitely without views
being put quite vigorously and frankly and clearly, not necessarily
in an organised sense or by the organisation represented here
tonight, but by individual public loaders in their own field, and
by public I mean men who have achieved stature in the eyes of the
public in the fields of industry and trnde and commerce.
There is a great need in Australia, a gap in our
structure from this absence of participation in the national
dialogue. It has been increasing, of course, to some degree
over recent years, but time and time again as we have sat around
the Cabinet table in Canberra and sought to appoint some person
to a particular public post, one which calls for a man with an
industrial or commercial background, but also which calls for
qualities which go beyond the tasks of his own particular organisation
or section of industry. And I assure you, you would
be rather shocked to know how narrow the field of selection proves
to be when we come to this task, and it perhaps explains why you
find familiar figures bobbing up in a number of tasks of government.
We feel almost cmbarr. as.: ed when we go back to the same
familiar figures and ask them to do a job for us, and if we do
that it is not because we want to load unanocessary burdens on their
back but because there hasn't been this general participation in
affairs going beyond the immediateprroccupation of the executive
or the director in particular industries and sections of the
economy which would provide us with the recruits we need for 
3.
public service sometimes honorary sometimes of a more
pormrnont character, but contributing to what has been as Sir
Robert Webstor recognised in hi: notable address the other evening,
Sconsiderable and significant increase in the participation by
government in the affair-of industry. Not psrticip. tion, I would
hope, in the sonso that w; e are going to -ntrude irare deeply
thani-s been the case in the past; but participation in the
sense that there is a growing need it has been there for a long
time, and we have done 0rsomething bout it but a growing need
in the times in which we find ourselves for temmwNork between
government and management so essential if the country is to
progress as we would all wish a: a great co-operating democracy.
And so, gentlcmen, here is isk for the Institute
of Director, and it is hc-rtening to us all to feeol the need for
a more co-oerative Australi, an 4u'tral that has devclJped
a close national unity, to sec evidenced by your presence here
tonight the signs thet in the field of top director-ship and exccutive
strength in this country, we will find a greatcr co-ordination
of ideas and activity than ve hrve in the paSct. This will be a
tromondous national a: ss:: t for utra. lic.
No! w w, 0s a Govcr-: mnt, have encounterod, or at leonst
are the inheritor of a combination of important development5 ; hich
era produein5 c1halle:--ing sitnations for us in a nuzabcr of dietions.
I mention first, however, the : noroal picture bcenuse I nt
to como to com of these dovelopOnts in a momnt, but as ono looTe
at the Au: traolian scone g -crwalltyhe, task doesn't look as formidable
in the internal domestic sense, the economic sense, Mr.
President, as perhaps you have pictured it here tonight. That may
be the viewpoint of an optimist but I think it is one in which Lriy
colleagues of tha Cabinet wculd agreo. That doesn't meancn that thr
won't be problems in the futura, of courso. , Anybody living in a
country so Cubject to the ha zo: rd: z of t( he Coson, the fluctuation
in ". utput year by year, a: the result of either drought, flood or
some other advorse fr'ctor, the quite snoartionr. l fluctuations
which occur from time to timo in iwhat we receive overseas for our
products, when you are fr0c!, ith that set of circumstances, noone
can claim that the course aheod is ever likely to be ecsy.
But for those of us that h". ve to sit and evolve continuing policies
of a national kind, it doesn't look so formidable as it did in
earlier periods in the last twcnty years because we have had the
good fortune in this c-ountry to come through a long period of stable
political growth and policy formation with no interruption and with
a continuing stability of conditions here. ' Not many countries
around the world could point to that kind of stability whilst they
were forming policies of an enduring kind. ind I believe that
over these years we've established a pattern and a structure for
the Australia of the future which will endure for very many years
to come, a basic pattrn and structure of policy and national
endeavour. Non let ma just illustrate it in a few directions. We
have launched and sustained a vigorous programec of migration
which we have every intcntion of continuing on as larg a scale
as we can contrive. Secondly, for miost of the period I speak of,
Australia has enjoyed Nhat would be described in realistic terms
as a full omployrnnt situation. Noiw although there have booeen here
some minor fluctuations, no-one with any recollection of the
pre-war Australia or of the more dreadful days of the 1930' s could
describe what has he: pcncd over the last twenty years as other than
a full cmploymont situntion for the country and that situation
continues. There will be odd pockets of weakness here snd there
which we shall have to attcnd to, but by and larg the achievoment
has been recorded through ycars of considerable fluctuation, come
of them years of stress, and ne have beern able to sustain, broadly
speaking, a full employmn; ont situation.
Then we have had a high capiitl fornotion in this
country. I wonder if everyone here realises juct how high this
has been. I was interested myself to discover recently that there
is only one country recorded in the official interna! tional statistics
that can point to a higher level of capital formation, or porcentage 
of capital formation than Australia, and -that is Japan. Ours
stands at abcut 27% of gross national expenditure. That Compares
with 17% or 18% for the Unitcdl Kingdom and tho United Sta-tes, and
this, too, is not n pssinE pha sc. It is rattributb] c, oif course,
to oIur oral jnterl crqap), acity -c vvcvc, fo high onc. by o
parativo stand zards around the world and also to the strong cpital
inflow v. hich has been sustaincd cven over these recent pcriods when
official , olicies would appear to have produced some reduction of
it. Ard I mcntion another fcctcr rtable govcrnmcnt something
we tend to take for grantod in this country, and . ri are lucky
pcople to be ble to do so. 1Ve havc-had enoDugh recent exa" mples
around the world to ill. uatr: atet for us that thcse things are not
either inevitablo nor favouring the rm'-srta of the or. dIs propulation
at the present time, a2nd only tonirht flash has bon
-eccived to the cfct -tht i: GL:: nr te army hs t-ak-I over the
govornment there a. nd appr -ntly deposed the -dministrc. tion of
Procident Ykrw arux. h. WeVoll, this ha-ppening so recently agninst the
events in figria, which w,. s regrdeda about the r. ost stable of
non-uropean cttes in A'frica, is an-ther illustrL-tion of the
re tless and violent world in ilhich i-e stand as an isand of
stability and security. Anc this, of cours, is the factor wrihich
one finds cropping up renotedly in the tnlk I hve with those , ho
come here looking , ustralii over ana ing away frem thiis country
more convinqced th-r. they h Od over been bef_, ore that thic is a. country
in which they should have some otake for the future, joining w ith us
in the building of a Croat notion, a stabilisin, -trcngthcning and
prospering factor in t-his significaint area of the orld.
But I have -mntioned the elements which are illustrative
of whnt I speak of as the established structure and pattern for the
Aastr: lic. o1f th fte. I don't b-liecve that even if there ;, wore
a chane of goveriment, dspite the fa ct th. At I know there is
and I not : nnting to turn this into a political occasion
despite the fact that there is a pr. ofession of demccratic socialism
on the part of VMr. Calwo ll, a rdicl and socialist party on the pa rt
of Mar. 7Yhitlair; my own belief is that these patterns tha-t I mention
are now co solidly cetablishod in ustrlia that even if a Labor
Govcriin-t catnc int.-office. it wold soon find that the electoraite
would rejcc-t it if it sought in any w! ay to lltcr what h-d becoe
establiched national policies, serving utralia .' ll.
So I say, ladies rnd gentlemcn, that I don't expect an,,
fundamcntl or drastic policy changcs even from our politicl
opponcnts; wh-tevcr their rish-sn i-hbte in this direction, I
-am sure the cight of -lctor7l opinion would be aga-inst it, and I
don't sc the need for them an the pa: rt of our on governiment, in
order to deal ;: tith the domoetic situa7tion as e view it. There will
be some marginal action re * uirecl in perhaps a variety of directions,
but any one in this ream who is trying to pla-. n for the future of
their own organisction in ustra-liai canli, I belicvc, rely upon those
fund. ntls. ill CoI industrial rroith Vill
continue, the full emloeycnt situati-) n w-: ill be a. steoady nd continuous
one in this cou~ ntry, n6 there will be a continuing stability
of political a: ffairs in ustrlia ao a btasis of our owin
national groth. Tow I believe this to be true : and I am , ure this is the
view taken of it by these who come from overseas to observe
our scene and they claim something else which I was going to
mcntion in another connection a little later, but perh-. ps it is
apposite to introduce it here, and this is sonrething we don't talk
about ourselves. A6gain, we tae it for ranted. But they include
in their cntcgory Cf the assts they discover, the character and
qulity of the ., utr-lia n popl. There may be less than 12
million of us but in the eyes of those who come to observe us,
we -re poople of character and. quality. nd how-essential this
is if weo rre less th n 12 million peop--le; ', ith ri contincnt of the
size of the Unitcd Statcs to develop, then e cn't -: afford to have
second-2atQ people or people lacking in chcarnctcr nnd quality. 
, The most valuable export that Australia can send abroad is the
Australian who goes as a technician or a professional man into
one of these countries to our North to give guidance and training
a proj-ection of Australia as a helpful kindly country
with people of character and quality who can make a contribution
to security and progress in this part of the world. It will be
one of my own tasks as your Prima Minister to encourage this process.
I can believe that Australia can do a great deal by the positive
constructive type if diplomacy using that word in its widest
sense where Australians go out and make Australia better known
in a constructive and helpful way around the world and in particular
around the world to the North of us.
I Now I have mentioned something about the established
economic situation but let me say a word about the prospects.
I said a word or two in this direction but my friend, Charles Court
ought to be taking over this part of what I have to say because he
is the best national salesman in political circles that I know.
You will be discovering this in more detail, no doubt, tomorrow
but having established the pattern and structure that I have
mentioned, forward prospects continue to read most attractively.
We have oar own good population growth rate and we have a good
growth rate with population and productivity going together.
But our population rate I have bean pointing this out to some of
our distinguished visitors, in particular Denis Healey, the British
Minister for Defence, and Vice-President Humphrey; we have a
population growth rate something of the order of upwards of 2 per
cent, the United Kingdom .8 of 1 per cent and at the last year of
record, the United States 1.3 per cent. Others may choose to
ignore this, but we can't ignore it. It is a fat of life for us.
It imposes considerable burden and stress upon us to provide the
hotsing, the schools, and the hospitals, as I am sure my State
COllo n. s here will beer -i-ness, . ui-te convincingly. And so
here is itself a factor for economic growth in the future.
the
Then we add to thistotory which Charles, I imagine,
will be expanding for you, of the exploration which has produced
the fabulous mineral discoveries in our North and in the W. est and
indeed in various other parts of Australia as well, not to ignore
the natural gas so far discovered which csan make such a contribution
for economic development. But these are things which in the
mineral field alone, could on a not over-optimistic estimate bring
us, within ten years' time, an export income equalling or surpassing
that which we will be receiving or are receiving concurrently
from our wool production. So this means quite a striking and
indeed almost fabulous addition to our resources.
Then there is the element, as yet I believe in its
early stages, of our trade with Asia. Who would have imagined
in his wildest hopes that Australia would have built up in these
last ten years or so the kind of regular trade not flukey trade
but regular and growing trade that we have with Japan. The
figures may interest you. In 1951/ 52, Australia's exports to Japan
were $ 97 million in value. Last year, which was not the highest
on record, they were $ 441 million. In other words, a 350 per cent
increase on the figure of 1951/ 52. This, I repeat, would not
have been dreamed of ten or fifteen years ago, and yet as we see
it, we know it is only the beginning. In respect of Japanese iron
ore contracts alone, and Charles correct me if my total is too low,
we have contracts, I understand, completed for the sale of Australian
iron ore to the tune of $ 2,320 million. So that we can
face, I believe, our future in economic terms confidently.
As Japan develops its own standards and grows with its
own internal demands, it will supply an increasing part of Asian
demand. This will be a demand which, with a more sensitive
world conscience on this issue of rising expectations and the
under-privileged areas of the world, there will be gradual but
increasing as I can tell you from our own provision of international
aid there will be increasing ossistance being given to
other countries which in turn will want their demands satisfied by
foodstuffs, raw materials, industrial equipment, all of which
Australia is well placed in this area of the world, with the 
resources we know about, to assist in supplying.
And we have, as part of this story, the determination
of President Johnson and his Administration, reflecting, I believe,
the views of the Amorican people generally, that thoir great
concept of he gr~~ at society ic not to bc limited to the United
States alone. He has already indicated that he is willing to
provide a billion dollar fund for Asian TDvelopment. inerica
has come handsomely into the Provision of capital for the Asian
Development Bank with $ 200M. We, recognising the importance
for the whole area of such a bank, have accepted a much higher
than our proportionote share of contribution by a comrmitment of
( American). Now as those institutions, these Funds, get under
way and make their worth felt, we, in turn, must derive some commercial
benefit from this; whether it is in the area of foodstuffs,
minerals, raw materials or a graowing volume of manufactured exports,
this is something which Australia will be able to do.
So let us turn now for a moment or two to the challenges
which show up clearly in the international fields and the most
urgent , and the most worrying of these, of course, is in South Viet
Nam. We, as an Australian Government, have been firm in our own
views and conclusions about this situation from the outset. We
have seen this, as we have seen o many othor of those critical
challenges of the post-war years, as further evidence of the
communist determination to spread its philosophy, its doctrine
through the world so far as this proves possible for it, probing
here and there, finding a weak spot, trying to build up the
pressures. We see it currently at its most manifest-. in South Viet
Nam, but I have boon talking yesterday and today with the rc-prooontatives
of Thailand end they would be telling you of the pres ures
to which they are being subject on their North, on their East, on
their ' ost from the Communist influence, and we have seen this,
as I am glad to say the President of the United States and his
Administration have seen it, as another challenge to free peoples
throughout the world.
Now gentlemen, if this is your view, and I think it would
be, because I know that in our own Parliament in the two Government
Parties, there is not one member elected to represent the people in
those two Government Parties who does not subscribe wholehoertedly
to the Government's policy of support in South Viet Nam and a
backing for the nmerican policies there. But I don't want you
to feel that you can just leave it to your Parliamentarians, if
on a great national question such as this, touching the very
security of the nation, touching the security of free peoples
everywhere, we can afford to allow the politician only to persuade,
to convince, to argue on this issue in our national community.
Here, if you believe these things is scope for you individually
in the positions of leadership that you occupy, and we can't
afford to allow a situation to develop in which the only voices
heard are the voices of dissent. You and I might believe, and
indeed know, that this represents only a handful in the population,
that its influence is not groat, but if you allow it to go, of
course, uncorrected, or unchallenged, a small influence can become
a larger:., cnc. This is what the President is finding. This is
what we, for our part, are finding. And if there is any doubter
in this room of the essential character of the challenge, the
critical nature of it, in South Viet Nam, I wish he would write
to me and toll me. I shall send him by the return of post, the
copy of the speech which Vice-President Humphrey made on this
matter, one of the most compelling and moving public speeches I
have ever heard. And if anybody remains unconvinced after the
evidence that be brings forward, then he lacks the capacity for
conviction. And we've seen, gentlemen, this challenge; how many
times does it have to be levelled before we recognise it in
whatever particular form it emerges. We saw it in Berlin. We
saw it in the so-called Greek civil vmr. As Vice-President
Humphrey pointed out, what a remarkable thing that when 
' Yugoslavia fell out with the Soviet and cut off that supply line
from the Soviet to Greece, the civil war disappeared. An in other
situations, whether it is in Cuba, whether it is in Berlin or in
Greece, or in Korea, or now in South Viet Nam, or in the probes that
are going on in Laos, Thailand gnd other countries in South-East
Asia, this threat to free peoples has to be met. And what an
extraordinary thing it is, illustrating the confusion of mind
on this matter, that you will get a groat paper like the " Now
York Times" which will urge the Administration to defend Berlin
to the last American soldier that can be sent there and yet next
day will write a powerful editorial and go on doing so, urging
them to pull our of the issue in Scuth Viet Nam.
We are told sometimes that we oversimplify the problem.
I am afraid there arc far too many people around the world who overcomplicate
it. And of course you can point to very sincere people
amongst the Viet Cong. No man offers his life unless he believes
quite strongly in what is happening around him, but there have been
people before that the communists have steered for their own
purposes. They have got on the popular band-waggon and nll the
evidence that comes to us is overwhelmingly convincing that here
is a challenge which is guided from Hanoi and which in turn is
masterminded from Poking. Well, there in brief is a reference to
Viet Nam, but we mustn't brush it out of consciousness as something
that isn't vital to Austrnlin's own security. If we can't hold the
line in South Viet Nam with all the weight of imerican strength, if
we can't hold it there, who can tell me where it con be held nywhere
in South-East Asia.
I would like to just mention a word or two to you
about our talks with Mr. Healey because these were fundamental, and
indeed quite historic, because uhat was involved here wvs a dialogue
about the British role in the world. You hove noticed even since
the publication of the White Poper one of the Ministers has resigned,
giving as his main rocson for the resignation that he disogrecs with
the strategic concept, that in his view Britain should withdraw,
should not have forces enst of Suez, and this view was advanced by
the shadow Defence Minister on the Conservative side, Enoch Powell
some time ago. I have reason to believe thnt it is not a universally
held view in the Conservative P: nrty or even in the Shvdow
Cabinet of the Conservative Party, but it nas put forward publicif:.
by their Shadow Minister, and so this is more than just editorial
stuff or liternry criticism or debating society material. These
issues are urgent topical, vital issues for the security of this
country. Mr. Hoaloy, quite obviously from the recent actions of
his colleagues, has been under much pressure to adopt the line of
withdrawal East of Suez and when he reached us, I think he felt
there would be a very limited life to their occupancy of the
base in Singapore. Well, at least one value which came from those discussions,
and there were several important conclusions which
we were able to reach together, but one at least was to impress
on him our view of the importance of the British presence in this
area of the world, the importance of the retention of the base
in Singapore for as long as this was humanly possible, an assurance
that in our view, a British presence there far from being resented
by the peoples of Asia, would be accepted by them as a moderating
and stabilizing influence, contributing to their security rather
than a source of disturbance and restlessness and turbulence amongst
their people... I am glad to say this view was endorsed when he reached
Singapore and Kuala Lumpur and it was a view which was endorsed
by the representatives of the Thai Government with which
we have been holding discussions in thcse last two days. And so
has emerged this quite notable decision of the British Government
to remain in effect a world influence, not to withdraw and adopt a
quite narrow view of their international responsibilities, but to
maintain a global role, to maintain substantial forces in this area
of the world and to remain on in Singapore for as long as that
proves humanly practicable. 
8.
! hat did flow from it also was acceptance by us of the
vicvw that althouh they might docide and h! ve now decided to remain
thcre, it rny prove, as a recult 1of ovelomonts which no-one can at
this time foreseeo, that a base in Singapore cannot be suctaincd.
Well it put in that blu. rt and frioadly fa. shio2 that r. Healey
has that if Britain couldn't stay there, it had nowhere :. lso to
go and had to go homo unless it could come to Australia. So we
shall, in our planning of our own brze facilitics for the future,
and indeed taking into account this contingency, be bringing our
attention to the possibilities which could develop here, and conducting
discussions at the Service lovel with reprosentativos
of the British Government.
iNow, remember, he was talking about problems which might
r. ric in the 1970S, cvven the 1990' s. Our on situation is not
going to be tr'nsfonncd overnight, but what we will be doing in
the yeors rhead will be planning, rill be acting in such a way
that wc guard against the sort of dangCer which your own judgoments
will conjure up for you.
7hat flows from all of this, from the talks with the
United States which has become so hcavily committed in terms
of manowcr and military equipmcnt and unLdrtrkings to conduct
a constructive, positive programme of peaceful economic development
in thrat are of the world, was that it obviously involves for
Australia a growing commitment over the years. The lesson is
there, or the writing is there for us, that we must become more
self-reliant to meet the varo. cty of dangers which can threaten
us in the future. I spoke a little oerlior of our trcdo with Jrpan.
We h: ave irmmodi-tely to the North of us 100 million people in Vwhat
has become a virtually bonkrupt and disorgniscd economy, with
turbulence of a political kind, the outcome of which no-one at
this point can foresee. Austr,. lian trade with Indonesia in the
same ycar that I mentioned with Japan ( 1951-52) was $ 8M. Last
year it was $ 7M agmainst 4; 44.11 for Japan. Eighty million of people
well organised with a strong, buoyant oconomy, industrialised with
rising standards in one direction; 100 million people subjected
to this turbulence, this economic failure which one sees immediately
to our North, and here is a country with which we have a
common boundary in New Guincea.
So Austra. ia., l'dica and gentlemen, has been jolted
ot merely into adulthood but into r maturity of attitudes and
approach; a requirement of maturity of decision which we have
not known in the degree we have to confront it today at any earlier
point in our history.
I don't mention those things to you in any pessimistic
spirit because I bclieve that this country has a destiny in
Asia which should excite us all. Indeed, one of the heartening
things is to discover amongst the lenders of the countries
of AsiC how much Australi, is respected as friend nd d lly, as
donor of international aid, and it is not the big costly
things that matter so terribly much in their eyes.
One of the most significant elements of aid that the
Prime Minister of Thailand was mentioning to me was a military
training school we have in his country for technical training
of people who go into the services. Those now going to the
school are being approached by private omployers before they
are through their training, wanting to get them for the
industry of Thailand. Well, at least there is a gain in
an industrial sense. And hero, by this kind of provision, he
pointed to come road construction that we were carrying out.
I am sure Pat orton could suggest a few place-around his own
State where roads could bc built. 
But this sort of thing, not hundreds of millions of
dollars of aid but friendly, technical advice with the man
on the spot, whom they can see, whom they can talk to and
regard as a friend. In these ways, I believe, we are helping
to strengthen our neighbours to o nr North. In these ways,
eventually, I believe, we will find the means of knitting more
closely together the countries interested in this area.
Now my concluding point on all this is that we
see in what faces us in the future not just Australia, but all
those of like-minded ideas in relation to the future we see
a tremendous need for the United Kingdom, the United States,
Australia and Now Zoaland to got together, to co-crdinate what
they are doing, work out together what our objectives should
be, what cur goals are, how we see the future, what we feel we
can do together. Our resources arc not so vast that we can
afford to squander them and we feel that it will be by our
joint efforts, facing common tasks, that we shall achieve most
effectively what lies within each of us to do.
Finally, here we have in this country of ours another
great asset in the co-operating democracy that we have established.
You can go to Darwin, or Perth or Brisbane; people
will be listening to the national news at about the same time,
making due allowances for the time changes in West and South
Australia, but here we have a remarkably homogeneous people of
very much more similar outlook than you will find even in the
British Isles or any other country that you could name. This,
itself, is a tremendous national asset, and at the various levels
of Government Commonwealth, State, Municipal I believe we have
a closer teamwork today and a battor-willcd one, more cordial and
co-operative teoomwork than I have known at any earlier point of
the Australian Federation. And when we look out from government
to industry, I know that next week we shall be conferring ag: in
with many of you, some of you anyhow, who are in this room tonight,
some of the leaders in the field of manufacturing, export advice,
and the leaders of industry, who will see us as a particular group
in the course of the afternoon.
Now this has become a regular exercise twice a year,
trying to get into the minds of industry, talking to those who come
to us freshly from the market place, trying to get the best
picture we can before we launch into major economic decisions by
the Government. So I mention these things. They are taken by so
many for granted, Here we are at this point of time having
established as very few countries in the world can claim to have
established, a co-operating deoocracy in which the rights of
minorities are safeguarded, as they must be in any true
democracy, and in which the national effort is channelled the more
successfully because of the teamwork we have produced.
Now, of course, we haven't reached perfection, and
we never will, but your organisation will be a step along the
road to a better result than we have achieved in the past,
and I would hope that in the course of your own discussions you
would spare a thought for the Parliament as an institution.
In this country, the Parliament doesn't enjoy the
respect it does in many other democracies, although I believe
the quality of service is just as high and the quality of
representation and membership is as high. One doesn't develop
any inferiority complex after participating in Parliamentary
Conferences with others around the world. Your toughset
competition is right back home, in my experience, it is
in so many other directions. But gentlemen and I exclude
the ladies on this because I am sure they give the Parliament
the respect it deserves anyhow but,, gentlemen, a community
which can't respect its Parliament really can't respect itself
because we are drawn from the community, we are there to serve 
the comunity, and if you don't like us, please replace us by
something better. At the moment it doesn't seem to be on the
horizon but one can never be sure!
Well, gentlemen, one could, of course, go on at much
greater length but I am appalled at my own affrontery when I
recall that in the course of this day you have been addressed
with such skill at such length bythe distinguished spokesmen
of whom we heard a little earlier. But 6an I say in my last
sentence to you that to an Australian leader it is a tremendously
heartening thing, not only to feel the good will which has been
radiating to me from all gathered here tonight, but to feel
that from people of the quality that I see represented here
will be moulded the Australia of the future, and in that I have
every confidence and great pride. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 18/ 1966
TALKS WITH THE PRIME MINISTER OF THAILAND
Statement by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt
The Cabinet met this morning with the Prime Minister
of Thailand, Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn, and the Foreign
Minister, Mr. Thanet Khoman, and the Minister for National
Development, Mr. Pote Sarasin.
Discussions were frank and cordial. They covered a
wide range of subjects. We are partners in the SEATO Treaty,
each having a vital concern for the stability of South-East Asia
and an intense interest and close identity of view about the
facts and the significance of the situation in South Viet Nam.
We reviewed together the discussions which we had each
had with Mr. Humphrey and Governor Harriman, and also the
discussions which the Australian Government held a little earlier
in Canberra with the British Minister of Defence, Mr. Denis
Healey. We both share a belief in the importance of the
continuance of a British presence on the mainland of Asia as a
stabilizing and moderating influence, helpful to the peace,
security and well-being of the area.
We also shared in a valuable exchange on matters
relating to the social and economic development of the countries
of South-East Asia. Vie agreed that it was important to look
beyond the immediate need to contain aggressive Communism by
military measures and that it is necessary simultaneously to
seek social and economic development of the area. In this
context we both welcomed the initiatives at the Honolulu talks
by the Governments of South Viet Nam and the United States to
build up the social and economic fabric of South Viet Nam.
In Thailand too, Australia has made substantial contributions,
which were fully acknowledged by Field Marshal Thanom, to the
development of Thailand under the SEATO Aid Plan and also under
the Colombo Plan, and will gladly continue to assist Thailand
in her efforts to maintain a sound and rapid rate of development.
Further, we each look forward to a continuation in the development
of trade between our two countries.
Our situation as friendly allies has been fortified
by the discussions which took place.
CANBEIRRA, 24th February, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 19/ 1966
TRIBUTES TO SIR ROBERT MENZIES
Statem~ ent by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt
Two special functions to honour Sir Robert Menzies
will be held in Canberra next month..
The first, n'n the 7th March, will be a tribute from
members of the Ministry. This Ministerial Dinner will be
a relaxed " family" gathering.
The se(, ond function will be on the 17th. This will be
a Parliamentary Dinner given by the Government to honour a
great Parliamentarian who made Australian history with a record
18 years as Prime Minister. This will be a more formal occasion
with speeches, and will be attended by Senators, Members of the
House of Representatives and Heads of Parliamentary Departments.
Both Dinners will be held at Parliament House.
CANBERRA, February, 1966 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 20/ 196
DAWSON BY-ELECTION
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Har61d Holt
Dr. Patterson is to be congratulated on his
impressive victbry. By-elections are notoriously unreliable guides to
the state of public thinking on national issues, and the
special local features of this campaign put the result very
much in that category.
However, when the full details are available,
we shall be studying the vote and its implications closely.
CANBERRA, 27th February, 1966. 



66/ 0 17
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 21/ 1966
ECONOMIC CONSULTATI ONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Members of the Economic Committee of Cabinet
have conducted a series of discussions in the course of the day
with representatives of official advisory bodies and with a group
of national organisations representing industry and commerce.
There were separate meetings this morning with the Manufacturing
Industries Advisory Council and the Export Development Council.
This afternoon, the talks continued with the group ~ f national
organisations which comprised:
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
National Farmers' Union of Australia
Australian Primary Producers' Union
Australian W~ ool Growers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wdool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Bankers' Association
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Australian Council of Retailers.
Members of all these bodies expressed appreciation
that the new Government was continuing the practice of holding
talks of this kind at half yearly intervals. It was agreed that
the talks had been found of great value to the Government, and alsrn
to industry and ccmmerce. The Prime Minister said the talks were
most timely, as Cabinet would be proceeding tomorrow to consideration
of a number of papers prepared by the Treasury and other
Departments, relating to the present state of the economy.
The Government would be greatly assisted in these by having as
background the material, supplied to it by the organisations which
had participated in its discussions today.
The Government will be meeting representatives
of the Australian Council of Trade Unions on Thursday,
March. CANBERRA, 1st March, 1966 



66/ 032
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 22/ 1966
TALKS WITH PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Hnlt
There was a discussion today between representatives
of the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments on the question
of an extension of the Brigalow Scheme into Area 3.
Area 5 is the Mackenzie Isaac River Basin section of
the Fitzroy Basin area. It contains an area of about six
million acres. It has a rainfall of about 25 inches per annum.
Major operations in Areas 1 and 2 are nearing
completion, and the Premier of Queensland, Mr. Nicklin, put it
to Uommonwealth Government representatives that this is an
appropriate time to consider Area 3.
In addition to the Prime Minister, the discussion
was attended by Mr. C. Adermann, Minister for Primary Industry,
Mr. D. N. Sutherland, Head of the Northern Division of the
Department of National Development, Mr. D. H. McKay Director
of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics Mr. arrett First
Assistant Secretary of the Department of the Treasury, and
Mr. D. J. Munro; First Assistant Secretary of the Prime Minister's
Department. the Queensland representatives were in additidn
to the Premier, the Hon. A. R. Fletcher Minister for Lands,
and Mr. E. C. Muir, Chief Commissioner lor Lands.
The Commonwealth Government views the Brigalow Scheme
as one of the most hopeful development prospects in Australia.
Despite having to contend with drought conditions early in the
history of the Scheme, experience in Areas 1 and 2 had been
sufficiently encouraging to call for a full and early examination
bv the Commonwealth overnment of the request now made to it
in respect of Area 3. I assured the Premier of Queensland that
the matter would be brought promptly to the Cabinet for its
consideration. The Commonwealth Government would view the
request against its general objective of maintaining a good
rate of progress in Northern development.
This morning's discussion also dealt with the effects
of drought in Queensland. Mr. Nicklin expressed appreciation
of the assistance already provided by the Commonwealth Government,
and pointed to problems Which remained, particularly in relation
tn the matter of re-stocking where serious stock losses had
been experienced. I assured him that this matter had been
actively under consideration and announcements could be expected
shortly on this and other aspects of drought relief.
CANBERRA, 4th March, 1966. 


 GOVERNMENT POLICY
 Ministerial Statement
 [ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 8th March 1966]
 Mr. HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime  Minister)-by leave- I am taking this first  opportunity after meeting the House to   speak on some of the more significant  matters with which we have been dealing  since the Government took office. The new  Government was sworn in on 26th January  -Australia Day. We have been in office, therefore, just short of six weeks. They have been weeks of unusually intense activity. As I give an account of the highlights of events over that period, I shall also be mentioning some important policy decisions not previously announced. Ministers who will be speaking later in the debate on this statement, or introducing statements of their own, will provide more detail on several matters which I shall only be able to touch briefly.
 It is to be expected that a new Government will have a busy time in its early weeks as it takes up the reins of government. But, in addition to the tasks normally to be expected in these circumstances, we have found ourselves engaged in discussions, some of a profound and far-reaching character-in the fields of defence and foreign policy. On the domestic front, we have concluded a review of the current state of the economy. This followed discussions with official economic advisory bodies 2874/ 66 assisting the Government and with representatives. of industry. We have devoted a good deal of attention to the drought situation' persisting over large areas of the Commonwealth and the . problems arising from the ramifications of the drought.
 Before commenting on . these matters, I would like the House to know that the Government will be. inviting it-on two occasions I shall mention-to give recognition to the distinguished -public and parliamentary services of my predecessor, Sir Robert Menzies. Sir Robert established a remarkable record of more than 18 years of leadership as Prime Minister,. more than double the previous record -length of service in this office. Tomorrow, I: shall present a resolution to the House enabling us to place on Parliamentary record our appreciation of his many years of service. On 17th March, the Government will be holding a Parliamentary dinner in honour of Sir Robert and Dame Pattie.
 DEFERMENT OF THE REFERENDUM  PROPOSALS.
 I also mention the Government's decision to defer, until the next Parliament, the referendum on the two proposals to amend the Constitution which were passed by both Houses of Parliament towards the end of last year. We would have preferred to let the question of deferment stand until such ' time as we could have benefit of parliamentary discussion and decision concerning it. But this course was not open to us because, as matters stood, the Chief Electoral Officer would have been required under the provisions of the Act to post the arguments for and against the proposals to some 6,000,000 voters before the end of February. Therefore, in practical terms, it was necessary for us to make and announce the decision before we met the Parliament. In pursuance of this decision, we will recommend to the Governor-General in Council that he should not issue the writ provided for in section 5 of the Referendum ( Constitution Alteration) Act. We remain strongly in support of both proposals. But we are a new Government and, inevitably, much occupied not only with the very many important and pressing matters arising at home and abroad, but with other matters which beset a new Government. A ref erendum campaign would be an extra and lengthy commitment. in these circumstances, and because there is no -urgency about either of the proposals becoming law this year, we believe that it would be better to defer the holding of the referendum.
 However, we intend, ' early in the life of the next Parliament, to introduce the necessary legislation to enable a referendum to be held on the proposal to break the nexus between the two Houses of Parliament. We will also -then give a general indication of our intentions in relation to the distribution proposals which would be made should the referendum prove successful.
 We intend, at the same time, to present also the proposal relating to Aborigines. This proposal has been supported by all political parties, and there was indeed no negative case prepared for circulation to the electors. Any delay in passing the referendum in relation to the counting of Aborigines will have no adverse practical result because, in fact, the Commonwealth Statistician does count the Aboriginal natives in the community and makes the figure public. The provision in the Constitution does not amount to an impediment against this counting. Nor does it prevent Aborigines voting; many of them do. We, nevertheless, believe that the provision should be taken out of the Constitution. It is outmoded and misleading, and gives unwarranted cause for criticism both inside and outside Australia by people unaware of the actual situation.
 As I said when announcing our decision  to recommend a deferment, we are sensitive  to the fact that the Parliament has supported in both Houses the referendum  legislation which the Menzies Government presented. We believe, however, that members in both Houses will recognise the reasons which have influenced us, and will approve our decision to defer the proposals for the time being. The deferment is being made with a view to strengthening, rather than weakening, the prospect of success for the two proposals.
 I turn now to aspects of foreign affairs and defence with which we have been dealing over recent weeks. In our first month of office, we had visits from Mr. Denis Healey, the British Minister for Defence, Mr. Hubert Humphrey, Vice-President of the United States, and His Excellency Field Marshal Thanomn Kittikachorn, Prime Minister of Thailand. Each of these discussions was of importance for Australia. Each of them required considerable preparation and close consultation with our civilian and military advisers.
 VISIT BY, MR. HEALEY.
Mr. Denis Healey, the British Minister  of Defence, visited us for four days from Monday, 31st January. The talks, although occurring within the first week of our taking office, were most timely. They were held at a -time when the United Kingdom Government was coming to major long term decisions, subsequently incorporated in the White Paper on defence recently presented to the United Kingdom Parliament. Mr. Healey had been set the task of framing a defence programme which would contain British expenditure on defence in 1970 within the equivalent in that year ofœ E2,000 million sterling today. This task called for some drastic adjustments. One of the possibilities coming under public discussion in Britain was a withdrawal of British forces east of Suez. Mr. Healey made it clear to us that his Government did not hold any views on these lines. But the general proposition had found support amongst -highly placed parliamentarians on  both sides of politics. The United Kingdom Government decided-in our view, very wisely-that it would continue to maintain a global role in world affairs and that as part of this role it would continue to maintain substantial forces in South East Asia. The Canberra talks were of tremendous value in enabling us -to make a frank exchange of views. Mr. Healey made it clear to us, in direct but friendly fashion, that if British troops had to leave Singapore, then either they would have to be accommodated in base facilities on the. Australian mainland or they would have to go home. For our part, we were willing , to plan against the contingency that Singapore might become untenable at some future point of time and have now put in hand a study, at the Service level, of various possibilities and their feasibility. However, we emphasised strongly the need for a continued British presence in South East Asia, and we affirmed that the bases in Singapore and Malaysia, in which we share and to which we have made substantial contribution, should be retained for as long as possible. The British presence on the mainland of Asia provides an essential stabilising and moderating influence, and aid to morale. British departure from the scene could have disastrous consequences. We are gratified that the United Kingdom Government has confirmed, in the White Paper, its firm intention to continue to maintain the bases in Singapore and Malaysia so long as the Governments of Singapore and Malaysia make this possible on " acceptable conditions". For Australia this is a most significant and welcome decision.
 Mr. Dean Eyre, the New Zealand Minister for Defence, participated in all the discussions with Mr. Healey. This Government wishes to increase its co-operation with New Zealand in defence matters and, indeed, in all other matters of mutual interest. The Anzac tradition was forged between us in another great struggle fought by the forces of freedom to resist aggression. The grim events in Vietnam and Indonesia's ill-conceived confrontation of Malaysia have brought us closely in association again. Our discussions revealed complete identity of view between our two Governments. It is worth recording that the British Government carried out its recent defence review in a way which was, we believe, unique in British history. It was probably the first time the British Government has ever tried to look so far ahead in planning its foreign and defence policy-Mr. Healey's talks with us ranged over the period from the 1970' s to the 1990' s-and it is also the first occasion on which the United Kingdom has consulted so closely with its allies before final recommendations were adopted by the Cabinet. 
 Arising from the Canberra talks, it was agreed with the representatives of Britain and New Zealand that consultations will continue at ministerial level. We felt that there should be discussions between ourselves- that is, the three Governments-and United States representatives on our respective activities in South East Asia. These should not be confined to political and defence matters. We all are involved in military action in one area or another but we all are also participating ' n programmes of economic and social aid in the area. It would ' be of great advantage to develop the widest possible agreement on policy aspects and to see how far our activities can be co-ordinated.
 VISIT BY VICE-PRESIDENT  HUMPHREY.
 It was of great advantage to us to receive a visit from Vice-President Humphrey and Governor Harriman so soon after the defence discussions with Mr. Healey. The Vice-President was with us on 18th and 19thFebruary. This is only the second occasion on which a Vice-President of the United States has visited Australia. Mr. Humphrey came to us after a rapid tour embracing a number of the key countries of South East Asia. He was able to bring us a complete account of the talks between President Johnson and Prime Minister Ky of South Vietnam. We found our own assessment of the situation there, based on information reaching us from our own sources, to be very much in line with that conveyed by Vice-President Humphrey to us. In his public statements in Australia he brought out compellingly the critical and fundamental character of the struggle in South Vietnam. We had earlier told him we applauded the initiatives advanced by Prime Minister Ky and President Johnson for a vigorous programme of economic and social reform. We all recognise that there is far more to  checking of the Communists by military means. There is a need of reconstruction  and rehabilitation. There is a need for an effective national administration pressing on  with desired reforms and the improvement  of standards.
 Most of the people of South Vietnam  live in villages and hamlets. Many of these have suffered the ravages of terrorist activities for years. First, -the affected areas must be cleared of the enemy and made secure against Vietcong reinfiltration. The next phase is the establishment of effective administration so that the benefits of modern the problem of South Vietnam than the services can be brought to scattered rural communities. So many leaders have been murdered that the Government of South Vietnam has launched an extensive, but concentrated, programme of training. It aims to produce as quickly as possible successive teams of people who will return to the ravaged areas as leaders in various activities of significance to the local communities. They include people trained in the business of administration and government, and in health and rural development;' they include also teachers -and personnel trained to undertake such rehabilitation tasks as the building of homes, schools, roads and hospitals. Already hundreds of these teams are operating and the South Vietnamese Government plans to have many more available by the end ' of 1966. The Government is planning in this way for the progressive rebuilding of the social fabric of the community. Australians are assisting in this valuable work. I speak, in particular, of our surgical teams, which are providing medical help in a country which has far too few trained doctors serving the community of 14 million people. Australians -are also helping as advisers in  agriculture and road building.
 I pay tribute, also,. Mr. Speaker, to the contributions made by. Australian forces in the'area. Since 1962, we have had military advisers with the South Vietnamese forces. These are highly trained and dedicated men, who at'great risk, and . in some cases casualty, to themselves, have stood beside their South Vietnamese counterparts in the field. Since 1964, a flight of Royal Australian Air Force Caribou aircraft ' has been used in a great variety of ways for general transport purposes, and to bring supplies quickly to meet emergency needs. Last year Australia committed the First Battalion of the Royal Australian Regiment to Vietnam, which was subsequently expanded to a battalion -group. The Battalion has to great effect and purpose been conducting operations from its base at Bien Hoa, and has earned praise and respect from our South Vietnamese and American allies. Vice- President Humphrey made particular reference during his visit here to the high value placed on the Australian contingent, both in their role as fighting men and their conduct generally amongst the Vietnamese people. 
 The Vice-President spoke of the overall prospects in terms of what he described as " restrained optimism". The information we and the Americans have is that the tide of war is turning in our favour. Progress is being made in rescuing new areas, in clearing them of Vietcong and in preparing them for orderly civil government. The critical nature of the conflict in South Vietnam has not been fully recognised by all, and this certainly includes many members of the Opposition. We are told that we over-simplify the issue there. It is more accurate to say that our critics overcomplicate it. We still hear from some representatives of the Opposition that this is a civil war and that we have no good cause for participation. This view runs against all the information and advice reaching us. The discovery by our own forces of extensive headquarters and military facilities in close vicinity to Saigon illustrates the lorng-term planning and the years of pre- -paration with outside assistance which lie behind the* activities of. the Vietcong. This is no civil war. It is the principal present manifestation of the expansionist activities of Communist China. These activities are channelled through, and " directed from, Hanoi. All the countries in South East Asia are facing the threat of Communist China's expansion in one form or another. In Laos, for example, there is fighting between Chinese-supplied Pathet Lao-or Communist forces-:--and the forces of the Government. The Prime Minister of Thailand and the senior Ministerial colleagues who accompanied him gave us a graphic account of increasing Communist subversion, infiltration, and terrorist activities threatening that country. In India there, have been direct attacks by troops of the Communist Chinese Army across the Indian border.  
Honorable members will see in these and  other countries the manifestation, in one  form or another, of externally-directed Communist aggression.
 VISIT BY FIELD MARSHAL THANOM
 We were able to discuss all these matters fully and frankly with the Prime Minister of Thailand and his distinguished Ministers in Canberra recently. We shared a common view of the situation in Vietnam and agreed about the incessant and widespread nature of Communist pressures in South East Asia. The Thai Government, let it be said, has a proud record of domestic achievement. It is a responsible Government which has committed the services and facilities of government and administration to the goals of economic and social progress in the spread'of education, health and medical facilities and social services generally. Its record of economic advance is impressive. National income has been increasing at an annual rate of seven per cent. for the past decade. Agricultural production is currently increasing annually at about 6.3 per cent. This is a country under Communist pressure. It is a country that we are glad to have as an ally and we look forward to the multiplication of our interests and associations.
 STRUGGLE AGAINST COMMUNISM  IN SOUTH VIETNAM
 The war in South Vietnam has many brutal aspects. What has been far too little perceived is the systematic destruction of leaders in the villages and hamlets in which most of the population of South Vietnam lives. The Communists deliberately eliminate any elements in village communities who might hold out some hope of effectively rebuilding their community. In the last two years, more than 3,000 local officials and civilians have been murdered. The leaders include teachers, medical workers, leaders in politics and administration, and technical experts of one kind and another. We can all picture the mental anguish and physical distress caused by this systematic butchery and the dislocation it brings to the life of the community where it occurs.
 All this is what Communism in Asia means. It does not stand for peaceful political and economic change. In the words of a leading Communist military theoretician- General Giap of North Vietnam--" armed struggle and political struggle are very closely  co-ordinated Of South Vietnam he says, armed struggle has budded forth from political struggle." Communism in Asia is the politics of brutality, the politics of disruption, the politics of the exploitation of backwardness. Its highest form is the people's war "-that is to say, the brutality and , viciousness of guerrilla warfare practised against an entire population-men, women and children alike. A study of North Vietnam's pronouncements in respect of South Vietnam reveals the complete rejection of peaceful coexistence. Its language is the language of power, of protracted struggle, of repression, and it shows no disposition to tolerate the existence of neighbouring social and political systems other than its own.
 Neither we, nor our allies, are in South Vietnam for territorial gain or colonial power. We are there to establish conditions , n which ordinary men and women-and there are 14 million of them in South Vietnam alone-can pursue their lives in freedom. We are there because while Communist aggression persists, the whole of South East Asia is threatened; while the Chinese Comirunist -philosophy of world domination persists, the whole free world is threatened.
 During the suspension of bombing in December and January, every conceivable effort was made to bring the North Vietnamese authorities to the conference table. The)' rebuffed every approach. The search for peace will go on, but a long period of fighting is the prospect which we have to face. The critical fighting in the area increasingly involves units and personnel trained in North Vietnam and directed and equipped from Hanoi and Peking. As pressure on the Viet Cong has increased, North Vietnam has sent in reinforcements of regular North Vietnamese troops on a very substantial scale, there now being nine and possibly more regiments of the North Vietnamese Army in South Vietnam. These reinforcements continued during the bombing pause, as did work on repairs and improvement to the infiltration system. Only when it is convinced that South Vietnam, the United States and other allies have the will and the cohesion to see the struggle through is the other side likely to desist. At the present time the evidence is that it wants to continue the fighting and to test our will and cohesion.
ADDITIONAL AUSTRALIAN FORCES  FOR SOUTH VIETNAM.
 The Government has for some time been made aware of the desire of the Government of South Vietnam that we increase the size of the Australian force there. There has been a very large build-up in strength of the United States forces. It is evident that the allies must put forward an increased effort if military successes are to be achieved and then followed effectively by the tasks of reconstruction.  Honorable members will be aware that there are at present serving in Vietnam more than 1,500 Australian Service personnel comprising the Army training team, the battalion group, and associated headquarters and Royal Australian Air Force personnel. Of these forces, the main element, namely, the infantry battalion-the First Royal Australian Regiment-is due to be, and will be, relieved on the conclusion of its tour of one year in the theatre. Its personnel, other than those who will have served a considerably shorter period, will return by air to their home station in Australia during the first two weeks in June.
 Measuring the availability of Australian troops in the light of our other commitments and in consultation with our allies, and at the request of the Government of South Vietnam, the Government has decided that the battalion will be replaced by a selfcontained Australian task force under Australian command embracing all personnel serving there and enlarging our contribution to a total of some 4,500 men-in effect, a trebling of the current strength of our -military forces there. The task force will contain, in addition to its headquarters, two infan-try battalions, a Special Air Services Squadron, and a substantial force of combat and logistic support units. The task force will need close helicopter support and, for this purpose, we are incorporating with it a flight of eight Royal Australian Air Force Iroquois helicopters. Provision of the flight of Caribou aircraft and of the team of 100 Army advisers will be continued.
 This force will make a greatly enlarged Australian contribution to the maintenance of security throughout South East Asia. It is, of course, in addition to our other force contributions in the region for the defence of Malaysia, Singapore * and Thailand. It is our judgement that this is the most militarily effective way in which we can assist the overall allied effort in South East Asia at this time.
 Honorable members are aware from previous statements by the Government that the obligation to discharge national service with the Army includes an obligation to serve overseas if necessary. The Australian task force which we will be sending to Vietnam in the middle of the year will contain two Army battalions, the 5th and 6th Battalions, Royal Australian Regiment, each of which will contain a proportion of fully trained and integrated national servicemen as will all future substantial Australian Army units deployed overseas in any theatre. That proportion may vary to some extent from unit to unit, but it will be a continuing feature. The normal tour of duty in Vietnam of personnel in the task force will be 12 months. The Government has also decided that the national service intake will be continued at 8,400 each year.
 I am sure that honorable members wiN, in the light of what I have already said, appreciate the necessity for the Government's decisions. They are decisions great responsibility and we have not taken them lightly. Australia cannot stand aside from the struggle to resist the aggressive thrust of Communism in Asia and to ensure conditions in which stability can be achieved. Our own national security demands this course. Do honorable members vpposite, wvho are interjecting, deny that?
 Mr. Calwell.-Yes. I deny it flatly.
 Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-If they do, let  them stand and be counted when the time comes. We cannot be isolationist or neutralist, placed as we are geographically and occupying, as we do, with limited national strength, this vast continent. We cannot leave it solely to our allies-and their national servicemen-to defend in the region -the rights of countries to their independence and the peaceful pursuit of their national way of life.
 I am confident that a majority of this Parliament and of this country will warmly support this increase in the Australian contribution. It has been heartening to the Government to have had, from the outset, the unanimous support of members of -the Government parties for Australian participation in resisting Communism in South
Vietnam. The overwhelming support given by the Congress of ' the United States of America in recent days to -the amounts sought by the President for the conduct of military and aid operations is encouraging testimony of the strength of purpose of the American people. The free world has cause to be grateful for -the clear sighted view President Johnson has held at all times of the menace and fundamental character of the challenge to freedom in South Vietnam, and we have admired the resolution with which he has met that challenge.
 DEFENCE SUPPLIES
 One matter which has had and is still having our attention at ministerial level is the matter of supply of goods and material of various kinds by Australian industry to the American forces in South Vietnam. Late last year, the present Minister for Defence ( Mr. Fairhall), when Minister for Supply, outlined personally, to the United States Secretary of Defense Australia's capacity to provide a wide range of military supplies. The Minister's talk has been followed up actively at the official level and, as one result, agreement has now been reached on the sale of a substantial quantity of Australian small arms ammunition to the American forces. We have also been asked to quote for a number of other important items most of which are needed in large quantities. We are now working on these requests. I might add that we took the opportunity to put this whole matter in the mind of Mr. Humphrey on his recent visit. We believe that Australia can, with advantage to the allied effort, to the strengthening of our own capacity and to the advantage of our own nation play an increasing part in this matter of supply.
 VIETNAM MEDAL.
 From our recognition of the fundamental significance of the struggle against Communist aggression in South Vietnam, and the special nature of the service which our armed forces are giving there, the Government has felt it appropriate that a special award should be made to Australian. and, if the New Zealand Government agreed, to New Zealand servicemen posted to South Vietnam. I conveyed our view on this to the Prime Minister of New Zealand, the Right Honorable Keith Holyoake. As I have already mentioned, New Zealand takes precisely the same view of the issue in South Vietnam as we do. I am glad to say that Mr. Holyoake fully and immediately welcomed the proposal, and we are jointly recommending to Her Majesty that a special medal for service in Vietnam be struck. Her Majesty has told us that she will be pleased to make this award. The detailed conditions of eligibility are being worked out, and will be announced following Her Majesty's approval of them.
 This new special* medal for service in Vietnam will replace the General Service Medal 1962 with clasp " South Vietnam", which has hitherto been available for Australian servicemen in the area. The new medal will apply to Australian servicemen who have been in South Vietnam at any time since 29th May 1964, which is the date when the role of the Australian Army training team in Vietnam was extended to permit its employment in the field with South Vietnamese Army units in contact with the Vietcong.
 The Prime Minister of New Zealand and I have seen the issuance of a special medal as another welcome link in the chain of the Anzac tradition. I am sure the medal will be worn with pride by all who participate in the South Vietnam campaign and it will carry with it to the wearer an expression of the gratitude of our two countries for service in the highest order of duty.
 VISIT TO VIETNAM.
 I am hopeful it will prove possible for me to make a visit within the next few months to South Vietnam and some of the other centres in South East Asia where Australian troops are on active service. My colleague, the Minister for External Affairs ( Mr. Hasluck), was in the area as recently as last December, and I propose to arrange for other visits by appropriate Ministers so as to keep the Government in close and frequent contact with developments in this and other centres where our servicemen are engaged.  
 Mr. Reynolds.-What about opportunities  for Opposition members as well?
 Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-I would be glad  to consider that proposition if it were put to me seriously by the Leader of the Opposition  ( Mr. Calwell).
OVERSEAS AID.
 Australia has an expanding role to play in South East Asia and, indeed, in the world at large consistent with its -growth in economic strength and the development of its natural * resources. The growing influx of immigration, investment capital and official visitors, the substantial increase in tourism, all signify * an increasing world interest in Australia and its growing stature.
Growing responsibilities carry with them enlarged obligations. Our three-year defence programme now in its first year of duration is one measure of our -response to our obligations. In the four years between 1962 and 1966, the defence vote has doubled, from approximately $ 400 million to $ 800 million. Large forward commitments have been undertaken for new and improved equipment, for which substantial payments must be made as the Services arm themselves to meet the defence requirements of -the future. But even a rapidly growing bill for defence expenditure is not the only way in which Australia's general external policy should -find material expression.
Aid appropriations from our Budget totalled $ 114 milion this year. This is more than nine times the amount given in the year before we took office. This is practical recognition of the needs of other countries for our assistance. T'he Territory of Papua and New Guinea, for which we have special responsibilities, remains -the major recipient of our aid. Indeed, this is a commitment which Australia has been carrying alone. Australia played a pioneering role -in the evolution of ' the Colombo Plan. Through this instrument we channel the largest component of Australian aid to Commonwealth and foreign countries, the amount this year being $ 12 million. Although we are a capital importing country our programmes of aid for overseas compare well in scale with those of other major donors of aid. We are currently spending about 0.6 per cent, of our gross national product on external aid. There are few donor countries which can match this record. We have joined . the Asian Development Bank, on the basis of an Australian subscription of $ US85 million. This is a substantial contribution quite disproportionate to our population and national wealth, even when compared with the subscrip tions of major donors such as the United States and Japan. Our contribution reflects our willingness to play a significant part in promoting greater prosperity and security throughout the South East Asian area and our hope that this new instrument will play an increasingly significant part in that process.
 We recently offered a'id to India to a value of $ 8 million, principally in the form of food, as a contribution : towards meeting the critical shortages occurring there. We believe that much remains to be done by -the international community to alleviate hunger problems of this kind, and we are doing what we can -to stimulate a willingness on the part of industrialised as well -as other food producing countries to join in ' helping the less ' favoured and less developed countries of the world. Our capacity to increase expenditure on defence and foreign aid will depened on -the success of our efforts to ensure ' that our own economy is soundly based and continues to develop rapidly in stable conditions.
 ECONOMIC AFFAIRS.
 I now turn to our latest survey of the economy. This Government retains the same broad economic objectives which, successfully pursued by Governments led by Sir Robert Menzies, resulted in the greatest era of economic development in Australia's history. Our slogan of " growth wvith stability will continue to guide us. We shall aim at the highest practicable level of national development and growth of industry. A policy of full employment has been successfully conducted with remarkably little -fluctuation throughout our years of office. It remains in the forefront of economic policy. Our national growth has been associated with a programme of immigration on the large scale. This will be continued at the highest level we find it practicable to sustain. The inflow of people has been accompanied by an inflow of capital responding to a climate favorable to enterprise, skill and initiative. Mr. Pollard.-Put a bit of ginger into it.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-That was the  honorable member's urging to me after the  last Budget. He had better get another  slogan to break the monotony.
 Mr. Pollard.-Give Holt a jolt.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-Well, a jolt is  better than a removal job. Judged on the  latest statistics of the volume of capital and the stream of official visitors coming here from various parts of the world to study investment prospects, Australia can look forward confidently to this inflow continuing strongly. Its extent is the more remarkable because the Governments in the two principal source countries from which this investment comes-the United Kingdom and the United States of America-have both imposed some restraints on external investment. The combination of favorable growth prospects and stable economic and political conditions are proving strongly attractive. Australia finds 90 per cent. of its capital investment from its own savings, but our rate of growth has been greatly assisted by the savings of others who bring new industry, new techniques, new equipment and new skills to us.
 Within the past fortnight, we have had discussions with representatives of industry and commerce and finance. These have been followed by discussions in the Cabinet. It is clear that the measures adopted in last year's Budget succeeded in bringing about a better balance between supply and demand in the economy. There are, I know, apprehensions about some weaknesses in the economy which, if they were to spread and combine, could create an undue slackening of demand and unemployment. The Government certainly does not want this to happen and will take any steps necessary to prevent it happening. The general trend of demand must be kept rising sufficiently to preserve full employment and provide jobs for the additional labour coming forward locally and from the rising migrant inflow. From the preliminary information available to us there was a sharp fall in registrants for employment during February.
 A substantial additional amount of finance, estimated at $ 24 million, is being provided by the savings banks for housing in the second half of 1965-66. The effect of this has yet to show up fully. We have under consideration other measures to give further support to housing. The same approach applies to other sectors-subject always ' to the consideration that we must be guided first and foremost by the trend in the general level of demand and activity and the need to ensure that resources are available for the priority requirements of defence and for developments of a kind that will increase exports: It is for this latter reason that we have been especially concerned with the problems created by the drought and the still wider problem of finance for rural industries.
 The drought in New South Wales and Queensland has been a great misfortune in many ways. Most of all, it has been a misfortune for -the producers in the drought areas. They have suffered heavy losses and a great deal of personal hardship. Our sympathy goes to them as we join our hope to theirs for early relief. The drought has been a misfortune-for the industries which serve the rural producers, such as the makers of agricultural machinery. It has been a misfortune for the economy because it has brought a heavy cut in rural output. We have felt the effects in exports for this financial year and we will possibly feel it still more heavily in exports for 1966-67.
 The Commonwealth Government and its agencies have, from the start, viewed the drought as a nationalproblem. The first requirement is that of assistance while the drought is still on. The provision of finance for this purpose rests largely with the trading banks and, from all the information I have, they have done an excellent job. They have been assisted in this by the Reserve Bank which has seen to it that there was no policy restraint on their ability to lend for the purpose and that they had the liquid resources to support their customers all through the drought areas. The Commonwealth Government has backed the State Governments with finance in all the relief measures they have found necessary. It has done this by grants and advances to enable the State Budgets to carry the costs of drought relief and to make loans to drought affected producers on easy terms. In fact it has assisted the States on a quite unprecedented scale to carry out drought relief measures.  
 Unfortunately, the drought has not passed even in Queensland, where there have been rains, and in New South Wales it is worsening. The Commonwealth will continue to assist the States to finance their drought relief measures as far as necessary and for as long as necessary. Where rains have fallen, and the restocking of properties has become possible, a need for restocking finance has arisen and is expected to grow as and when the drought is relieved. Here again, ' the provision of finance will largely be a matter for the trading banks. The Reserve Bank will support them in this to the full extent. The Commonwealth Development Bank has also been lending for the purpose and the Government will ensure that it has the resources to continue doing so.
 There will, however, be producers who, for one reason or another, cannot get adequate bank finance for restocking. The Premier of New South Wales has written to me about this. He has proposed that the system of loans the State is making to producers for relief purposes should be extended, with necessary adaptation, for restocking purposes. Under this system, loans are made up to certain limits at low rates of interest and with provision for a deferred repayment period. I have advised the Premier of New South Wales and also the Premier of Queensland that the Commonwealth is prepared, for this purpose, to extend the support it has been giving to the State for other drought measures. Obviously, it is only sensible and very much in the national interest that, so far as finance is necessary and can help to keep down drought losses and get farms and stations back into full production as the drought lifts, it should be made available. The need to sustain and increase rural production for domestic requirements and for exports is as important -today as it has ever been in our history.
 The drought itself has demonstrated a need for more investment in rural industries to strengthen them in various ways against a recurrence of drought from which we have had the good fortune to be relatively free over a long period. This need for drought mitigation work merges into a wider need for increased capital investment in the rural industries. On the one hand, we will need more and more rural output to provide exports. On the other hand, the scope exists for progressively increasing rural output in a variety of ways, all of which require increased capital expenditure on farms.
 We have had a great many opinions as to where the main need lies and, while they vary in detail and emphasis, they all converge in a requirement for improved facilities to provide longer term rural development finance on a term loan basis. We are convinced, however, that the need is not so much for any radical innovations or new machinery as for improvement and extension of facilities which have already proved their worth.
 The Commonwealth Development Bank, established in 1960, has already made a valuable contribution towards meeting the needs for development finance by rural and other industries. However, we believe that the special problems of the farmer would be better served if there were facilities exclusively devoted to his credit needs. Accordingly, the Government has under consideration -the establishment of a separate Rural Division within the Commonwealth Development Bank. Legislation will be required for this.
 The Government believes it is desirable to provide the farmer with greater access to medium and long term capital for development purposes -through his own private bank. The term loan funds, introduced in 1962, already go some way towards meeting this purpose. The Government now proposes to consult with the trading banks with a view to establishing farm loan funds separate from the existing term loan arrangement. The funds would provide finance for medium and long term development purposes including the purchase of land and measures ' for drought recovery and mitigation of future droughts.
Subject to suitable arrangements being made with the banks, it is envisaged that a sum of $ 50 million will be available for these farm loan funds. This will be in addition to the arrangements now being made by the Reserve Bank to increase existing term loan funds by $ 20 million. So, from -those two 6ources a total of $ 70 million, most of which will be for rural purposes, will be available.
 Mr. Calwell.-At what rate of interest?
 Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-As the honorable gentleman knows, there has always been a preferred rate of interest for rural borrowers. It is contemplated that overdraft lending to farmers will continue as before. In addition, the trading banks will, we hope, be lending from the new funds on a long term basis on reasonable terms and conditions. I hope to be able to make arrangements for the Treasurer ( Mr. McMahon) and myself to discuss these matters with the Reserve Bank and the trading banks in the  near future.
The Government is exploring an insurance scheme to cover loans made from the farm loan funds of the banks. This will be done in order to ensure that this kind of lending is not unduly restricted by security considerations where projects otherwise offer excellent prospects of success. From the national standpoint, action in this area is directed initially to the building up of our export capabilities, which are one of the great key requisites for ensuring continued growth. As such, it is to be seen as part of a many sided programme embracing not only assistance, direct and indirect, to exporting industries, but all that goes to the discovery and development of resources, such as mineral exploration, oil search, water conservation, road, ail and port improvements, scientific research and extension services, in fact, most of the main branches of developmental work.
One of the most encouraging facts about exports in recent years has been their increasing deversification. Rural exports still predominate, and will do so for many a day to come. But they are being increasingly and most opportunely supplemented by exports of minerals and of manufactures. One of the main topics discussed with industry representatives last week was that of export incentives for manufactures. It was the unanimous view that the scheme introduced in 1962 had yielded excellent results. The Export Development Council told us that it was making a general review of the subject, on which it would be reporting to us. It asked that certain features of the existing scheme which had come to be regarded as anomalous should be removed, and we have undertaken to consider this. It strongly recommended that the Government should give an assurance that export incentives will be continued after the present legislation expires next year. It is certainly the general intention of the Government that this should be done. Industry representatives also urged upon us most strongly the need for encouraging the pursuit of research and development in manufacturing industry. The Government has been impressed by these views and is considering various proposals for assistance to industry in this field.  
 NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT.
 Our approach to development generally, and northern development in particular, will continue to be-both vigorous and comprehensive. Achievements to'. date have been very much more impressive than published criticisms would suggest.. When account is taken -of current and proposed work, the total of public and private investmcnt for northern Australia is in the vicinity of $ 2,000 million. The Government will maintain close co-operation with State Governments for development purposes. The planning and construction of public developmental projects are primarily matters foi State Governments. The Commonwealth Government has assisted the States to undertake a variety of projects by means ot special grants and loans. We recognise, howeverl,' that while our activities can sometimes trigger off worthwhile developments, or act in aid of the development undertakings of others, the major contribution will be made by private enterprise and the initiative of private investors.
 A recent example of co-operation between the Commonwealth and the States towards development was the announcement by the Minister for National Development ( Mr. Fairbairn) on 24th February that the Commonwealth and Sta te Governments have agreed that Australia should increase its rate of softwood planting from the present 40,000 acres a year to 75,000 acres for the next 35 years. The programme recommended will meet Australia's most urgent needs in the foreseeable future. Imports of ' timber and other forestry products now cost Australia more than $ 200 million a year. This cost could treble by the end of the century if we fail to increase our planting rate. The Commonwealth Government has offered the States about $ 20 million in longterm loans over the next five years to help lift the planting rate in the Government softwood plantations. These loans will be interest -free for the first 10 years.
 Commonwealth-State co-operation led to the formation some four years ago of the Australian Water Resources Council. Thanks principally to the provision of Commonwealth funds of about $ 5.5 million, expenditure on the investigation of water resources will increase by 60 per cent. in the three years to 1966-67. A further expansion of this work in the succeeding three years is being discussed . by . Commonwealth and State officers in Canberra this week.
 Examples of -this' co-operation are too numerous for. me to list them all here, but I mention the agreement entered into between the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments in 1962 to develop 4+ million acres of land for beef production in the brigalow belt of central Queensland, with the Commonwealth providing $ 14.5 million to finance -the scheme. Despite severe drought conditions in 1964 and 1965, go Iod progress has * been made in development of the area and, : as recently as last Friday, I talked' in ' Canberra with the Premier of Queensland about a similar scheme for a further area of nearly six million acres in central Queensland.
 Expansion in the mining industry has been the most spectacular development in the north in the post-war period. New industries -have been established at a number of places-bauxite development at Weipa and Gove, manganese at -Groote Eylandt, iron ore on the northwest of Western Australia, and at two centres in the No rthern Territory, and coal at two centres in central Queensland. In addition, considerable expansion has taken place at Mount Isa, involving private investment of some $ 130 million. In this case, the Government has made this development feasible by providing $ 34.5 million towards the cost of reconstruction of the railway to Townsville. In the case of the bauxite deposits at Gove in the Northern Territory, the Government has negotiated arrangements for development of the field by a company with 50 per cent. Australian equity and with conditions requiring establishment of a plant on the site to process bauxite into alumina.
The -Commonwealth Government through its financial assistance in connection with the beef cattle roads has made an enormous contribution to the development of better road transport facilities throughout Northern Australia leading to a larger turn-off of cattle. Drought effects were alleviated by movement over these roads to better pastures. Since 1961-62, approval has been given for assistance totalling $ 41.5 million towards the construction and upgrading of roads for cattle transport in Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
 The sugar industry which supports the bulk of the -population in the north of Queensland has gone through a phase of expansion since 1950 with acreage and output both . increasing by approximately 100 per cent. This expansion has been made possible by the successful negotiations of the Government which have enabled it to establish markets at home and abroad to absorb the increased output. Development of the industry over the past 15 years has led to substantial growth of cities and towns on the north Queensland coast and to development and modernisation of harbour and transport facilities.
 DECIMAL CURRENCY.
The changeover to the new decimal currency system for which work and planning have proceeded over several years went remarkably smoothly. The fact that it did so reflects great credit on the many people in all walks of life who played an active part in one aspect or another of the planning for this highly complex operation. Naturally, there were some uncertainties, and even an element of confusion, as was to be expected, in a few areas during the early stages, but, by and large, the general public has ' rapidly become familiar with the new coins and notes.
 The United Kingdom bad a team of offici , al observers in Australia at the time of the changeover. Presumably these must have reported favorably, because shortly afterwards the United Kingdom Government announced its own firm decision to change to a decimal system in 1971. New Zealand will be moving into decimals in July of next year, and several other smaller countries will also be following suit over the next year or two. There will be very few, if any, countries remaining outside the decimal family by the time of the British changeover. Australia thus will have become part of a world-wide decimal currency community.  
 IMMIGRATION.
 The Government has been making a review of the restrictive aspects of our immigration policy. Australia's increasing involvement in Asian developments, the rapid growth of our trade with Asian countries, our participation on a larger scale in an increasing number of aid projects in the area, the considerable number of Asian students-now well over 12,000-receiving education in Australia, the expansion of our military effort, and the scale of diplomatic contact, the growth of tourism to and from the countries of Asia, combine to make such a review desirable in our eyes.
 It is, at the same time, important that there should be a clearer understanding in Asia of our policy, and the reasons for it. It is certainly not based on any false notion of superiority. We are fully aware that many of the peoples of Asia can point to cultures dating back centuries before those of Western Europe. But, in these modern times, every country reserves to itself the right to decide what the composition of its population shall be; it has regard to the preservation of standards and of national characteristics and to the maintenance of the essential homogeneity of its people. Australia derives strength from its unity and a community life free from serious minority and racial problems. All countries in South East Asia maintain restrictions against immigration to serve their own national policies. Our basic policy has been firmly established since the beginning of our Federation. It is widely supported. But it has been the wish of the Government, as it would be of the community at large, that the policy should be administered with a spirit of humanity and with good sense.
Following our most recent review, the Government has decided on some modification and a degree of liberalisation. Under current policy, a non-European admitted on a long-term entry permit, must complete 15 years in Australia before applying for resident status and Australian citizenship. We have decided that, in future, application can be made in these cases after five years, the same period as applies for naturalisation application by settlers from Europe. There are other changes which, while maintaining the basic principles of our policy, can be made with advantage to enable more flexibility in administration. The Minister for Immigration ( Mr. Opperman) will shortly indicate to the House the Government's conclusions in more detail.   
LEGISLATION PROGRAMME.
 Honorable members will realise, from what I have been saying, that the Government has been, and will be, active on many fronts. Legislation will be needed to put into effect some of the matters I have mentioned to-night, and, of course, there will be numerous other items not covered in this statement, encompassing as it does the broad field rather than the detail.
 The legislation being prepared will cover a wide and important range of subjects. Some of them are complex measures which will require much drafting and consultation, such as the shipping provisions for the trade practices legislation, and measures relating to copyright and off-shore petroleum. In relation to off-shore petroleum we have had a remarkable instance of effective Commonwealth and State co-operation in the arrangements reached after the discussions which have occurred. There is also the comprehensive review of the defence legislation. Other subjects will reflect our immediate preoccupations at home and abroad, such as the legislation seeking approval of our decision to join the Asian Development Bank, and legislation in regard to drought relief. I am sure that all honorable members will welcome our proposal to give full voting rights to the member for the Australian Capital Territory. This is a matter which I shall leave until tomorrow, when my colleague, the Minister for the Interior ( Mr. Anthony), will be making a statement on it.  
 CONCLUSION.
My fellow Australians will find reflected in what I have said tonight the change of orientation which marks Australia's situation in this second half of the 20th century. We find ourselves playing an active and not uninfluential part, in the world community, but we have become increasingly involved in the affairs of Asia. We have found our external responsibilities increasing as we have increased our population and economic strength. Others expect us to play an increasing part in military assistance, in international aid and in diplomatic discussion. We are all conscious of a heightened influence on our community life from a quickening spirit of nationalism. We see dangers ahead, but they seem to occupy far less of the horizon than happier vistas of national growth. We have the good fortune to live together in a true democracy. We breathe the air of freedom. We do not always succeed in doing so, but we have learned to co-operate effectively at all levels of Government, and in the relations between Government and industry. We are confident that our greatest years have yet to be.
 Mr. Whitlam.-Ha!
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-I appreciate the chagrin of the honorable gentleman opposite. I hope that he and his colleagues will be able to eradicate the repression under which they suffer. It is a privilege for all members of this Government to have the opportunity, through their Ministries, to make a contribution towards Australia's progress. We commit ourselves to the tasks ahead with enthusiasm, with our hard work and our devotion.
I present the following paper- Statement of Policy by New Government-  Ministerial Statement 8th March 1966--
 and move-
 That the House take note of the paper.
 



INCREASED AID TO VIET NAM
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. H. AROID1=-T&amp;
FOR RADIO AND TV 9TH ? MCH. 1966
Mr. Caiwell's proposal for a referendum in relation to
the despatch of National Servicemen to South Viet Nam I think reflects
a misunderstanding of what is proposed.
He hearks back to the quite dissimilar situation which
existed in the First and Second World Wars. There people enlisted for
service for an indefinite period of years and in the result, many were
absent from Australia for a number of years. But our National
Servicemen have a two-year term of duty. Most of them will have been
under training for the best part of twelve months before they are
moved to South Viet Nam and the term of duty there would be in the
neighbourhood of a twelve months' tour of duty; that is the period
which would have been served approximately by our present battalion
there before it is relieved, and this would be in contemplation for
the Task Force which we have decided to send to South Viet Nam. And
so on return from service there, many of our National Servicemen would
be very close to the conclusion of their two-year term of duty or would
actually have passed beyond that point, and they could only be
extended beyond that point by their own decision. So that the
situation is scarcely comparable.
Now, I would hope that this service can be seen in its
true perspective in view of the explanations that I have given. We
felt that the despatch of the Task Force was the most effective
military contribution that Australia can make at this time. We are
assured by our military advisers that it would be the most effective.
It is the smallest force that we can despatch which could function
effectively as a completely serviced Australian unit under Australian
command, and there is great advantage in having a unified Australian
command, our own body of men responding to Australian leadership and
giving Australia an identifiable role in this conflict.
The episode which has involved Gunner O'Neill is, of
course, an unfortunate one which has given me personally a good deal
of concern. I am easier in my mind now that I know that a very
distinguished and able military leader in the person of the Chief
of Staff, Lieutenant-General Wilton, has been personally giving his
attention to the matter, and I '-Jould most certainly hope that this
episode should not be allowed to blur the splendid image which has
been established in Australia and indeed throughout the world by our
forces in Viet Num. 



POLICY
INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER. MR.
GALLERY. CANBERRA 9TH MARCH, 196
MR. HOLT Gentlemen, my principle purpose in asking you to come
together with me this morning was that after such a lengthy statement
covering so much ground, I thought there would be a fair amount of
fill-in required. Some of you may feel that you wanted some
amplification at various points, so I didn't bring you together
to make another lmng speech, but to be available to clarify where
that seemed desirable. And so unless otherwise indicated, I think
what arises here is clarification from me.
Q. Mr. Caiwell, Sir, has asked for a referendum for conscripts
that are being sent to Viet Nam.
MR. HOLT: A referendum? I don't think Australia has found a
referendum a satisfactory way of resolving issues of this charaeter,
and the Government is fully conscious of the responsibility it has
exercised in coming to its decision. What I should paint out is
the significant difference between the situation which existed in
the wars in which a referendum was held and the disposition of our
fbrces an this occasion. At that time, the issue was whether a
man was to remain in the army, in effect, for the duration of the
conflict which, in the result, in both world wars, was spread over
a considerable number of years. In the case 4f the National
Servicemen, who will go abroad for service, most of them have the
best part of twelve months' training in Australia before being
posted abroad and their total period of service is two years,
so that those posted to, say, South Viet Nam, would not be likely
to be required to serve for lnnger than approximately twelve months
in that particular posting, by which, in most cases, they would
have reached the end of their required period of service.
Q. Doesn't the Defence Act give the Government power to extend
their period of service in certain circumstances?
MR. HOLT That is subject to correction. I think that is in the case
of defence emergency, isn't it? Or a declared defence emergency.
Q. Mr. Holt, in your opinion then, the test of public opinion
will be at the next election. 
1A.
MR. HOLT ( Summing up) It is my view that a referendum
certainly would not be a satisfactory method of dealing with
a situation of this sort. Is the referendum to relate
solely to the situation in South Viet Nam? Would Mr. Calwell
see the discharge of our commitments in Malaysia in respect
of Indonesian confrontation in Malaysia or any action we
might find it necessary to take for the security of New
Guinea in the same light. I think Mr. Calwell's rather
hasty statement on this matter reflects the woolly-mindedness
of the Opposition generally and its evident division on the
issue in South Viet Nam and what should be done about it,
which I thought became clearly apparent as my statement
proceeded last night. It was quite obvious to me that there
were many members * f the Opposition discomfited by the
alacrity with which Mr. Calwell persisted in his view that
this is a civil war which is being fought in South Viet Nam,
ignoring the deeper significance and the wider ramifications
which I spelt out in some detail. 
-2
' MR. HOLT I welcome that, Prank. I was about to say something
to the effect that while the issue is not one appropriate for
decision by referendum, the Government having accepted responsibility
for its decision, will at no distant point of time be required to
answer to the Australian electorate for its actions. I am
confident that faced with the situation in which we find
ourselves, the Australian public will continue to give us its
firm support. the engagement of servicemen for Viet Nam inescapable?
MR. HOLT We think so if we are to deal effectively with the total
defence situation. Australia has a variety of commitments and
we wish to so organise our affairs as to maintain the nation in the
necessary economic strength to back up our military and aid effort.
This has appeared to us to be the most effective way of going aqbout
the business. Ne-one could seriously argue that the inducements
to men of the desired ages are inadequate. I think we now can-claim
to have the highest paid army of men of lozer ranks anyhow
engaged anywhere in the world. The last time this matter came under
my notice, our men of the lower ranks were being paid more than their
opposite numbers in the army of the United States.
Q. Can you give us a break-up, Sir, of how this 4,500 men will be
made up?
MR. HOLT Well, I tried to get some detail on that for you. We
had this material, of course, before us. I may say we went over
this decision, or at least we had extensive discussions leading up
to it over a considerable period of time. This hasn't just happened
since, say, Vice-President' Humphrey was here. One of the earliest
items of business of the new Government was to consider what should
be done further in the defence field. Apart from that, there were
of course, reviews going on of one kind or another almost
continuously before the end of last year, and one of the factors
which influenced our decision was that a force smaller than this
would not hae enabled Australia to operate its own unified command
under Australian leadership and direction. If we had sent, for
example, another battalion, it wouldn't have been located with the
battalion corresponding to that one already there. The composition
of the American force, the need for logistic arrangements and for
specialist troops would have debarred an additional battalion to
be placed in another United States regiment, but by a decision to
send a force on the scale that we have, our troops are enabled to
cord-ict their ovm nampaignl as a unified Australian command, with
their own specialist services and with this special SAS force
accompanying them, so that it should be an extremely effective body
of men, and in our judgment the most effective military contribution
which Australia could make at this time. Now the question naturally e 9 / 3 
-3
MR. HOLT ( CONTD.) arises, " Can wie make these troops available, and
at the same time--he-ready to meet our other commitments" and our
military advice is " Yes we can." Have in mind although the numbers
may seem large to some, they seem small to others. You have to
keep in mind what I said at the outset about the rotation process
and that as ore force moves out, we have to be in a position to move
in a force of equivalent strength. The battalion there will, as I
think I indicated yesterday, be rel. ieved in June. When the mem~ bers
of the proposed Task Force have completed their period of service,
then they too will be replaced,-: You could conceivably have a
situation if it became necessary to take some precautionary action,
say in New Guinea, you would turn to some of those who had been on
a tour of duty in South Viet Nam, some time after they had returned
to Australia, but it would be, in all probability, a very different
kind of situation that they would have to cope with up there.
Anyhow, this follows the recommendation of our own Service advisers.
It is their considered judgment that this was the most effective
military contribution that Australia could make and that it was
within our capacity to make it.
Q. Have you selected the commander of the new force yet?
MR. HOLT Just before I leave that point, the 4,500 is the overall
total and includes all services, not merely the iiitary service.
The command? Well, others will have to give you that answer...
Either Fraser or Alan Fairhall.
Q. Has he been selected yet?
MR. HOLT Wdell, he is not known to me anyhow.
Q. Sir, the 4,500 seems a bit high when you consider that only two
infantry battalions are going.
MR. HOLT : Well, there are all these others. Apart from the R. 11. A. F.
elements, there are the advisers who were formerly there, thaerree the
specialist services, signallers and people of that sort, artillery
elements. They are not just infantrymen. And this specialist
squadron. But this is what it totals up to. I am not, of course, a
military expert. Our Minister for Defence and our Service Ministers
can give you more detail, but I was, of course, a party to all the
discussions at which the Service Chiefs were present and concerned
with the strategic aspects and the relativity of the effort here to
what we were doing in other theatres. Remember that we are building
up our own forces all the time. One reason why our contribution
was on the limited scale which occurred at the outset was derived
from the need to use some of our trained Service personnel to give
a hand in the training of those coming into the army, but as we go
along, so we are building up our numbers and our strength. so 9 -/ 4 
-4
Q. Bearing an the point that you have made, Sir, that this will
be a self-contained force, Mr. Fraser in the House last night said
that you might make an arrangement with the Americans for the
detention of Australian offenders. Would it be desirable to turn
Australians over to some other
MR. HOLT Well, I don't think we are in a position to give a final
reply on that episode. I would hope that we don't over-sensationalise
this thing. It is not an episode I confess to having
been very much concerned by my first reading of it and I think one
does have to take into consideration not only the seriousness of
the offence which in that kind of war in that type of area does
assume a major seriousness, but also the circumstances in which the
troops are operating there. The Commanding Officer has acknowledged
that he was in error in his understanding of the manner in which
punishment should be applied but my mind is easier on this matter
because I know that it is under the personal consideratio4 not
merely of the Minister, but of a very experienced and capable
Army leader in the person of Lieutenant-General Wihlton and I
hav-: sufficient confidence in his experience and judgment to
feel that this matter will be dealt with in the most appropriate
way from now on. I think that it is greatly to be regretted that
the episode should not only have occurred but the publicity whiich
understably attached to it could, I think, give a misleading picture
or a distorted picture to the Australian public of what has been
a magnificent force whili has brought great credit to Australia
and has been generally recognised as the most effective and
highly disciplined fighting unit to be found in South Viet Narn;
Q. Mr. Holt, you said that the Service Ministers can give us the
details after. Is there going to be some form reversal and they
will give them to us?
MR. HOLT I will advise my colleague, Mr. Fairhall . It is not my
purpose to take over the functions of the Minister for Defence.
I wanted to supply some additional informration if that were
necessary but if you do want to into the more technical aspeats
on the defence or service side, I think it would be appropriate
for Mr. Fairhall to have that discussion with you,
Q. Mr. Holt, with this increased force, will Australia have a
greater say in strategy, in general policy?
MR. HOLT I wouldn't ask really for a stronger Australian voice
than we possess at the present time. The United States and South
Vietnamese governments have been highly considerate of us in the
weight they have attached tq Australian opinions not only in
Service matters but in relation to the policies to be followed
generally. 1 
Q. Sir, can you reconcile for us the apparent inconsistencies
betweenjthis decision and what you said before Mr. Healey's
arrival about Australia not being able to incur additional Defeno3--
commitments?
MR. HOLT I regard what we are now incurring as being manageable
within the balanced programme for the nation that I envisaged
at that time. Before we had our talks with Mr. Healey, it was not
clear what was to be proposed by him. There had been in quite
influential quarters in the United Kingdom proposals for a complete
withdrawal of the United Kingdom East of Suez and if this had
occurred, then I could foresee burdens resting on Australia which
we wou~ Ld have found difficult to meet while at the same time
pursuing a considerable programme of development. What I have
been putting publicly and to the representatives of other countries
is that, taking a not so very long view, it is in their own interests
that Australia sinuld continue to expand, to build its strength, its
capacity to supply a greater military contribution, a greater aid
contribution in the period ahead. However, I believe that what has
now been decided is in no sense inconsistent with the general view
I was holding. I am confident that we can sustain a defence effort
an the scale contemplated and at the same time press forward
vigorously with our development programme. The cloud over us, of
course, is this drought aspect, and it is a characteristic of
drought that nobody can tell how long it wivl l last or how widely
its influence will be spread. The remark-able thing, I think, for
most of us who are old enough to have remembered earlier periods of
drought is how well we have come through the circumstances of this
one with relatively little dislocation to the economy as a whole.
We may not yet have experienced the worst of it by any means, but
it does demonstrate how much more highly diversified the Australian
economy is and how much better able we are to contend with the
unfavourable conditions in one area of Australia because we have
strengthened our situation in anwther. Last year, ,, for example,
while we were getting a poor return from wheat crops in New South
Wales, they had a record wheat production in Australia. But I
was rather surprised at the tone taken by one or two of the
financial commentators. I thought if you studied the text closely
enough of what I said on the economic s'ide that we wi re giving
quite a number of indications of directions in whih the economy
required that assistanoe, then further assistance would be
forthcoming, housing being a case in point. Then there were the
references to export incentives, proposals for research and
development, other matters of that sort which were not unimportant. veso~ so / 6 
-6-
Q. Mr. Halt, any development in your plans to go to Viet
Nam?
MR. HOLT: Nw, Harold, I am keeping in my mind a particular period
as the best possibility, but I would prefer not to discuss that
at the present time. On the one hand, there is a quite crowded
programme leading up to Easter. The week of Easter we have the
Queen Mother here. The following week we have a gathering of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Q. How long will you go after Easter, Sir?
MR. HOLIT The Session? I should think a run of about four weeks,
but it may need to be longer. I am hoping to avoid having to
leave it until the Session ends, It may be I have got to take up
portion of the Parliamentary time to do this, but I would see a
visit of something just under a fortnight as probably being about
necessary.
Q. You wouldn't fly in with the troops, would y~ u?
MR. HOLT Well my problem will be to get to a number of different
points because I certainly want to get to Borneo, and we have
troops stationed in various areas and I think it would be useful
to get to as many of these as I can. Then you find when it once
becomes known that you are liable to be in that general area, you
have requests then f rem governments wanting you to come and confer
with them on matters of interest. to them.
Q. This is mainly to see the troops, Sir?
MR. HOLT : Well, partly to inform my own mind better on the nature
of the terrain, the country and the general atmosphere. A
fairly experienced political observer or Ministerial observer
can pick up in a couple of days a good deal of information and
atmosphere. He gets a concentrated treatment; just as we have
people dropping in here for a couple of days and able to confer
directly with either heads of government or heads of services,
armed services. You do absorb a good deal of the local
atmosphere, the information that can be made available to you
on the spot which I think becomes more educative than anything
that you can get at a distance or secondhand.
Q. Sir, this 650M for the Farm Lean Fund. Is the Government
providing that?
MR. HOLT The general idea is that this would come from the SED
accounts but we have yet to discuss in all its detail with the
representatives of the tradin, banks. There have been some
preliminary talks; thereforgBA~ re is something indefinite at
this point of time about the way the machinery will operate,
we have our own view of what we would like to see happen. &amp; 0*/ 7 
-7-
MR. HOILT ( Contd.) This is therefore subject to hearing the views the
banks may wish to put to us on details, but broadly what we are
looking to do is to have available, for borrowing purposes in the
long term and at reasonable rates of interest, funds which in the
first instance would be avai] Eble for meeting the problems arising
from drought, but this is not seen as merely a way of dealing
with drought. We are conscious that there is a need in the rural
community for finance of a long-term nature, the people knowing
the sort of commitment they have undertaken and the rates they have
to pay for their money. Over an amazing proportion of the
farming community, the overdraft system has operated indefinitely
in some cases. There have been outstanding loans on well-established
properties, probably running back through generation
it is theoretically callable " overdraft" and yet that particul1ar
hank has satisfied the particular needs of that family or that
establishment perhaps over fifty, sixty or more years. WNell, the
farmer likes to foel he knows just what his liabilities are, and
what is the leng-th and availability of his financial resources and
then he can plan more confidently for his future. This doesn't
mean that you seek to replace overnight the overdraft system which
has operated in this practical way for so long, but there will be
situations where a man would need the encouragement of an assured
long-term loan at a rate which he felt represented an economic one
having regard to all he might have to undertake before perhaps
he would subject himself to the anxieties and heartbreaks that some
of them have experienced over recent times.
Q. On a Viuqefsland note, are you intending to ' hold on to your
Bin~ gi Bay home and holiday there when you can?
MR. HOLT Holiday. Thanks for the thought. I am hanging on to
it for my retirement, untimely or otherwise.
Mr. Fitchett Sir Robert went twenty years without a holiday, Sir.
MR. HOLJT : I am not emulating his endurance feats, I assure yriu.
Q. I have a very ingenuous question, Mr. Prime Minister.
Could you tell us when you are going to debate the bill now
before Parliament to extend aid to private schools in Canberra?
MR. HOLT : I haven't consulted my colleague, the Leader of the House
on the conduct of the programme. I don't know that it will be
introduced at an early point of time. I have no wish to add to
or complicate the problems of the Opposition, but it is there on
the Notice Paper. Is it in the form of a bill or a statement?
Q. A statement. The Leader of the Opposition secured the
adjournment. S 
8-
MR. BOLT Well this is where you had me foxed for a moment.
I am not saying " foxed" in any sinister sense. YLou had me
groping around as to just what legislation it was. I knew there
was a statement, and I gather that the Opposition if wie are
proposing to bring it on wishes to have some prior notice so
that there would be an opportunity for Caucus discussions.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, on immigration. Last night, I think
you mentioned only Asiatics.
MR. BOLT Oh, no. There is no significance What I think I was
stressing was that these devel~ pments around the Asian area had
been amongst the factors which had influenced us to make a review
at this time but the rules and arrangements don't exclude other
non-Europeans than Asians. But in our experience, it is the
people fr'nm Asia who come here for one purpose or another who seem
to give rise to the problems with which we have to deal.
Q. Ihat I have particularly in mind, Sir, is that about a
year ago, Mr. Wilson told Dr. Viilliams of the letIndies that he
would try and get Sir Robert to give some thought to taking some
excess West Indian population.
MR. BOLT: Yes, well he hasn't put any such proposal to me, nor
am I aware of it having been put to Sir Robert. But we, of course,
have these arrangements which apply mainly in Asia for students
coming in here. I mentioned a figure, a total figure of more
than 12,000 as representing the number in Australia at the present
time, and not all of course, not more than a relatively small
proportion of those here are on Commonwealth or Colombo Plan
scholarships. A lot of them come here to do their primary and
secondary education.
Q. It would be true to say, then, that this wouldn't
include any members of the British Commonwealth as such....
MR. BOLT Oh, they are not excluded. If they come here under any
of the categories of eligibility, then the same rules would apply
in relation to them. But I said we were proposing to give rather
more flexibility in their administration to the Department of
Immigration. We want them to feel that if they run up against
what we would all regard as the more difficult cases, then they
dqn't have to regard themselves as being too tightly bound by the
rules. Could you give us a little more backgroun. to your speech
on Northern Development? Did it derive from a comprehensive
Government review of Northern Development policies or was it just
a continuation 0* 0 9* / 9 
9-
MR. HOLT Well, we feel we have-been-te. Ling-yo.-a-grea t deal
on northerrv eev~ pinnt--but we are belted all the time by critics
who haven't bothered to put together the total of what we have
been doing or what we have encouraged to occur. I quoted a
figure last night which is an official figure. It comes from
the Department of National Development. If ybu look at the
various projects currently in train or fir early implementation,
you get a total expenditure on northern development from
governmental and private sources of the order of 32,600M. That's,
a lot of money for capital investment in a relatively under-!
populated area of Australia and must make a tremendous difference
to the situation in thoseareas. Vie are going ahead steadily with,
say, the beef roads programme and programmes such as the Brigalow
Scheme, ports and harbour facilities, railway development of.
this sort. We still make the approach from the Commonwealth,
and if we can be shown projects with an export potential that
have an economic viability about them, we are attracted to do
something to help that along. But what I was really trying ta
do was to get the rather more balanced and realistic view taken
of a good deal me~ re than developmental activity. Some may argue
it is not enough but it represents a very great increase on
anything we have ever attempted before. In Western Australia
at the moment, I would think you would find thdr resources
there pretty much at full stretch an our analysis, anyhow, of
the figures. I am not finding the Queensland Government in
complaining mood about what we are doing up there. On the
contrary.
Q. Can we expect some news about Jim Fraser's voting
rights today?
MR. HOLT I don't know whether you noticed that this was~ in the
concluding page of the speech which was roneoed off. It was
my expectation that Doug Anthony would announce at question
time that we had decided to give voting rights to the member
for the Australian Capital Territory. Viell, he knowing that it
would require a bill and the rule is that bills must first be
explained in the party room, deferred until today his announcement.
I came to it as I was reading thrwugh and baulked at the hurdle
and without mentioning the topic, said, " This is a matter
which my colleague will be raising tomorrow", subsequently
realising that everybody who had had a copy of the roneoed
speech would have this new break. ' Vhfether it was regarded as
of insufficient importance to attract the dailies in other parts
of the Commonwealth, I don't know, but it has been a big issue
with Jim Fraser. It might prove his undoing.
Mr. Alan Reid Thank you, Sir. 



66/ 035
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 23/ 1966
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
The Government this afternoon completed its
current series of economic consultations when Ministers met
representatives of the A. C. T. U. Today's meeting followed
discussions last week with representatives of commerce and
industry. The A. C. T. U. was represented by Mr. Albert Monk
( President), Mr. J. D. Kenny ( Vice-President), Mr. W. P.
Evans ( Junior Vice-President) and Mr. H. J. Souter ( Secretary).
Apart from the Prime Minister, Ministers
present were Mr. J. McEwen, Minister for Trade and Industry,
Mr. W. McMahon, Treasurer, Mr. C. F. Adermann, Minister for
Primary Industry, Senator N. H. D. Henty, Minister for Supply,
Mr. D. E. Fairbairn, Minister for National Development and Mr.
L. H. E. Bury, Minister for Labour and National Service.
The A. C. T. U. representatives submitted several
proposals, and the Government appreciated the opportunity of
obtaining at first hand the views of the Council. Consideration
will be given to these.
CANBERRA, March, 1966. 



66/ 0 36
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 24/ 1966
CORAL SEA GUEST
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Vice-Admiral Paul Ramsey, Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations ( Air) United States Navy, will come to Australia
for the Coral Sea Celebrations this year.
Admiral Ramsey will arrive in Australia on Sunday,
1st May, for a sixteen-day visit. He will go to all States
and Canberra, his itinerary being as follows
Monda and Tuesday
May 2nd and 4' rd
Wednesday, 4th
Thursday, 5th
Friday, 6th
Saturday, 7th
Sunday, 8th
Monday, 9th
Tuesday, 10th
Wednesday, 11th
Thursday Pnd Friday,
May 12th and 13~ th
Saturday, 14th
Sunday, 15th
Monday, 16th Sydney Sydney/ Newcastle/ Brisbane
Brisbane Brisbane/ Canberra
Canberra Canberra/ Perth
Perth Perth/ Adelaide
Adelaide/ Melbourne
Melbourne Melbourne/ Hobart
Hobart Leaves Tasmania for New
Zealand
CANBERRA, March, 1966. 



FIRST CONVENTION OF THiE YOUNG AUSTRALIAN
FOUNDATION
WILSON HALL, UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE,
MELBOURNE. 11TH MARCHi-1966.
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Good Evening to you all, and that includes our dissident group
outside. This actually makes me feel very much at home because
the first campaign I ever took part in was in the electorate of
Yarra against the then Labor Prime Minister, or former Prime
Minister, Mr. Scullin, and I remember that night, which was in
the middle of the depression, coming to the hall and finding
that nobody there was prepared to hear what I had to say.
And thinking about tonight as I came along here, I marvelled at
the contrast in circumstances which this generation faces
compared with the generation of which I was a part in my own
university days at this institution. Now I don't know whether
our friends outside arc--students of the university. I hope
not because thoy have not yet learnt that noise is no effective
answer to argument not logical argument, in any event. And
I would hope that as time goes on because my stamina for these
matters, assisted by these mechanical devices is very much
greater than theirs they will learn a few things which will
be of interest to them.
Now ladies and gentlemen, I suggest that you ignore
the people outside and just concentrate on what I have to put
to you because you can hear me and, thanks to this instrument,
I can get over to you, and I came here tonight to speak to you,
or those who are willing to hear what I might have to say.
And I thought quite hard about accepting this invitation because
it came in the first week of the Parliament. It was a particularly
heavy week and normally I'd have been disposed to say,
" Sorry, there's rather too much to do this week. Perhaps we
could try another time". Then I remembered back to my own days,
of which you are the corresponding generation, and I recall how
hard it was to get young people interested in the comm~ unity and
political affairs of their country. The only reason, I thir~ k,
why I came into politics when I did was that this country was
in such a state of economic disaster, a condition which nobody
of this generation, I think, could even visualise. There has
been only one month in the last sixteen years when the registrants
for employment exceeded 3 per cent., and that was in the normal
low seasonal demand month of January some years ago 3 per cent.
In the year of which I speak, the registrations were 30 per cent.
Thirty out of every 100 trade unionists registered with the
various unions were unable to get any regular paid employment
at that time. And every generation has to face up to its own
set of problems and challengus and we in my day had to face up
to the problem of economic organisation. We had just come out
of a war, and the dislocation of war was still upon us and the
clouds of the next world war were gathering ominously above us,
but we learn through our expceriences how to master, very
considerably, the economic problems. 
It's true we have fluctuations. People get concerned
about recessions as they see them appearing or disappearing in
the economic field, but here we have had a remarkable experience
going on now for the best part of twenty years in which Australia
has known this full employment situation, this condition of what
is termed in modern times, the affluent society. That doesn't
mean that your generation doesn't have the same set of tough
problems which you have to face. And it is a heartening thing
to somebody who has given more than half his own life in the
service of the National Parliament to find that a new generation
of young Australians is prepared to come together as you are in
this organisation and face up to the possibilities of service
which lie open to you, face up to the task of analysing as calmly
and sensibly as you can, the national problems, those affecting
you directly, those in which you can play some part in helping
your country along. And because I believe that is the essence
of the objectives that you have outlined for this organisation,
I felt that here was something to be encouraged and here was an
organisation which could at least feel from its foundation that
it enjoyed the warm approval and commendation of the government
of its own country. And so I am here to demonstrate that.
I am also here to tell you something which I found of
interest to myself and that is that there are so many of you.
I don't know whether you realise it but more than 50 per cent.
of the Australian population is 30 years of age or under, and
so the young Australian represents the majority of Australians,
and it is about time, I thought, you saw another Prime Minister.
Most of you have only seen one in your lifetime. I suppose I
am now the second. I can assure you that you will have an
opportunity to see a third. I have no intention of establishing
any endurance records despite the encouragement of Herb Elliott's
presence with us here tonight. In fact, I had looked rather
enviously at Herb because he combines in himself, speed, stamina
and lightness on his feet. Now what better combination could
a politician hope for than that set of qualities, but while Ican't
guarantee that I shall remain for any length of time
corresponding to that of Sir Robert, nor would you probably be
wishing that, I find it difficult to predict at the moment whom
my successor will be.
Here we are concerned with the great problem of which
we have had an echo from the attendance of our friends outside.
I have no desire to convert this gathering into a political
occasion but I think that you are entitled, having regard to the
obligations that the Government imposes upon you, to hear an
explanation at first hand as to why these things have been
believed to be necessary, and so while there are a few other
matters I would like to mention to you tonight, perhaps it
would be useful if before we get the whole issue clouded with
emotion anC political propaganda, I could just give a few facts
about this issue first of Australia's participation in the
campaign in South Viet Nam, and secondly to tell you the reasons
why we found it necessary to adopt a particular method of service
in relation to the army and the incidence of this, how it works
out. I say I believe this to be necessary because I have little
doubt in my own mind that given the facts, the Australian community
is quite capable of coming to a sound and sensible decision,
but if people refuse to study the facts, then who can foretell
the kind of decision that they in their public judgments will
find themselves coming to. 
I don't think that anybody who has made a study of
contemporary history could really be in much doubt or remain
there for a long time about the issue in South Viet Nam. I
know that there are some people who profess that this is a civil
war and that the rest of us should keep out of it and let the
citizens decide this issue for themselves. But anybody who
speaks in those terms has either q~ jpletely ignored or forgotten
contemporary history in relation/ Malaya, Korea, Taiwan and
various other parts of Asia which even at this moment are currently
feeling the pressures and probes of the Communist expansion.
Even India, peace-loving India, is finding itself at this moment
confronted on its boundaries with thrusting Communist pressures.
Even in Thailand, which offers no threat to China or any interest
of China's, I learned from the mouth of the Prime Minister of
that country only a week or so ago that they are at the present
time under pressure in their north, in their east, and in their
west from Chinese communist expansion. And when one knows
these things and has all the evidence of what occurred in Korea,
the fact that but for the strength of American resistance, Taiwan
woulO have been overrun by the Chinese communists also. And
now here in this critical area of South East Asia, a great
struggle, a struggle involving your freedom and my freedom and
the freedom of free peoples everywhere throughout the world is
occurring. Now, I would have thought that this was plain enough;
whatever one might decide as to what ought to be done about it,
the broad fac* t-s surely are plain enough and the evidence surely
has accumulated sufficiently to convince the most doubting that
whether you like it or not or approve of it or not, the thrust
is the thrust of the communist movement inspired and directed
from Peking and carrying through its campaigning the ideological
challenge of Peking, the challenge of its philosophy of world
domination for a world that is given to communism.
Now we can understand people differing from our own
ideas. We happen to believe in the virtues of a free society
and of people having the maximum freedom available to them under
laws of their own making. You and I enjoy that kind of democracy.
Our friends outside here enjoy that kind of democracy. otherwise
they wouldn't be here tonight. And a robust democracy doesn't
discard or repress its minorities. It gives them the opportunity
for expression and so I, ladies and gentlemen, believe that as
the facts unfold, the Australian people will realise as I am sure
they do now, the essential character of the struggle that is
going on in South Viet Nam. Have we all forgotten quite as
quickly as would seem to be the case with some that this country
and the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries had to
maintain a campaign for, I think it was, 15 years in Malaya in
order to suppress Communist guerrilla activity in that country.
If you go to Malaya, or Malaysia as it is called at the present
time, you will find a well-ordered community, a people functioning
under a Parliamentary democracy, steadily improving their own
economic and social standards. Now this country was saved, as
South Korea was saved, as Taiwan has been saved from communist
domination because there were people who were prepared to join
with those who were under threat, who were facing aggression,
people who were prepared to join with them in resisting that
aggression. 
And you~ know, there are people even in this country
who have plenty of cause to be grateful to the United States
for the defence given to freedom throughout the world but who
either refuse to see that it was the critical United States aid
in Korea when the United States stood alone which saved Korea;
but for the United States' willingness to resist agression, if
it came to Taiwan, there would be no Taiwan, or Formosa as we
used to name it, and there would be, had America not stood firm
in its resolution, no South Viet Nam.
Australia has a proud tradition of service beyond its
own shores in the cause of freedom. In two world wars, this
country sustained nearly half a million casualties, fighting
for the issue of freedom in those great contests. We lost more
men in casualties, killed from war action, in the First World
War, than did the whole of the United States. So we don't
take an isolationist view of life. Where the threat exists,
there the threat must be resisted and we have joined freely and
willingly those of like mind to ourselves in resisting that kind
of threat. And this is why we are in South Viet Nam. We
believe that if South Viet Nam were to fall, it would only be a
matter of time before the whole of South-East Asia fell and
Australia came directly under physical threat itself. These
are not fanciful beliefs but they are the views of the most
experienced men in the public life of your country, acting on
the most expert advice that they can secure from their
diplomatic sources, from their military sources and from the
senior administrative personalities who conduct the government
of this country through the Departments of State of this country.
And I ask you to bear that in mind as you gather in some
newspaper editorial and are asked to accept the judgment of
that particular paper. The judgment we ask you to accept is
the judgment of yoar freely-elected representatives, many of
them with many years of experience of government, acting, I
repeat, on the best advice they can secure and the best
information they can obtain, and they being in a better position
than anybody else in this country to secure that advice and to
obtain that information.
Now we in Australia have remained secure. Secure far
more so than most other countries of the world because of the
alliances to which we are a party. We entered, some years ago,
into an alliance we and New Zealand with the United States
of America. It is a mutual pact against aggression on any one
of us, and so long as that pact endures, Australia enjoys the
guarantee of its security against attack by the forces and
strength of the mightiest power in the history of mankind.
And when we know this, and we know that the issue
which the Americans are facing in South Viet Nam is an issuie
which involves Australia even more immediately and directly than
the United States of America itself which isn't under the same
physical threat that we would be, then I wonder what our critics
have in mind as an alternative policy for this country. I have
yet to hear it. I have yet to hear a clear, coherent alternative
put to the policy being pursued by the government of this
country. And who do our noisy friends outside expect to do
the fighting for Australia? Do they want to fight to the last
Crop of American blood or do they expect Australia to carry its
own share of obligation in resisting these challenges which 
involve us as they involve our Allies in this great cause.
And I wouldI have very much mistaken the generation of young
Australians to which you belong if I concludeOd that this
generation had no wish to play its own part in the defence of
its own country andL for the common cause of freedom throughout
the world. But it was so unlike the generations of earlier
Australians who gave their service in meeting these challenges
that it wasn't prepared to face up to the obligations which
came to it in its own day and age. Well, I don't believe
that for a moment. I believe that this generation of young
Australians and I don't say this because I am at such a
gathering tonight; I have said it publicly on more than one
occasion I say that this generation, I believe, is the finest
generation this country has produced. You are a better
educated lot, you are a better trained lot, and in many respects,
despite current evidence to the contrary, I think you are a
better mannered lot than my own generation at the university.
But now, having just said something in outline of the
issue there, let me take up this matter for a few minutes, of
the National Service obligation. This country has fortunately
not found it necessary in the past to call on people conscripted
into service in time of war except, of course, for the limited
operation in the Second World War to a defined area around
Australia, and in both the other Services, in the Air Force and
the Navy, we have secured all the volunteers necessary. This
is rather contradictory to those who say that there can't be
very much interest in the issue facing the Government at this
time. Both these services are up to their complement, working
on a voluntary basis of enlistment.
Now with the Army, although the conditions of service
in the Army and the pay are by no means unattractive indeed
in the lower paid ranks of the Army I believe I am correct in
saying that the rates are the highest of any army in the world,
not excluding the United States of America and it is of interest
to know, and I report this to you, that our Army personnel have
been displaying a very high rate of re-engagement. They enlist
for six years and they have an option of re-engagement at the end
of that time, and 70 per cent. of those who have come to the end
of their period of service have offered to remain on on a reengagement.
So there is not a picture there of a people
dissatisfied with their lot or finding conditions outside so much
more attractive that they hasten to leave the Service. On the
contrary. But the Army I think very properly has insisted
on a very high standard of physical condition and mental capacity
on the part of those offering to join the Army, and you will have
heard of the very high rate of rejection, so that I think only
about one in five of those volunteering has actually been
enlisted and trained in the Army.
Now in order to maintain the strength in what is not an
expeditionary force in time of war in the sense we knew it in
World War I and II when people enlisted for the duration and had
no idea of how long they would be away for, and in the result were
away for four or five years at a time, many of them, the
obligation of National Service is clear and precise and its
termination is clearly known by the National Service trainee when
he is taken into the Army. on the expert advice of our Chief 
of Staf f of the Army, we were told at the time that this was
the oniy effective way in which we could get the numbers of men
of the right quality for our own regular army service. And the
Government took its decision very responsibly. We made its
implications quite clear.
When Mr. Calwell says now he wants a referendum on
this issue, he overlooks the fact that at the time the bill was
introduced into the Parliament, the conditions of service were
made amply clear, and so he said at the S-,-nate election which
followed, " We'll make that the issue of the election" 3 and the
election was largely fought around that particular issue. So
the Australian public has been well aware of what is involved
in this. But propaganda can create a quite misleading picture.
I heard over the news tonight for example that some 81,000
registrants were involved this year in the scheme. Nobody went
on to say that the total to be taken in to the Army from this
80,000-odd would be just over 8,000. In other words, one in
ten approximately of those of that particular age group, would
be finally taken into the ranks of the Army. Nobody went on
to say that so far as the obligation to serve in South Viet Nain
is involved, the total force to be sent is under 4,500. The
National Service component would be of the order of 30 per cent.
In other words, out of more than 80,000 young men of twenty at
this time, not more than about 1,350 would be in service in
South Viet Nain at any one time, and the period of service being
in total two years and the period of training occupying from six
to nine months, the tour of duty in South Viet Namn being limited
to one year, the National Servicemen there at any one time would
be of the order that I have mentioned, just about 1/ 60th or
1/ 70th part of the total of young men of that age group and a
period of service limited in the result to one year in that
particular theatre.
Now, nobody likes a policy of this kind, of course,
but having regard to the issues for one's own country, can it
be said that an Australian Government is placing an unduly heavy
burden for the security of the nation upon any particular
section of its citizens. However, that is our view of the
fairness of it and of the limitations of numbers and of period
of service imposed under the scheme and I hope that these facts
will remain clear in the minds at least of people like yourselves
when the propaganda and the emotion which will be such a feature
of the coming months has served to obscure in the minds of most
people just what is involved.
Now I really feel I should apologise to you for spending
so much time on these particular matters but they are of great
concern to your own generation and they are of tremendous public
interest to Australians as a whole, but that wasn't what I
expected I would be talking about to you when I first accepted
your invitation because I felt that here was an opportunity to
explore together for a few minutes the other directions in which
a young generation of Australians can these days make an
effective contribution to the national welfare and to the national
security because while we have been talking about the grimmer
side, the military side of facing the threats we see around us,
there is a positive side to the opportunities which lie ahead
in which an Australian nation can serve the area of which we are
a part, an area in which Australia is finding itself increasingly 
of growingT prestige and stature and of growing interest to the
countries around us. And this interest proceeds partly from
the fact that we have had to face up to a tough job of
development and most of the countries to our north are
themselves going through periods of development of their own
resources and struggling with the fundamentals of economic
organisation. Now they see here a country of less than 12
million people who have built up one of the highest standards
of living in the world, a country in which less than 12 million
people are developing a continent the size of the United States,
and they are turning to us for guidance in various ways. We
get a request for technicians and professional people in all
manner of fields. At one time we were asked to supply, for
example, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malaysia. We get
medical teams in the field, technicians going up to help with
agricultural ( next portion lost while tapes were being changed)
increasingly services by intelligent young Australian men
and women who are going into the public service of Papua and New
Guinea, helping to build the country up with standards of
education, help that will enable the people to lead civilised
lives in a modern well-organised community.
And so there are these fields of service open for the
young Australian. We are, as I have stressed, and is so evident
to you from your own studies, increasingly involved these days
in the affairs of Asia and we have to learn to live sensibly in
a friendly and helpful way with people who have different habits
of life from ourselves, different attitudes, different religious
faiths, people who in some ways are very unlike us but in other
ways share with us the great objectives in terms of human
principle that we have established here in our own country, and
so here in our own day anO generation, we face our own particular
challenge. In my day, we looked to the United Kingdom and the
strength of the British Navy. People thought in terms of the
British Isles as home. Here, while our affection remains from
the lands of our kith and our kin for most of us that has been
the situation we have now realised that Australia has a
national independent entity of its own and that Australia faces
problems and has obligations which are quite unlike anything
the earlier generations of Australians had to meet. And so
we can't offer you a tremendous amount by way of guidance because
a precedent hasn't been able to serve us for the kind of
situations we now face. But what we and I speak now for the
older generation of Australians do offer to you is a comradeship
together as we face the difficulties and at the same time the
fantastic possibilities that we see ahead of a growing nation.
Over the next ten years, there will be vast mineral
projects opened up on this continent that will focus the
attention of the world on what is going on in Australia. We
have a vast treasure store of basic minerals in quantity excelling
that certainly of most other countries and in some instances
ranking among the highest sources of supply in the world our
bauxite, our iron ore, which up to a few years ago were not even
known to us for their existence. And as these things open up,
as our own great resources expand, we in Australia will be 
sharing in the growth of a nation assuming an increasingly
important part in the affairs of the world. Even today we
have an influence out of all relationship to our numbers and
our material strength. We can take pride in that. It is an
inheritance that the service of Australians i'ho have gone
before us have built for our enjoyment and for our strength and
you in turn must accept the obligations as you accept the
opportunities of this wonderful country in which we live.
I would hope from time to time to be able to follow
the development of the work of this organisation but at least
your objectives commend themselves so highly to us that you have
the warmest good wishes of the members of my own Government for
your future success, and we hope from this Foundation there will
be a growing body of responsible Australian men and women able
to play an increasing part in the various fields of national
leadership, in the politics of the nation, in the professions,
in the public service and in the economic and community life
of Australia. It is to the people that you represent here
tonight that we look to carry on the tasks and the opportunities
which open up such a great and promising vista for all of us to
enjoy together the privilege of Australian nationhood. 



FOR PRESS lctl
. M A6' 9' 25 1966
RURAL CREDIT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister announced tonight that as
foreshadowed in his statement to the House of Representatives
on 8th March he, the Minister for Trade and Industry and the
Treasurer heid discussions today with the General Managers of
the major trading banks and the Governor of the Reserve Bank on
proposals for new and extended farm loan facilities.
The main proposals put forward by the Government
were That a new system of Farm Loan Funds should be
established for the financing of farm development.
There would be an initial transfer of $ 50 million
to these Funds, part from Statutory Reserve
Deposits of the trading banks with the Reserve Bank
and part from the resources of the trading banks
as uider the existing Term Loan scheme. The
purposesof the Farm Loan Funds would be to provide
loans on longer terms than are now available under
the Term Loan Scheme for development of both new and
existing rural properties and loans for drought
rehabilitation and mitigation measures and the
gcneral enhancement of farm productivity;
That the existint Term Loan Funds would be increased
by a transfer oT 20 million part from the Statutory
Reserve Deposits and part from trading bank funds.
bIet mwaadse enfrvoims agtehde set haFtu ndrsu raoln tlhoea nss awmeo ulbda sicso ntaisnue to
previously, for periods generally of three
to eight years and that over a period, much the
same proportion of the term Loan Funds would be
used or rural purposes as hitherto;
That trading banks lending on overdraft to rural
borrowers would not be di ed on account of the
new arrangements which would thus represent a net
addition To the finance available for rural purposes;
That releases from the Statutory Reserve Deposits of
the trading banks for the above purposes should be
without prejudice to the normal administration of
the S. R. D. system from time to time for liquidity
purposes. It was proposed that the rates of interest on loans
from the new Farm Loan Funds would maintain the preference
already extended to primary producers and would fall within the
range of rates currently charged to primary producers on
overdraft loans. Representatives of the trading banks expressed
themselves as being generally in full agreement with these
proposals. Further discussion on details will, however be
held between the Reserve Bank and the trading banks. It is
expected that announcement of full details of the new arrangements
as agreed will be made at an early date. ./ 2 
2
Mr. Holt added that he regarded the outcome as
a very successful result and entirely in keeping with the
objectives he had announced in the H-buse on this matter as
representing Government policy. Members of the Government
are very appreciative of the helpful _ and constructive
contribution representatives of the banks made to the
discussion.
CANBERRA, 17th March, 1966 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT:
REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RADIATION
ADVISORY COMMITTEE NOVEMBER 1965
I lay on the table of the House the Report dated
November, 1965 of the National Radiation Advisory Committee.
In pursuance of its function of advising the
Commonwealth Government, through the Prime Minister, on
matters concerning the effects of ionizing radiation on the
Australian community, the N. R. A. C. reviewed during 1965 those
matters studied by the Committee since it presented its
previous Report in July, 1962.
In its present Report the Committee has concentrated
its attention on fallout from nuclear tests. An assessment
is made of the possible effects on health in Australia of
fallout from all tests conducted to date. Proposals by France
to conduct weapons tests in the South Pacific Ocean in the near
future have also been considered and possible effects on health
in Australia evaluated.
On the question of hazards arising from those tests
already conducted, fallout monitoring programmes have continued
over the Australian continent since the Committee's last Report
in 1962, and the Committee has accordingly had at its disposal
a most extensive body of data on the levels of fallout radioactivity
in Australia. The Report presents these facts lucidly
and in lay language. Appendices to the Report give the detailed
technical information. Having reviewed all of the information
available to it, the Committee sees no reason to amend its
previous conclusion that there is no significant hazard to the
2 
e-2
health of the Australian population now or in the future as a
result of past nuclear tests.
The French Government will probably commence later this
year the testing of nuclear weapons on a site being established
for this purpose in the South Pacific Ocean, some 4,000 miles
east of Australia. It is expected that at first the tests will
involve only low yield nuclear weapons but later megaton weapons
will be included. In assessing the possible position in Australia
the Committee had available an analysis of the problem prepared by
the Atomic Weapons Tests Safety Committee. The National Radiation
Advisory Committee is satisfied that the proposed weapons tests
are unlikely to lead to a significant health hazard in Australia.
I might add that this assessment is supported by the
report received from Professor E. W. Titterton and Mr. J. R. Moroney
of their discussions with the French authorities in Paris last
December in regard to the safety measures being undertaken by the
French. The major programmes for monitoring fallout in Australia
are carried out under the direction of the Atomic Weapons Tests
Safety Committee; much of this work features in the Report now
before you. The National Radiation Advisory Committee, being
familiar with these current programmes and also with those to be
implemented in relation to the proposed French tests, believes
that they are adequate to provide for thorough assessment of the
situation in Australia. The measurement and analysis which must
be made to provide reliable information on these low levels of
radioactivity is an exacting and slow process and, obviously, we
cannot expect useful statements of fallout levels to be made on a
day-to-day basis. However Honourable Members can be assured that
adequate monitoring programmes will be implemented on a continuing
basis to keep a check on the level of radioactive fallout following
future tests.
CANBERRA 17th March. 1966. 



66/ 028
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 26/ 1966
ROYAL VISIT
EXCHANGE OF MESSAGES WITH QUEEN MOTHER
The following is an exchange of messages between
the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, and Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth The Queen Mother prior to Her Majesty's departure
from London for Australia on Friday, 18th March
From the Prime Minister to Her Majesty
" I send to your Majesty greetings on
behalf of the Government and people. We are looking
forward to your visit and hope your journey will be
happy and comfortable."
From Her Majesty to the Prime Minister-
" Thank you for your kind message which I
deeply appreciate. I am eagerly looking forward to my visit
and it will be a source of &amp; real happiness to me to
be in Australia once again.
CANBERRA, March, 1966 



66/ 027
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 28/ 1966
DEAT! 11 OF SIR DALLAS BROOKS
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I am deeply saddened to learn of the passing
of Sir Dallas Brooks, He was one of the most popular and most able
Governors to serve in Australia and endaeared himself to
the people of Victoria during what became a record period of
office. Indeed, he could be said to have established
a new concept of his office carin his activities through
all sections of the community an maing all feel his friend.
The Commonwealth has special cause for
appreciation of Sir Dallas' public service. He on fo ur
occasions served with distinction as Administrator of the
Commonwvealth. In all he did he was most effectively assisted
by his gracious and charming wife, Lady Brooks who firmly
established her own high place in the affection of the people
of Victoria. Sir Dallas was a man of broad views and wide
interests. He was stirred by his vision of Australia's
future greatness and when he finally retired, he made Australia
his permanent home. Mrs. Holt and I have lost a very dear friend
and we offer our profound sympathy to Lady Brooks and her
family. CANBERRA, 22nd March, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 21/ 1966
GOVERNMENT PARTIES UNANIMOUS
ON VIETNAM POLICY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Government Parties devoted a major part of their
available time at their regular Joint Party Meeting today to a
discussion of criticisms by Australian Labour Party Members and
others of Australian participation in military activities in
South Vietiam and the inclusion of national service troops in
the milita1y task force to be despatched to that country.
I was requcsted by the meeting to state publicly that
members of the Government Parties had re-affirmed their
unanimous support for the decisions of the Government both on
the desirabi hty of Australia's continued assistance to South
Vietnam in its resistance to Communist aggression and the
necessity for the inclusion of national servicemen in regular
Army units to provide the most effective military force as
required in Vietnam and elsewhere.
CANBERRA March, 1966. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH
The Rt. Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.
ON
GOVERNMENT POLICY
Ministerial Statement
[ From the Parliamentary Debates," 24th March 1966]
Mr. HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister Speaker, the Leader
of the Opposition ( Mr. Caiwell) has proposed
an amendment to the motion that the
paper -that I presented to the House on 8th
March be printed, that motion providing
an opportunity for honorable members to
debate my statement. It is one of the major
ironies of Australian politics that the
amendment, which is claimed to be virtually
a motion of no confidence, has been submitted
by a leader who is unsure of his
leadership of his party and, indeed, unsure
of the deputy leadership of his party, to
say nothing of his party's policies. He is
* certain of only one thing-that each member
of his party must toe the line of dictation
from its. outside organisation or face
expulsion from the party. This, Sir, is the
alternative government that the Australian
Labour Party offers to the Australian
people. However, I do not intend tonight to
engage in a lengthy political argument with
honorable gentlemen opposite. I have more
important business to attend to in the
limited time available to me and there will
be other opportunities for these issues to
be thrashed out between us.
The amendment proporsed by the Leader
of the Opposition challenges a major aspect
of the Government's financial policy and
3 672/ 66 military strategy. He has attacked a vital
aspect of the measures designed to maintain
our military forces at the desired level
and at their highest degree of effectiveness.
The gulf that lies between the Government
and the Opposition in these matters has
been clearly revealed and the Parliament
has very properly been concentrating its
attention on this division over what becomes
for governments and parliaments the most
important subject that they have to discuss
-the security of the nation. There is a
clear choice between what the Government
has decided and what the Opposition proposes.
These matters have been vigorously
debated. The Government and its supporters
hold firmly to their view of the necessities
of the situation. Indeed, as recently as
yesterday Government supporters in both
Government parties and in both Houses of
the Parliament requested me to say publicly
on their behalf that they unanimously support
the Government in its policies in relation
to both South Vietnam and the use of
national servicemen. The Opposition persists
with its resistance to the point at which
it describes these issues as being appropriate
for determination at a general election. Sir,
the Government accepts full and final responsibility
for its decisions and will be
answerable for them. It is confident that as 
the public becomes fully informed about
what is involved in these issues the people
will give strong backing to it.
One thing that should be noted is that
the Government, while it has final responsibility,
has acted after seeking the best
advice available to it from its own defence
advisers and on information that it has obtained
from allied and other friendly governments.
This Government takes its decisions
on defence against the background
of advice from competent and experienced
officers, both Service and civil. I should
like to make it clear that the Government
does -not act in a vacuum or on impulse
or for some political purpose. The first concern
of any Australian government must be
the security of this country, and procedures
have been established to assist the
Government in arriving at sound decisions
in this vital area of policy. The Government
works on the basis of long range
strategic appreciations submitted to it by
its professional advisers in the fields of external
affairs and strategic, military and economic
matters. This advice is channelled
to the Government through two principal
bodies. There is the Defence Committee
under the chairmanship of the Secretary of
the Department of Defence. It is composed
of the Chiefs of Staff and the Permanent
Heads of the Departments of Defence and
External Affairs, -the Prime Minister's Department
and the Treasury. This Committee
deals with questions involving the widest
issues of defence policy. For professional
military advice, the Government looks to
the Chiefs of Staff Committee, which is
composed of the Chairman of the Chiefs
of Staff and the heads of the three Services.
The strateg'ic appreciations placed before
the Government take into account future
trends in the international situa-tion, the
assessment of possible threats to our security,
and contingency plans developed in
consultation with our allies. A great range of
information is available to the Government
from our own and allied sources, though
naturally this cannot all be made public.
There is an analysis of this as it bears on
the problems of Australia's security, and
conclusions are placed before the Government
by men of experience and judgment.
This is something which proceeds on a continuing
basis, for we do not get our advice from a Federal executive outside this
Parliament. We get ours from the Government's
official advisers. By a systematic
process of discerning the fundamental issues
that determine our security, we project our
thinking forward as far as is reasonably
possible. The decisions on defence, I repeat,
are decisions of the Government. But in
arriving at those decisions, the Government
takes into account the* considered conclusions
of its professional advisers in all
the relevant fields.
The fundamental difference between the
attitude of the Government and its supporters
and the attitude of Opposition members
is that we see the events in South Vietnam
against the historical background of postwar
Communist aggression. It seems to us
utterly lacking in realism to ignore the part
that Russian and Chinese Communism has
played in the encouragement of aggression
in South Vietnam and the material assistance
given by the Russian and Chinese Governments
to the Communist Government of
North Vietnam. The members of the Vietcoyng
have taken their direction from Hanoi.
It is only by ignoring the role of Communism
in the postwar ideological contest
that the Leader of the Opposition and his
supporters can have come to the hopelessly
unrealistic conclusion that this is merely a
civil war and that we should let the Vietnamese,
North and South, sort out the
situation for themselves. It should be noted
that of the four political parties represented
in, the National Parliament, three-the
Liberal Party of Australia, the Australian
Country Party and the Australian Democratic
Labour Party-L-take the same view
of events in South-' Vietnam and of their
significance. The view of the Commonwealth
Government is in accord with that
held by three successive Presidents of the
United States of America-first, President
Eisenhower and President Kennedy and
now President Johnson. On the benches
opposite we have representatives of the one
party that challenges the judgment of the
country's expert advisers and of these three
friendly Presidents of our great ally, the
United States.
South Korea, which was itself so recently
threatened by Chinese Communist aggression,
is supplying in South Vietnam forces
which, proportionate to its population, represent
the same scale of assistance as is 
being given by those of the United States.
Australia is helping the free Government
and people of the Republic of South Vietnam
to defend their freedom and independence
against an attack directed and in
large part supplied from North Vietnam.
We are helping to prevent the success of
Communist aggression. If honorable members
opposite want any further proof that
this aggre ' ssion is Communist directed, Sir,
let them examine the findings of the Legal
Committee of the International Commission
for Supervision and Control which was
established to supervise the observance of
the Vietnam ceasefire of 1954. The Commission
is composed of Indian, Polish and
Canadian members. The Legal Committee,
with Pnland objecting, reported in 1962-
There is evidence to show that arms, munitions
and other supplies have been sent from the zone
in the north to the zone in the south with the
objective of supporting, organising and carrying
out hostile activities, including armed attacks,
against the armed forces and administration of
the zone in the south.
One could quote at length the findings
of this Committee firmly establishing intervention
from the North. In the three year
period from 1959 to 1961, the North Vietnam
regime infiltrated 10,000 men into the
South. In 1962, 13,000 additional personnel
were infiltrated and by the end of 1964,
North Vietnam may well have moved over
40,000 armed and unarmed guerrillas into
South Vietnam. Most recently, Hanoi has
begun to infiltrate elements of the North
Vietnamese Army in increasingly large
numbers. Up to the end of January 1966,
t there was evidence that nine regiments of
regular North Vietnamese forces were fighting
in organised -units in the South. This is
the civil war that -honorable gentlemen opposite
persist in proclaiming it to be.
In the long run, the threat to South Vietnam
is a direct threat to Australia. That is
the view of this Government. We are much
more dangerously placed than is the United
States of America. The previous Prime
Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, announcing
in Parliament on 29th April 1965 the decision
to send the 1st Battalion to Vietnam
said-The takeover of South Vietnam would be a
direct military threat to Australia and to the
countries of South and South East Asia. It must
be seen as a part of a thrust by Communist China
between the Indian and Pacific Oceans. Yet honorable gentlemen opposite continue
to deny that this is the situation in
that part of the world.
Mr. Calwell.-We do.
Mr. SPEAKER.-Order! A number of
honorable members persist in loudly interjecting.
I remind the House that the Prime
Minister is limited to 20 minutes. The
challenger was unlimited. I ask honorable
members to observe the Standing Orders. If
they do not do so, I shall have to deal with
them. Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-We cannot leave
the containment of aggressive Communism
in Asia to our allies and their national
servicemen. The United States has made a
sustained, firm and large commitment to
the South Vietnamese Government and
people. As leaders of our own Government
have said previously our stake in preserving
the security of South East Asia is at least as
great as that of the United States. It would
be outside the character of the Australian
people to leave the fighting to the Americans
in what we know are also our interests and
our causes.
It is within our capacity to make the
enlarged contribution which we have
offered. The Army forces to be deployed to
South Vietnam will constitute approximately
10 per cent., in terms of personnel
numbers, of the strength of 40,000, to which
it has been approved the Army is to rise
by 1967. The Government's enlarged
contribution to South Vietnam has been
measured against all our other commitments
including those to Malaysia and Singapore.
It has been of great value and reassurance
to us to know of the United Kingdom's
declared intention to maintain a strong
military presence in this area. The deployments
to South Vietnam are also, of course,
fully consistent with our obligations and
requirements to retain adequate forces for
the defence of Australia and its Territories,
including Papua and New Guinea.
Now, Sir, I turn to the question of the
introduction of national service. The
Menzies Government conducted a review of
Australia's defence position in 1964 against
a background of an accelerated deterioration
in the strategic situation in South East Asia.
China had committed open aggression 
against India. North Vietnam, with the
encouragement of China, had increased its
terrorist and insurgency campaign against
South Vietnam. Communist armed activity
continued in Laos. There was a resurgence
of Communist terrorism in northern Malaya,
and Indonesia had stepped up its armed
confrontation of Malaysia.
In his report to the Parliament on 10th
November 1964, the then Prime Minister,
Sir Robert Menzies, pointed out that Indonesian
attacks against Malaysia could create
a real risk of war, and that Australia must
prepare for all eventualities including the
control and, if necessary, defence of the
frontier between West New Guinea and the
Territory of Papua and New Guinea. Our
defence review showed clearly that the
likely military situations Australia must be
prepared to face had increased in number
and complexity. Does anybody opposite
deny that? It was apparent that the tasks
already entered upon must be maintained
and that ' a rapid buildup of ground forces
would be required to enable this to be done
and to prepare against further possible
contingencies including an increase in cold
war commitments; meeting agreed commitments
under collective security agreements
if called upon; providing bilateral assistance
to our allies if required at short notice;
increased provision for the defence of Australia
and her Territories; and the development
of forces against a further erosion of
the strategic situation in South East Asia
and as a basis for rapid expansion in the
event of war.
The Regular Army strength at the time
was 22,750. The assessment by the Chiefs
of Staff Committee of the actual, foreseeable
and contingency tasks showed that an
effective Army strength of 33,000 was required
by the end of 1966. All practicable
steps were taken -to attract an increase in
volunteers for the Regular Army. Pay was
increased, conditions of service were improved,
quarters were modernised, the number
of married quarters was increased,
amenities were improved, the retirement
benefits scheme was streamlined and an
intensive recruiting campaign was undertaken.
These measures produced some
additional recruits. It became evident, however,
that in a time of great prosperity with
over full employment and intense competition for young men, it was not possible
to obtain the necessary increase in effective
strength within the time required. A survey
of recruiting trends showed that some 3,000
volunteers would be recruited each year for
the Army. Allowing for wastage as members
completed their engagements and return
to civil life, the net increase in strength
would be only of the order of 750 a year.
To obtain an increase of some 10,000 in
strength in two years, there was no alternative
to the introduction of selective national
service. No party in this place has a monopoly
of concern for the young manhood of Australia
and it is an unwarranted presumption
on the part of any member of Parliament
to claim it. But this Government has concern
for the national security of Australia
and when our security, on the advice of expert
advisers, had to be supported in the
way we have been told as tor the numbers
required, we faced quite realistically and
firmly in the national interest the harsh
decision which then lay ahead of us. We
have an illustration of how the Opposition
would have met that kind of challenge. Our
national security produced the need for a
national service scheme and, accepting that
need, what fairer or more democratic
method of selection could be devised?
Mr. Calwell.-The lottery of death.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-That is the way
the Leader of the Opposition distorts the
sitbation. He is running true to form
because when his own former leader introduced
in a time of national peril a scheme
to call up young men in th-is country for
national service, he opposed it. The honorable
gentleman resisted it and he is running
true to form again. The honorable gentleman
cannot get his mind on economic
matters away from the depression years of
the 1930' s. On the defence matters, he cannot
get his mind outside the conscription
issues of 1916 and 1917. What Australia
needs is a government which faces * up to
the reality that here we have a country
which is expected to shoulder its own share
of obligations. With maturing nationhood, it
is proud to take its share of that responsibility.
I say -that, sure as I1a m that the young
manhood of Australia will accept its obl-igations
with pride and will serve Australia
with credit. 
I am glad to be able to tell the House
that in the course of the next month, as I
indicated in my statement, I shall be visiting
our troops in a number of their stations
abroad. I am quite certain that when I
come back to this Parliament it will be
with a heartening recognition that this young
Australian battalion which has served us
with such distinction in Vietnam, and our
troops in Thailand, in Malaysia and in
Borneo, are helping to discharge the
national obligations of a country which can stand before the rest of the world proudly,
knowing that it has faced up to the need
to maintain the eternal vigilance that is
necessary for the preservation of freedom
throughout this troubled world.
We shall not be deterred from that course
by the threats of the Opposition. We are
confident that once the Australian people
know the realities of the situation they have
to face they will support this Government
and they will support Australia's young
manhood in the testing time that lies ahead.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA.
3762/ 66.-2 



PRESS, RADIO AND TELEVISION CONFERENCE GIVEN
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT, AT
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HOTEL, ADELIDE, S. A. MARCH. 1966
MR. HOLT WWe ll, Nancy and gentlemen I am already heartened to
find my very dear colleague here with me; I welcome her in her
new capacity, but I ho e she won't be long separated from us.
And I see some other od friends in Stewart and some of you that
I think I have encountered in the course of campaigning or
Treasury operations or something of that sort. But I didn't
come here equiped to make any Iong nation-shaking utterance.
I did want to take this opportunity quite early in my own Prime
Ministership, of meeting representatives of the Press from South
Australia, and while here give you the opportunity if you
choose to exercise it of putting anj questions you may wish
to me about current affairs. But I think rather than spend
a great deal of time on matters which may not be of interest
to you, I could leave the time to you, hoping there will be
enough left from the two of us to enable mento partake of the
refreshments with you.
I may say that this is The first time that I have been
to one of your Adelaide Festivals. Mrs. Holt and I are greatly
loxKing forward to the remainder of the programme which we have
before us. But I do regard it as a very happy circumstance that
the visit enabled me to be at the very impressive opening this
afternoon of Flinders University. Our own Government, as you
know, he. s taken a very great interest. and my predecessor made
it one of his prime concerns and personal interests to advance
the university expansion programme throughout Australia, and I
know it would have given him very great personal pleasure to
be here today and see this wonderful example of the fruits of
that policy of expansion.
Now, there must be some questions bubbling up in your
minds, so it is over to you.
Q. ( Cockburn of the " Advertiser") Mr. Holt, you are reported as
saying today that when the Government has full explained its
reasons for its conscription policy for Viet am you are
confident that the country will be behind you. Can you tell us
why you haven't found it possible to disclose these reasons
alrealy?
MR. HOLT Well, I wasn't speaking of reasons in the sense of the
broad purposes of policy. This has been done, of course, mnst
admirably first by Sir Robert when he introduced the legislation
relating to the National Service call-up, and of course in
relatioñ to South Viet Nam itself, there have been statements of
Government policy on that for many years since the situation
worsened so seriously there. But iwas thinking in particular
of the operatinnal service aspect and my interview was taking
place in the open air after an aeroplane flight. I wouldn't
regard it as iny lack of competence on anyone's part, including
myown, if the language emerged as a rather loose statement of
what I was trying to put. But I think I can explain it perhaps
clearly enough to you here. We have explained, in considerable
dReetgauilla, r tAhrem yn, e aendd foIr wial ln agtoi oonvaelr setrhvait ceg rOcuonmdp onaegnatin wfiotrh ytohue in
some detail if you would wish me to refresh your minds on it. s / 2 
2
MR. HOLT ( Contd.) I don't think it is so widely known to members of
the general public and I don't think we are-bgin arcisted in
making the need, the purposes, and indeed the limits of tne
National Service participation, known to the publio by the campaign
which is based on an apoeal to emotions even stirring the feelings,
or running the danger of stirring some feelings of hysteria from
the manner in which the Opposition has commented on these matters.
It will have been noted that there has been no practical
alternative proposed by the Opposition even suggestion that
we might have offered more attractive terms to people in the
hope that they might volunteer can be of course answered by the
facts of what we aid. We did offer the most attractive terms
I think I am correct in saying that in the lower ranks of the
Australian Regular Army, our servicemen are the highest paid in
that ranking of any army in the world.
Q. Nevertheless, Sir, do you feel worried about the extent to
which the Australian public" are not adequately informed and are
not responding in perhaps the way you might wish. This new
dimension of our commitment..........
MR. HOLT Well, when you say am I worried, I am naturally concerned.
I am not lacking in faith and optimism that when the facts and
the need and the limits of what is proposed are carefully
explained in the detail that will be necessary and perhaps on the
occasions in number that will be necessary, there will be the
kind of response from the Australian people that will be consistent
with the responsibility that they have shown in these matters in
the past. We have never been an isolationist people. We have
recognised that our responsibilities in protecting freedom extend
beyond our own shores, and indeed it is preferable to meet the
challenge beyond our own shores if this can be done, but if I may
gn to this degree of explanation I think that too many people
see what is ahead in the terms of two world wars when Australia
called for volunteers for expeditionary forces that were away
from this country for long years in the period or in the course
of that service. Now, this is a very different situation that Australia
faces today. We have a Regular Army with tasks allotted to it to
meet the commitments, the obligations which Australia has undertaken.
We have become an adult nation. We can't rest comfortably
with the protection of the British Navy which we enjoyed about the
period of the First Wcrld War, or Just look to an automatic
response say from the Seventh Fleet of the United States if we
get into any trouble at any time. We can lonk confidently to
the support of the United States of America, our tested ally
bound to us by treaty in ANZUS and SEATO, but those treaties
carry obligations for us as well as for our Allies, and I would
not resgrd the response that we are making in South Viet Nam as
excessive, having regard to our treaty alliances.
Q. ( Scales of the " Advertiser") Mr. Holt, do you consider that
South Australian representation in Cabinet or the Ministry is
sufficient to safeguard its interests? There is no representation
in Cabinet and only one in the Ministry.
MR. HOLT: Well, this is so and it is a matter for regret fir me as
I am sure it is for South Australia, but while we do attempt to
arrange the representation in the Cabinet on a basis which will
secure some representation in each of the States, we also have to
have regard to capacities and to the suitability of particular
persons for the posts that we have for assignment to them. If you
look a little more broadly at the matter South Australia with the
Speakership, the Deputy Whipship and a place in the Ministry,
isn't without representation at the official levels of the / 3 
-3-
MR. HOLT ( Contd.) Parliament. It so happens that at the moment you
don't have a-Member in the Cabinet. We would hpve liked to have
included one on the last occasion, but I am sure that Dr. Forbes
himself would not have that his own limited experience at that
point of time would have carried the day for him against the very
much more experienced members &amp; f the Ministry who are now in the
Cabinet. That is one reason in fact the principal reason why
I arranged for him to take up the portfolio of Health rather than
maintain that in the Army where he was doing a first-class job
was that as Minister for the Army he was very much the Junior
Minister operating under the general guidance of the Minister for
Defence who was a Cabinet Minister. As Minister for Health he
does have a domain of his own, and I am confident will show in that
portfolio the qualities which will warrant promotion for him when
opportunity offers later on.
Q. ( Mrs. Nancy Buttfield of 5DN) This morning, the Governor of the
Reserve Bank is reported to have said that the economy was nicely
balanced in the state of uncertainty. If you agree that uncertainty
is good for public confidence and therefore for the economy as a
whole, do you anticipate that more may need to be done to help the
economy other than what you have already done in extra money for
housing and extra money for drought and immigration?
MR. HOLT I am not sure what you have said puts quite fairly for
him what the Governor had in mind. As I tried to explain to someone
who put a similar question to me earlier if you think of a scale
in balance the needle can hover around the mark which says balance
and in that sense there is a little uncertainty if it hovers
backvards and forwards from that balance mark. And this is the
sense in which I am sure the Governor was using the term. In
other words, the economy at the moment was neither moving strongly
into inflation or moving strongly into recession. It was in a
state of balance with certain factors working through which could
affect the pace of growth. If we have good seasonal developments,
if there is finally a breaking of the drought on what looks like
being an enduring basis for at least some time in New South Wales
and Queensland, then there is enugh steam in the economy to move
steadily ahead. On the ether hand, if there are adverse developments,
then I think the Government which has really given stimulus
at various points its drought relief measures measures which
are small but of a useful kind in relation to housing these things
are just helping to keep the needle rather nicely balanced at the
desired point.
Q. ( Jeff Medwell of 5DN) Sume time ago, the A stralian Government
announced that it was sending more troops to South Viet Nam at the
request of the South Vietnamese Government. Just recently the South
Korean Governmean announced that it was sending more troops to
South Viet Nam in excnange for more economic aid from the United
States, and at the request of the United States. Can you explain
why one country sends troops at the request of America and the
other sends troops at the request of South Viet Nam?
MR. HOLT I wouldn't imagine for one moment that South Korea would
be sending troops unless it was with the approval, and I should
imagine at the request of, South Viet Nam. There is nothing
mysterious or unlikely about South Viet Nam which is so sorely
pressed it has over 300,00 of its own troops in the field
asking for help where help can be giv. n. These matters are handled
between governments on the basis of formality finally so that you
don't have people imposed on one government against the will of
that government. There was a clear understanding for some time
that South Viet Nam would welcome whatever help could be given.
Now, the South Koreans have every cause to be sensitive to pressures
from Chinese Communism. They were within an ace of being overrun
themselves. It was only by the most strenuous American resistance / 4 
4
MR. HOLT ( Contd2-Biñ b-them and very substantialAmer-ican support-4That
South Korea was held from a takeover by Communist China. I think
that this is one of the influences affecting the decision of the
Government of South Korea. It may well be that such decision
imposed economic stresses on the Government of that country or
the financing of the operation of their own troops imposed
stresses on it. They might well have turned to the United States
and said, " Will you help us economically if we are going to accept
these burdens?" But I don't think I read too much significance
into the fact that, on the face of it, we met a request, and on the
face of it they supplied the troops apparently without a request.
I am sure there would have been a continuing request which, in
effect, is what we already have.
Q. Mr. Holt what has to ha pen in South Viet Nam or in the
vicinity of South iet Nam before the United Nations steps in?
MR. HOLT I would of course, be very glad to see the United Nations
step in, if it did so in a purposeful and effective way. It did
so in the case of South Korea, but perhaps the issues are not so
clear-cut in the minds of some members of the United Nations at
this time. I think we must all recognise the political significance
of the development of an Afro-Asian Bloc in which Chinese
Commnist leadership played a very large part, and undoubtedly
there are many members of the United Nations in that bloc who
would not give support to any nation which seemed to be directed
against Communist China. And I think this is the principal
inhibiting factor. One other is, I think, the preoccupation of
the countries of Western Europe with the problems of Europe.
I had a European diplomat put it to me quite bluntly. He said
" You won't get the Western European countries at this time thinking
of South East Asia. They are all too much concerned with trying
to hang on te a species of unity in Europe."
Q. ( Stewart Cockburn) Even those, Sir, who are members of SEATO?
Because Britain and France would have similar obligations to those
of Australia under the provisions of the SEATO treaty.
MR. HOLT The United Kingdom, of course, has been conducting its
own recent Defence Review, ancepting obligations in relation to
the Indonesian confrontation of Malaysia which have required a
very lare build-up of British Forces in the area far larger than
they would intend t maintain subsequently in that area so I
think they feel they are making their valuable cortribution.
The Americans are doing a big jrb in South Viet Nam.
Q. The reason why I ask the guestion is that you are today
reported as saying that the United States and other SEATO nations
would probably consider it a serious disregard of our obligations
if we were not actively participating in South Viet Nam. I am
wondering how the fact that Britain and France are not actually
participating as strongly as we are is explained?
MR. HOLT Well, I repeat that the Americans know that the United
Kingdom in addition et the obligations it has in NATO has assumed
very substantial obligations in the Malaysian area and, of course,
the United Kingdom doesn't possess these days the economic
strength, particularly in relation to external capacity that it
had in an earlier point of time. I don't think that the Americans
would feel that Britain wasn't playing a considerable and
appropriate part where it is. But looking at the Australian
participation until we had made our recently announced decision,
the numbers of Australians outside this country were not so very
large and the contribution in that particular area was a
comparatively small one. A very good battalion, but just one
battalion. Se a 
Q. ( Brian Taylor, Channel 7) Mr. Prime Minister, it appears that
some people feel very strongly about the lack of information on
the Viet Nam issue, particularly in regard to our increased
commitments. If in yodr mind the situation does exist, has
anything been done to rectify it?
MR. HOLT Yes. It's not that there has been either lack of
action or lack of will to et the story over more widely, and
we have looked to the Parliament in recent days as one of the
mmst effective mediums for getting the Government's policy aid
intentions across but even there it is hard to cover the story
in the detail that you wish to do so in the time and the
opportunities available. I spent 20 minutes last night and
really didn't touch more than the fringe of the matter. I would
have liked to have explained the attempts being made to secure
volunteers the fact that in none of the last three years did we
have less than 9,000 volunteers coming forward in each of those
three years, and in each of those three years we did not find more
than 2,500 who measured up to the standards which the Army
required. Now, when it was decided that we had to increase our
force from say, 22,500 to 33,000 by 1967 to meet increasing
dangers and problems which were seen in the area, our military
advisers made it quite clear to us that you just couldn't get
those numbers by the normal voluntary process. It was not a
case of pay and conditions. Our re-engagement rate this is
not well-khown our re-engagement rate in the Army is at about
the highest level it has ever attained. Our re-engagement rate
is 70 per cent., and these are men who have done their full term
of service, not National Servicemen, but career Army men, and
peGple don t re-engage at that rate if pay and conditions aren't
atfractive to them. The rate has been as low as 40 per cent.
Seventy per cent. is a high rate. So it wasn't that. In a
fully employed society, you do find it difficult to attract young
men to a Regular Army career. The National Service scheme was
adopted as the fairest method. It only touches a fractional part
of that age group. Only one in ten of the age group is called
up and the pro ortion of those called up who wilI ever see service
outside of Ausralia will be a very small one. So it is a
relatively small proportion of that total age group.
Q. Getting back to my final question on Viet Nam, when
we were up there last year, we found that morale was very high.
The soldiers felt a certain disinterest from Australia, and they
were also ratler concerned about the anti-Viet Nam demonstrations.
Has that in any way prompted your forthcoming visit to Viet Nam
and other ports of call?
MR. HOLT Well it was frankly an influence in my decision to
go there. It so happens that the particular battalion which is
coming to the end of its tour of duty would be leaving that area
at no distant point of time, and I felt it appropriate that this
battalion which had brought such credit to Australia and distinetion
to itself should be thanked for its services if I could make the
visit in that time, as well, of course, familiarising me in my
present position as to conditions not only there but in several
other posts where our troops are. But I agree that morale has
been splendid and it is unfortunate that there should have been
doubts created in the minds of these men serving so ably there
that they didn't have wholeheartedly behind them the Parliament
and indeed the Australian people as a whole. But I am sure that
those who are serving do have-the gratitude and appreciation of
the Australian people and * ust as their morale is high, I am glad
to say that the morale of ? hose who have been called up that alse
is high. They are turning Put splendidly, and those that are
later to serve in reaudlar army units in any theatre of combat,
I am sure will acquit themselves as well as the regular army men
themselves. s / 6 
6
Q. ( Frank Kennedy of the " Advertiser") We gather that you are
interested in the Festival, Sir. Financial difficulties are
holding up the building of a much-needed Festival Hall. Would you
care ti tell us Sir what would be the attitude of your Government
to any request from the South Australian Government in this matter?
MR. HOLT Well, it would certainly, of course, be carefully
studied. Our interest has been shown in the general sphere of
cultural developments by the Elizabethan Theatre Trust contribution
and by the regular contribution we make to the Adelaide Festival.
We don't make it to all city festivals I might remind you. We
don't make a contribution, for example, t9 M" omba. We don't
believe it has attained quite the same cultural level as your own
and yet I think there was a request for assistance for the Waratah
Festival which also didn't attract Federal suppnrt. But I make
the point that we have not been lacking in sympathy. Whether this
is a matter which should more appropriately be financed by the
people of this State from their own resources, or whether it is
one which will justify some Commonwealth participation is a question
which I would like to look at with the necessary documentation in
front of me and some consideration of what we have found it fair
and proper to do in similar circumstances in other States.
Q. ( Len James of Radio 5AD) Mr. Prime Minister I would like to
make a point of reference concerning the United States radio
communication centre being built in Western Australia. I
understand that the American partner or one of the American subcontractors
has gone through the hoop and left quite a number of
private Australian concerns small ones and large ones with
debts owing to them of some few dollars to tens of thousands.
Does the Federal Government compensate these people or is the
Federal Government conversing with the United States Government
over these things?
MR. HOLT This matter has been looked at, I know, by Ministers
who have activities relarant to the episode to which you refer or
tj the events to which you refer. My colleague the Minister for
Defence has commented on it. He is very much better informed on
it than I am, but I understood his general view to be that when one
took into account the circumstances cf the notification of people
concerned in these matters that they have embarked on what might
be fairly re! arded as commercial risk and they could hardly expect
the general body of taxpayers to carry the consequences of their
own lack of provision or care in the matter. That is putting it
as I understand it from what I have heard and read but how far
this matter is still before us is something I couldn't just answer
off the cuff.
Q. South Australia has been asking for financial assistance
for beef roads in the State's North. Is there any plan by the
Commonwealth Government to supply financial assistance to cover
freight costs for restocking the North?
MR. HOLT You mean in relation to the drought? They are two
separate matters really. On the first one I would regard this
myself as not being finally dealt with. There has been a request
in earlier but the higher priority in what was not an unlimited
provision of funds for beef road purposes has gone to roads further
to the north, running across the top of Australia in Western
Australia, the Northern Territory and Queensland. But the Premier
does not regard it as a closed matter. I doubt whether the
Leader of the Opposition would see it as a closed matter. For
my part, I still regard it as under active consideration. I am
sure we will be hearing something more about it, seein there is
a Loan Council meeting in June if not before then. It may be that
we will find it more appropriate to deal with it then than at this / 7 
-7-
MR. HOLT ( Contd.) point of time. On the second point, I have
received a request. I did not actually see it but that might have
been because I was preoccupied with other matters until last
night. I do regard it as a matter which needs to be looked
at quite urgently and I hope to get reply tc the Premier early
next week. That s on the arought and freight assistance.
Q. During your arrival at the Adelaide airport you must
have found it uncomfortably crbwded because I don't think it
is possible for a plane to come in and not have that effect.
Do you think that you could think very seriously in the future of
giving us added facilities at our Adelaide airport.
MR. HOLT Well, again I think I would like notice of that one
because I am not sufficiently well informed. I must say that
when one looks at the Canberra facilities I think they rank
about the bottom of any city which lays claim to that sert of
title. I used to feel badly about it until having travelled
overseas and being compelled to carry my bag through long
interminable passages in these great glittering airports of
other countries, I felt a little more kindly disposed to our
more accessible terminals here. But all I know is that my
colleague the Minister for Civil Aviation puts up a very costly
programme of civil aviation works and I am sure that Adelaide
would be justly dealt with by him out of those funds, but I
can't say from my own knowledge much about it.
Q. ( Ron Boath, Southern Cross newspaper) Does the Federal
Government plan any extension for aid to independent schools?
MR. HOLT You mean additional to the provision that has been
made? The origin of this matter I think, is well known. In
Canberra we tock action to assist the schools there which were
coping with a quite abnormal situation, and from that beginning
we have extended our assistance in a manner which you were
well aware of at the time of the last general election. But
I am not aware of any proposal currently before us for any
extension. I will be surprised if we didn t receive requests
for further extensions, but it is customary to deal with these
at Budget time, sometimes even at election times.
Q. ( Jeff Medwell) Do you believe that the new Indonesian
anti-communist regime will result in a lessening of its
confrontation policy in Malaysia?
MR. HOLT Now, are we on the record or are we off it?
Q. I think so, Sir.
MR. HOLT Well, I prefer not to say too much about that matter
because noreof us can be sure at the moment what attitude will
emerge from this regime but I amqiite certain that it would
not e very helpful to that regime for it to be felt inside
Indonesia that this regime was going to abandon the confrontation
policy.
Q. ( Stewart Cockburn): Following up that question, Sir, is the
Minister for External Affairs likely to visit Indonesia and
take the opportunity to meet the new regime there and satisfy
himself of the probable policies of the new Government? 0 / e 
8
MR. HOLT What I have just said on the other matter has a
bearing n your question, too. There is virtue in a little
patience, I think, in this field. But as I indicated in the
House yesterday, we have maintained even through the difficult
confrontation period, a basis of friendship in our general
relations with Indonesia. de wish to live in cordiality, as
I said yesterday with them. certainly think that it is
unfortunate in their owm interests that a country with their
tremendous natural resources hasn't succeeded in building up a
considerable trade with not merely Australia but other
cimopunrotrveiemes nto f itnh et haatr ead, i raencdt ioinf, thiet wnoeuwl dr egbei mew elecfofmeec. t s sBoumte our
interest in Indonesia is not primarily a commercial interest,
and it is the interest that one neighbour has for the other,
particularly when the other has a rather restless turbulent
population of 100 million people.
Q. ( Barry Tornquist of the " News") How do you enjoy life as
Prime Minister?
MR. HOLT: Well, I am enjoying it. I enjoyed life as
Treasurer. I enjoy it in most capacities, as I think my
friend Nancy would know. But I find it a very stimulating
occupation. I think my anly criticism of it is that it
doesn't leave me very much time to behave as a human being. 



PUBLIC MEETING,_ KOOYONG BY-ELECTION
KEW TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE 28TH MARCH 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I have heard a lot of people here tonight calling
out " Let's have a referendum" but you know they are the same
people who won't even let us have a meeting. There is not
much point in having a referendum if we can't have a meeting.
My purpose here tonight and I won't, of course, be
deterred from it by the noise of those who come here to break
up a meeting is to speak in support of our Liberal
candidate, Andrew Peacock, who has been selected by the
Liberal Party to succeed a very great Australian who represented
this electorate with great distinction for more than thirty
years. Kooyong has a reputation for returning to the Federal
Parliament very great men. You gave us Sir John Latham, who
proved to be one of the outstanding figures in the history of
our Federation. And then followed Sir Robert Menzies who
established an all-time record term of office as Prime Minister
of this coantry. And so when it came to find a worthy
successor to Sir Robert Menzies, the people of Kooyong, in a
democratic ballot, selected from those who were offering a
young man who had already established his political wisdom and
capacity to a point where at a comparatively early age he had
been selected as the State President of the Liberal Party in
Victoria. Now a young man who enjoys the confidence of his
fellow citizens and members of the same party sufficiently to
be selected as their State leader in what has been a stronghold
of Liberalism in Australia is a young man quite clearly who
possesses exceptional political qualities, and that is the
candidate that we are offering from the Liberal Party to the
electors of Kooyong on this occasion.
Now tonight, ladies and gentlemen and I am speaking
now not only to those of you in this hall but the many thousands
of you who are listening to the broadcast of tonight's
proce. edings the issue in this campaign is not whether you
have a change of government; this is a by-election but this
by-election provides not merely the opportunity to return a
very able man to the national Parliament but it does provide
an opportunity for an Australian electorate to offer a view on
what is clearly the most outstanding public issue of this time.
And the public issue can be divided into two parts for tonight's
purposes. One is whether Australia should or should not be in
South Viet Nam with troops, and a considerable section of
this audience, not all of whom I suspect come from Kooyong,
has indicated very clearly that they think Australia should
not be in South Viet Nam, and in adopting that view they are,
of course, echoing the view of the Australian Labor Party and
its Parliamentary representatives in Canberra. Well at least
then, we have that much established. Those who are making
the noise are supporters of the Australian Labor Party and they
oppose our being in Viet Nam. 
on the other hand, the other three parties
represented in the National Parliament the Liberal Party,
the Country Party and the Democratic Labor Party, all
believe that Australia should be represented in South
Viet Nam and should be engaged in assisting the communist
aggression which threatens the people of that country.
So here tonight we have a number of people, supporters of the
Labor Party, the one party represented in the National
Parliament which is opposed to Australia's participation in
South Viet Nam. Of course there is one party outside the
National Parliament, and I suspect that that party is well
represented here tonight also; that, of course, is the
Communist Party. It too believes that we should not be in
South Viet Nam.
And so, ladies and gentlemen, here is a national
line-up. Three political parties saying Australia should
be fighting communist aggression in South Viet Nam, and two
parties the Australian Labor Party and the Communist Party
saying that Australia should keep out of South Viet Nam.
All right, if that is one of the great national issues on
which the Labor Party wants to fight an election, then this
government accepts that challenge quite gladly.
Somebody says " What about a referendum?". Of
course this wasn't Mr. Calwell's story when we passed the
legislation. At the time when we passed the legislation on
National Service, the Labor Party then said that the forthcoming
Senate election was going to be the testing election of the
Government's policy on National Service, and that election
was held in 1964, and in only one State did the Labor Party
secure a majority of the votes on that occasion. And so,
having fought the Senate election of 1964 on this particular
issue, the Labor Party refuses to accept the verdict given
at that time. Well, then, let that be the case. For our
part, we welcome the fact that this campaign provides yet
another opportunity to examine I would have hoped to
examine calmly and carefully the issues which are involved
in this campaign, but unfortunately there are some who have
come here tonight determined to prevent a clear and coherent
account being given of what is involved. However, thanks
to these mechanical aids to good sense and to good government,
I shall be able to speak to many people outside this hall who
will only be affected to a minor degree by the species of
entertainment which have been provided around various sections
of this audience. Now Sir, Mr. Chairman, the reason why Australia is
represented in South Viet Nam is first because we and our
allies have resisted communist aggression wherever we have
found it. We resisted it in Berlin. we resisted it in the
threat from Cuba. We resisted it in Korea. We saved Taiwan
from being overrun by Chinese communists. And we have
resisted it now in South Viet Nam. We know fully well that
if Chinese communism succeeds in South Viet Nam, then Chinese
communism will spread unchecked through the mainland of
South East Asia and we can surrender the whole of this vital
area of the world to communist overlordship. 
3.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, this issue has been
clear enough to the Australian people f or a very long time
and they have given the Government staunch support in the
action which it has taken. The Government does not take
its action as if somehow the members of the Cabinet lived
in a vacuum. We act, not only on the soundest military
advice we can secure, we act on the advice and the
information reaching us from a wide variety of sources, from
our own diplomatic sources, from the governments of other
countries, from thB Defence Committee which includes in its
membership not merely the Chiefs of Staff but which includes
in its membership I am afraid this lady is behaving in a
very unladylike fashion. It is not often that a lady
intrudes where she hasn't been invited. I hope that nobody
tries to treat her with other than sympathy for obviously
there is a quite imperfect knowledge of the issues involv-2d
for this country and the action which should be taken
regarding them.
Now, I am not surprised that here ton ht in what
we are assured by the Labor Party is a democracy and of
course they may well believe that to be so, because when
Mr. Calwell spoke in this campaign, he wgas given a very
attentive hearing. May I repeat that When Mr. Calwell
spoke in this campaign, he was given a very attentive hearing.
I wonder why his supporters deny to the candidate here
tonight, Andrew Peacock, and to myself a reasonable opportunity
to put the Government's case. I mean, what are they afraid
of? Can't they stand up to the facts? Aren't they
prepared to hear the case which the Government is quite able
to give, convincingly enough, I think, even to shake those
who have come here with the most rigid Labor support in their
minds. And I want them to give me just this opportunity.
I heard one or two calling out " All the way with LBJ". Yes,
there he is. " All the way with LBJ".
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I would think it was
well known to the meanest intelligence that Australia, a
country of less than 12 million people, inhabiting a continent
the size of the United States, could not hope to defend
itself against aggression entirely from its own resources.
That should be quite obvious I should think to the meanest
intelligence. And the action which contributed most to the,
security of the Australian people was the action of the Menzies
Government in negotiating the ANZUS Treaty and the South East
Asian Treaty. These two treaties contribute more to
Australia' s security than anything else that could be named.
These treaties assure us that should we be attacked by an
aggressor we can look to powerful allies to bring us the
strength of their support in resisting that aggression.
Now, once this fact has been grasped, and I hope that you are
able to grasp it quite firmly, then the Labor platform
becomes all the more significant and I am going to read to
you for a moment the Labor Party platform on defence. I
wonder whether our noisy friends will at least allow me to
tell this audience the Labor Party platform on defence. Well
let me read it to you. Now allow me please. 
4.
This is taken from the official printed platform
of the Australian Labor Party under the heading of Defence
" Australia's national policy must be to ensure her
territorial security, the security of her overseas
trade and her development as an independent but
co-operative nation. The nation's defence must
be so arranged that the intention of Australia to
defend itself to the limits of its ability is clear
beyond all doubt to our own people, to our allies
and to any potential aggressor. The development
by negotiation of a regional defence system of
United Nations Member States within the South East
Asian and Indian sub-continental areas for mutual
defence consistent with the requirements of the
United Nations Charter and not inconsistent with
the general provisions of Australia' s existing
defence treaty commitments. Labor's defence and
foreign policies are based on the conviction that
war can and must be prevented and Australia has a
part to play in its prevention. Australia demands
the right to consultation in the great decisions
of peace and war."
Now this is the final sentence and I want you to listen to
this final sentence
" Labor will honour and support Australia's treaties
and defence alliances."
Now that is a very now wait a minute. That is a
very important sentence, but the significant thing is that
that sentence appears in the platform of the Labor Party
for 1963 and 1964, but it has been dropped from the platform
of the Labor Party in 1965, and I say, Sir, that this
Australian Labor Party under its present leadership has no
intention of honouring Australia's treaties and alliances
with those with whom it has engaged This provision
that I have referred to was deliberately dropped from the
platform of the Australian Labor Party and I suggest to
Mr. Calwell and to Mr. Whitlan, his doubtful deputy, I suggest
to Mr. Calwell and to Mr. Whitlam that they occupy the
remainder of this by-election campaign explaining to the
Australian people why the Labor Party has dropped from its
platform the sentence which says " Labor will honour and
support Australia's treaties and defence alliances"
Now, ladies and gentlemen, if this by-election has
done nothing else it has at least brought out into the open
that the Australian Labor Party, without any flourish of
trumpets and without the Australian public being fully aware
of this matter until it has appeared in this rather obscure
way, the Australian Labor Party has dropped from its platform
its undertaking to honour and support Australia's treaties and
defence alliances. All right, we now know where the Labor
Party stands on South Viet Nam. They don't stand with the
United States and the Allies and the South Vietnamese and they
don't stand by the treaties and alliances which we, for
Australia's protection, have freely entered into. 
4. ( a)
Now let me move to the next point. The next point
that I want to deal with is why did we find it necessary to
introduce a National Service scheme. As is well known,
the Australian Government decided some years ago that
Australia should establish and maintain a well-equipped,
highly mobile Regular Army, Navy and Air Force. And over
recent years we have increased the strength of the Navy,
the Air Force and the Army. In 1964, after a period in
which Indonesia had embarked on a policy of confrontation
against Malaysia, a country to which Australia had given
an undertaking to assist in its defence, and at a time when
Communist pressures were increasing in South Viet Nam, in
Laos, in Cambodia, in Thailand, in other parts of South
East Asia, the Government decided that Australia should
increase our Regular Army components. Now at that time the
target was 22,500 men, and a decision was taken to build
this total up to 37,500. S. 
Now, Sir, at that time we were engaging on an active
campaign of advertising for volunteers. We were offering
improved conditions and terms of service, and no one can
seriously argue that the conditions and terms of service are
unfavourable or unattractive because the fact of the matter
is that Army men who come to the end of their period of
service are re-engaging at what is a very high percentage rate.
The figure at the moment is higher, the percentage of reengagement
is actually higher in the Army than it is in the
Air Force or the Navy. It is a percentage of 70, and 700%
of re-engagement is one of the highest figures in the history
of the Australian Army. And so this defeats any argument
that there are not sufficiently attractive pay and conditions
offering for the Regular Army.
So you look for the reason elsewhere and the reason
why we are not getting all the volunteers that we require is
to be found in two directions. The first is that in a fully
employed society, with plenty of opportunities offering for
our young men, in a country that doesn't have a military
tradition, you don't have a great number of young men offering
for an Army career, and the number offering over the last
three years has been in the neighbourhood of 8,500 young men.
But the Army if it is maintaining a small Regular Army has to
have a highly efficient Army, a very fit Army, a well-trained
Army, and people who can measure up to the demands of the
various and varied diverse circumstances that a mobile Army
group will have to meet in various parts of South East Asia.
And so we found in practice that out of some 8,500 volunteers
less than 2,500 were regarded as measuring up to the standard
which the Army required. Now this operated right through
the three years leading up to the changeover to National
Service and when the decision was and it was
a decision taken against a background of the highest advice
we could secure, the strategic advice of our own Defence
Committee, the Defence Committee consisting of the Chiefs of
Staff of the three Services, the Chairman of the Chiefs of
Staff Committee, the Permanent Head of the Prime Minister's
Department, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Permanent
Head of the Department of External Affairs. Now these people
are the top advisers that the Government can secure and based
on their strategic view of the worsening circumstances and
situation in South East Asia they recommended a substantial
increase in the Armed Services and the equipment available
to the Armed Services.
The Chief of Staff of the Army pointed ( obt to us
that if we wished to increase our troops from 22,500 to 37,500
then the voluntary system would give us merely an additional
750 people a year, and quite obviously we wouldn't build up
to the desired target on the basis of 750 people a year.
And it was at this point, Mr. Chairman, that a Government
which has the responsibility for the national security of the
Australian people decided that a system of National Service
was essential in the interests of our people. 
Sir, could any party, has any political party in
the history of Australia been humiliated and treated with
such contempt as the Australian Labor Party's Federal
Parliamentary Party was by the Federal Executive of that
Party. Never in the history of the Australian people has
a political party been treated with such contempt and been
publicly humiliated in the way that the Federal Parliamentary party
of the A. L. P. has over these recent months and this, Sir, is
the Party that says to the people of Kooyong in this campaign
elect us, put the Government out and put us in, put in a
Party that has no defence policy, that has no foreign policy,
that goes along with the noisier members of this audience in
attacking Australia's alliance with the United States. These,
Sir, are the people that ask the Australian Government and
people to allow them to govern the Australia of today. Sir,
there cannot be any doubt as to where Australians come out on
this particular issue.
Now you have a chance to show your support for a
splendid candidate who will represent Kooyong ably and for long
in the years ahead. I would have liked tonight, ladies and
gentlemen, to have given you the positive side of the
Government's programme in the domestic field. I would very
much have liked to have had the opportunity to tell you of the
positive side to the campaign in South Viet Nam because, as
President Johnson pointed out in Honolulu when he met the
courageous leader of the South Vietnamese people, we are
determined that out of the struggle in South Viet Nam will
come a reconstruction, a rehabilitation, a new economic and
social order which will be a model and example to other
countries in South East Asia. Now, Sir, this becomes possible
if Communism can be resisted. This is what has occurred in
Korea, this is what has been done in Taiwan, two countries
rescued from Communist aggression and this is what can be done
in South Viet Nam if we are able to hold in check the cancerous
scourge of Communism.
Now Communism is a cancerous scourge you either
check the cancerous scourge of Communism, you check it, you
eradicate it, or your victim goes under as it spreads its
deadly poisonous effect through the victim concerned, and this
is what has happened in so many of the enslaved countries of'
Central Europe and this, but for the strength and resolution
of the American people is what would be happening in South East
Asia today. Ladies and gentlemen, it is a significant thing that
in addition to all the countries which are giving their military
and material aid in South East Asia, three distinguished
Presidents of the United States, President Eisenhower,
President Kennedy and President Johnson all have taken the
same view of the necessity of resisting aggression in that
country and we in Australia can feel deeply grateful for the
resolution, the strength of purpose, the firmness of mind of
the President of the United States, President Johnson, for
his determination to see these issues through in South Viet Nam. 
Now,. Sir, there are some 80,000 odd young men in
the 20-year age group. And the total of National Servicemen
required was some 8,400, approximately one tenth of the total
number of people who reach that particular age arnd
incidentally, it is of interest to know that in the task
force that will be going to South Viet Nam there will be
approximately 30% of the membership of that task force drawn
from the National Service component.
Now, right from the outset, it was intended that
the National Service trainee should go into a Regular Army
unit and in that army unit serve on the same pay, the same
terms and the same conditions as the Regular Army Servicemen.
But, having then gone into that Regular unit, they should go
wherever that particular Army unit was placed some will be
placed on various duties inside Australia, some will go to
Malaysia, some will go to Viet Nami. If any trouble develops
in our own Territory of Papua and New Guinea then others
would be required in Papua and New Guinea. But where assisting
the Regular Army troops, the people who represent Australia's
contribution to our own security in this part of the world,
they, Sir, will be supported by this comparatively small
component of National Servicemen.
Now, Sir, those National Servicemen are required to
serve in regular service for a period of two years, and, as
to overseas service in South Viet Nam, quite obviously just
as only a fraction of the 20-year-olds will ever be called up
for National S,:. rvice so also only a fraction of those actually
called up will be required to serve outside Australia, whether
in Viet Nam or elsewhere. The tour of duty in South Viet Nam
is one year, after which they would retuirn to Australia.
That in essence is the scheme and the reason why it was found
necessary to introduce that scheme.
Now the Labor Party has offered no alternative.
What is the alternative policy of the Labor Party? First of
all it says pull our troops out of South Viet Nam. it
dropped from its platform the clause which says it will honour
its treaties and its alliances, so it leaves Australia without
treaty assistance and it leaves Australia without the
friendship of those who would feel some obligation to us
because in their time of peril we have given them assistance
to resist the communist aggression directed against them.
Now there in essence, ladies and gentlemen, is the issue on
which the Labor Party chooses to fight this campaign. They
cloud these issues over of course with an emotional smokescreen.
They try to tell the mothers of this country that
their boys are going to be taken away for indefinite periods
of. time, that this is something which is going to apply to
the young manhood of this country. They paint the most
harrowing picture and, Sir, if I thought that the Australian
Labor Party represented the feeling of the Australian people
then I would despair for this country, but I am quite certain
that this Australian Labor Party will go down in history as
the weakest, the most irresponsible, the most unrealistic of
all the political parties which have ever carried an honourable
name in Australia. 
Mr. Caiwell tells us that this is an unwinnable
war what sort of national leader when we know we have
on our side in this issue the United States of America, the
people of this country, the people of other countries who
are giving military support and the South Vietnamese
themselves who have more than 200,000 regular troops in the
armed forces of that country what manner of national
leader is it who tells the Australian people that this is an
unwinnable war. This is the man who wouldn't even support
his own Labor Leader, John Curtin, when John Curtin thought
it was necessary in the interests of Australia to call up
national Servicemen. This is the man who now comes before
you and says that he would be the leader of the Australian
people at a time when the pernicious, corroding, erosive,
influence of Communism is spreading through Europe and is
spreading through Africa and is spreading through the
countries of South East. Asia. Yes, but unfortunately
Arthur Calwell is not. This is my deep complaint.
Our friend here thinks that times are changing.
Of course they are. They have changed since the days of
the conscription of 1916/ 17. Arthur Calwell has never got
outside the atmosphere of that campaign. They have changed
since the days of the depression period of the 1930' s, when
a Labor Government couldn't cope with the economic situation
of that time. Here most of you in this room, most of those
of you screaming here tonight, have never known anything but
full employment thanks to this Government. No government
in the history of Australia has ever kept its people employed,
fully employed, in the way this Government has done. No
country in the history of Australia has given the standard
of living that this country has done. In Labor's last year
of office they provided œ 9014-$ 18014-for social welfare.
That was Labor. We, Sir, in our last Budget, provided
$ 940M4 against $ 180M4 for Labor we provided $ 940M, so this
Government has built the economy of Australia so that we
can support a considerable defence effort, we can support
the most rapid rate of development in the history of this
nation and we can support the highest level of social welfare
that this country has ever known.
Why is it that around the world Oh, I
know, they don't want to hear this, they don't want to hear
it, of course they don't want to hear it but they cannot deny
that these are the facts and these are the facts that Mr.
Calwell and his parliamentary colleagues are not prepared to
stand up to. This is why, although there are many issues
on which this campaign in Kooyong should be fought, they want
the smoke-screen of the one issue. They won't fight the
election in Kooyong over the broad fields of government.
policies they want to concentrate on the one item of policy
and they organise this kind of undemocratic demonstration,
this kind of demonstration worthy of the totalitarian countries
for which their sympathies have been so plainly evidenced.
Sir, does Mr. Calwell who was given an uninterrupted
and attentive hearing in the meeting he opened in this
camnpaign, does Mr. Calwell and that notable democrat, Mr.
Whitlam, the dagger man, does he believe that this is the
way in which Labor supporters should show how a political
meeting should be conducted. I am quite certain that those 
who came here to disrupt this meeting have gained many
supporters for the Liberal cause. If there were any doubters
in this audience tonight as to how their vote should be cast,
then after tonight's performance there will be no doubt that
they will be voting for a government that can maintain order
at home and order abroad. They are not going to hand this
country over to the rabble supporters of a rabble government.
The Labor Party in Canberra today is a rabble party can
anyone who has witnessed the events in the last few months
describe it as other than a rabble party desperately trying
to find a leader that they can support with any species of
loyalty. They cannot support Caiwell they don't believe
he is the man for leader, they cannot support Whitlam because
they don't think he is a man that they can trust, and they
cannot find a candidate inside the Labor Parliamentary Party
that they are prepared to back for their leadership. And
so a rabble party which offers Australia a rabble government
turns to its rabble supporters and says go out and wreck the
meeting of the one government that can conduct Australia to
security and prosperity in these difficult times.
So ladies and gentlemen, I think most of us tonight
have got the essence of the message that we have been trying
to get over to you. You don't have to hear from Andrew
Peacock because you know that this young man has shown the
qualities of character, of intelligence and of leadership
which at this age have brought him to the election in the
position of President of the State Division of the Liberal
Party of Australia, and this young man in a first class field
of candidates which offered themselves for the s~ ection for
this notable seat he had the handsome votes which brought him
here as your candidate tonight.
Now Kooyong has been notable for its illustrious
representation and I am quite certain that following Sir John
Latham, Sir Robert Menzies and the men who preceded them will
be a splendid candidate who enjoys the support of a most
charming, gracious and attractive young wife. These young
people will not only be an ornament for the electors of Kooyong
but they will be assets of great value to the National
Parliament in Canberra. I wish, Andrew, continuing success
to you in the years ahead. I know that you will be a welcome
addition to our ranks in Canberra. You are typical of the
young vigorous, able and intelligent young men and women who
are rallying in their thousands today to the Australian people.
And not only are the young people rallying to us, but tbe,
trade anionists of this country are rallying to us in increasing
numbers. The Labor Party used to claim to represent the trade
unionists of this country but, Sir, we would not be in office
here today unless hundreds of thousands of men and women in
the trade unions of this country voted for us regularly,
election after election.
And this party, this Liberal Party, this great
national party, can claim to be truly representative of all
sections of the Australian people. We are not a class conscious
party envisaged by the memories of long ago struggles which
seem to have poisoned the minds of Mr. Calwell and so many 
of his supporters. This is a young party with a young
outlook for the great future of a great country and it is
with the help of able young men of courage and character
like Andrew Peacock that we shall build a great Australia to
which the Liberal Party will have made a notable contribution
of leadership and wise political guidance and policy
development. Ladies and gentlemen, give this young man, this
very able and very courageous young man, a flying start on
a long and notable political career by a bumper vote not
merely victory, we know he is going to win but give him a
vote of which he and we and all of us can be proud when he
comes to the poll in the next week. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 31st March 1966]
Mr. HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister) Speaker, my colleague,
the Minister for External Affairs
( Mr. Hasluck), dealt comprehensively with
the matters that the House has been debating.
However, I believed that it would be
convenient if I were to take the opportunity
* provided by the motion that the
House take note of his statement to deal
with the three major matters that have
relevance to the greater part of the debate
that has taken place. Understandably, most
speakers have concentrated a good deal of
their attention on the issues that arise in
South Vietnam and in South East Asia
generally. I hope to discuss three particular
matters in the limited time that I have
available. First, in response -to remarks
made by the honorable member for Fremantle
( Mr. Beazley), who, in a thoughtful
speech, urged that the Government state its
aims in South Vietnam, I shall state those
aimns. This -has been done on other occasions
by -numbers of my colleagues, I
believe, but I shall make a statement on
the subject in response -to the honorable
member's appeal. Secondly, I wish to establish
beyond the doubt of any reasonable
man that the Leader of the Opposition
( Mr. Calwell) misled the House wilfully
and seriously when he assured honorable
members that at the 1965 Federal Conference
of the Australian Labour Party there
had been no change of substance in the
Party's defence policy. Thirdly, as the
Leader of the Opposition has referred to
the demonstrations which occurred at my
4409/ 66 public meeting on Monday night as being
an expression of the pent up feelings of
Australian youth and purporting to convey
some atmosphere of spontaneity about that
operation, I shall bring to the attention of
the House a copy of the Newsletter from
one of the principal organisations concerned,
which will show how highly organised these
demonstrations are at the present time.
Turning to our war aims in South Vietnam,
I shall list the objectives of our intervention
there. Our first objective is to help
the Government of the Republic of Vietnam,
at its request and in the light of our own
assessment of the nature of the conflict in
Vietnam, to resist the armed aggression of
Communist North Vietnam against the South
-an aggression waged through the Communist
agencies of the Vietcong and the
National Liberation Front and by its own
regular armed forces. It is aimed at taking
over the South by a campaign of force,
terror and subversion and thence reunifying
the country under Communist administration.
Our second objective is to free
million people of South Vietnam from the
threat of oppression and terror which would
be their lot under the domination of the
Communists 6f the N46rth, and help establish
conditions under which they will be able
to choose Anid develop fre6 from coercion
of any kihd the forms of government and
society which they themselves want. The
third objective is to leave no one in doubt
that ' we in Australia are prepared Iand
fegolVed to hiofifr our treaty commitmeiits
Anid our Alliances and to stand firm with 
our allies in the face of aggression, whether
direct or disguised as it is now in Vietnam
under the label of a war of liberation
or a people's war Fourthly, by denying
victory to Hanoi and Peking in South Vietnam
we will ensure that the spread of
Communism in South East Asia is checked
and we will give encouragement to those
moderate elements in the various countries
of the region whom we are already supporting
in the work of modernisation and
economic and social progress. Fifthly, we
do not seek to overthrow the regime in
North Vietnam or to destroy the livelihood
of the North Vietnamese people. We simply
want the North to stop its aggression. We
seek no widening of the war. We seek a
peaceful settlement of the conflict through
negotiations. We think that a peaceful settlement
can be negotiated on the basis of the
Geneva Agreement.
Our basic aims are not only clear and
limited-they are sound. What, for example,
would be the consequences of our abandoning
these objectives and withdrawing, as
honorable members opposite suggest, with
our allies from the struggle and from the
defence of the independence of South Vietnam?
South Vietnam, a country of 15
million people, would become a Communist
state. This would not be ; because
the people of South Vietnam want Communism.
It would be because they were
unable to resist the armed power of the
Vietcong supported by North Vietnam.
The lives of millions of people who have
resisted Communism, the security of their
families and their properties would be in
jeopardy and opposition in South Vietnam
would be wiped out. There would be a
repetition of the liquidation of -the so
called class enemies, which occurred when
the Communists took over the North. The
political and psychological -impact of our
withdrawal would be felt, not only in the
countries bordering Vietnam, but throughout
the whole of South East Asia. The path
of the aggressors would be smoother as the
countries of the area lost their faith and
confidence in the forces of the United States
and of the free world to protect their independence
and sovereignty. The American
guarantee would come under challenge in
other parts of Asia -and Communist China's
long term aim of d-riving the United States
out of Asia and the Pacific would have had
a significant success. In those countries which have entered into a security partnership
with the United States-Korea, Japan,
Taiwan and the Philippines-the opponents
of the American connection would gain
new strength. Conversely, successful resistance
in Vietnam will contribute to
security and to peaceful co-existence in the
region as a whole.
Australia has a vital interest in the effective
presence and active participation of
the United States as a great power in the
area of Asia and the Pacific. We have an
obligation to support the United States in
this role-an obligation arising from our
treaty relationships, from our role as an
ally in supporting the United States in
international diplomacy and politics, and
from the fact that our international interests
are directly involved in preserving South
East Asia from aggression and from Communist
domination. Can anyone doubt that
the South East Asia region under Comnmunism
or Chinese domination would be
a socially, morally and economically impoverished
and degraded region?
I hope -that that statement is a clear
enough indication of where this Government
stands. If the people of Australia support
that kind of statement of objective,
then they cannot hope to secure the support
that they would seek from honorable
members on the other side of the -House.
I have made a study of -the resolutions and
the policy discussions which, as the Leader
of the Opposition said, were conducted in
the full -light of publicity and which were
reported, not only in the daily Press, but
also in the Press of the Labour Party itself.
They have subsequently been the occasion
for discussion by members of the Party
opposite. Honorable members will recall
-that the Leader of the Opposition told us
that there had been no change of substance.
I shall give the precise language because I
think it is important that I should. I have
pointed out-
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-Why does not the
Prime Minister quote from a Labour Party
document? Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-I have the documents
-here if the honorable member wishes
me to do that. I had them here yesterday
when we were discussing this matter.
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-If the Prime Minister
is going to discuss the matter now, we would
expect him to bring them in. 
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-I had it in
" Hansard" and I . thought -that was
authoritative enough. I quoted the precise
words from the Federal Platform of the
Labour Party, as reported at page 669 of
Hansard of 29th March-
Labour will honour and support Australia's
treaties and defence alliances.
Those words have been dropped from the
defence section of the Labour Party's document.
The Leader of the Opposition said
that they had reappeared, at least in substance,
in the same sense, in the foreign
affairs section of the document.
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-That is correct.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-I am glad to
hear the honorable member say that because
the document states-
Australia must periodically review its defence
treaties and alliances to meet new circumstances
as they arise.
Does the honorable member claim, with
the trained mind which he brings to bear on
these matters, that the words " honour and
support" are the same thing as " review"
from time to time? That is what the honorable
member is saying. That was not the
view taken by members of the Labour
Party at the time. I wish to refer now to
the issue of the Labour Party journal
" Fact" for Friday, 20th August 1965. The
editorial states--
Important, too, is the new look at defence and
foreign affairs whereby, for instance, Australia
can face her nearby neighbours on a friendly basis
rather than as a warring opponent as has been
caused by the Menzies Government intervention
: n Vietnam's private affairs.
Mr. Uren.-That is all right.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-Yes, that is all
right. These things accumulate. Just give
me a little time. Then in the August 1965
issue of Labour the official journal, the
following appeared-
Despite a strong Press campaign and threats
from the Deputy Leader, Mr. Whitlam, and the
the recently concluded 26th Federal
Conference of the Australian Labour Party was
highly successful.
The Conference refused to be stampeded on
foreign affairs and by an overwhelming vote of
votes to 6 reaffirmed its support for Mr.
Calwell's nuclear-free zone proposals which were
originally adopted by the Labour Party two
years ago.
A number of recommendations from the
Labour Party Foreign Affairs Committee were not accepted by the Conference who were
obviously determined not to be intimidated by the
Press to drop some of its more forward-looking
peace policies.
The Conference expressed concern for military
aspects of S. E. A. T. O. and suggested that new
security arrangements in South East Asia should
be considered by Australia, under the auspices
of the U. N.
The Conference decided by a large majority,
after hearing a speech by Mr. Calwell ( Victoria)
who moved an amendment, to retain the nuclearfree
zone policy. The Foreign Affairs Committee
had recommended its deletion. Only the six New
South Wales delegates voted against this policy.
By so doing, they ignored the 1963 New South
Wales Labour Party Conference decision supporting
the nuclear free zone.
It is quite obvious that there has been a
very significant switch in the strength of the
Australian Labour Party under its Federal
Executive in relation to these matters of
defence and foreign affairs. There was a
rejection at several critical points-if I had
the time I would deal with them-of
proposals brought forward by the then
Foreign Affairs Committee.
The representatives who were displaced
from the Foreign Affairs Committee recently
were, as I think most honorable gentlemen
know, the honorable member for
Eden-Monaro ( Mr. Allan Fraser), a foimer
member for Darebin, Mr. R. W. Holt, who
later became State President of the Party
in Victoria, and Mr. Dunstan, the Attorney-
General in the Labour Government of
South Australia. The three men appointed
to the Foreign Affairs Committee of the
Australian Labour Party by the Federal
Executive-and these are the men who
would be carrying out the proposed review
of Australia's treaties and alliances-are the
honorable member for Yarra ( Dr. J. F.
Cairns), the honorable member for Reid
( Mr. Uren) and Senator Cavanagh-and
they threw in Senator Cohen for good luck.
I intend no reflection on the honorable
gentlemen I have named because I believe
they hold their views as sincerely and
earnestly as anybody else in this Parliament,
but it is a matter of either public celebrity
or public notoriety, according to one's
viewpoint, that these men are to be found
on the extreme left of thought on defence
and foreign affairs within the ranks of the
Labour Party. The Labour Press treated
as a rebuff to the Deputy Leader of the
Opposition and the Australian Workers 
Union the proposals carried at the 1965
defence conference. It was regarded by the
Labour Press as a significant switch in
attitude on these matters, and quite certainly
it effected a reduction in the support
that our allies, in particular the United
States of America, might have expected
from a Labour government.
The Leader of the Labour Party has
shown significantly the difference in attitude
that he brings to this matter. Anybody who
studies the foreign affairs statement put out
by the Australian Labour Party's information
release No. 2/ 1965 of February last
year on " The Situation in Vietnam will
notice a statement which, as to a great deal
of it anyway, is very much in line with the
general approach of this Government and
its supporters.
Mr. Allan Fraser.-What arrant nonsense.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-Well, just give
me 10 minutes more and I will establish to
the honorable member's satisfaction that the
situation is as I have put it. But from that the
Leader of the Opposition has turned to a
statement about the West, as he calls it, and
the only country that fits that description is
the United States of America. In the debate
on Government policy the Leader of the
Opposition used -these words:
The West has no standards and apparently no
scruples. The Americans have already supported
eight so-called governments in Vietnam, and all
of them have been military dictatorships, and all
have been tyrannical and oppressive.
Mr. Uren.-Answer that proposition.
Mr. SPEAKER ( Hon. Sir John McLeay).
-Order! The honorable member for Reid
will come to order.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-I have said
enough, I think, to show that the substance
of what I allege regarding honorable
gentlemen opposite and their leader has
been borne out by recent developments. Mr. Uren.-I want you to answer that
proposition. Mr. SPEAKER.-Order! 1 will not warn
the honorable member again. I will deal
with him.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-I have only three
minutes left and I want to answer the statement
made by the Leader of the Opposition
that the events at my public meeting the
other night resulted from an upsurge of the
pentup feelings of Australian youth. I have
in my hand a newsletter distributed by the
Youth Campaign Against Conscription.
It gives details of the names and addresses
of the President and Secretary. I shall not
read it in full, but if honorable members
want to know some details of the demonstrations
that have occurred they will find them
set out here. More interestingly, I can give
them advance notice of the demonstrations
for Wednesday, 6th April, Friday,
April, Friday, 22nd April and Friday, 29th
April. But in relation to Monday, 28th
March, the night of my meeting, the document
says-
7 Kew Gardens. Meet at the corner of
Gellibrand Street and Cotham Road, Kew ( just
inside the gaidens) prior to Liberal Kooyong Meeting'at
Kew Civic Centre, Cotham Road. This time,
some will protest silently by standing around the
Hall with signs on a givei signal. Others will remain
part of the audience and heckle and ask
questions.
This was the spontaneous upsurge of Australian
youth to which the Leader of the
Opposition referred. I say in conclusion that
the foolish people who take part in these
demonstrations will find that they are having
exactly the reverse effect to that which they
intend. There are in this country ways in
which people may demonstrate a political
opposition to Government policies or the
views of members of Parliament. But no
Australian who values democracy in this
country will accept as a reasonable demonstration
the methods that were adopted on
this occasion.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA 



SETT'ING PZ THM F( W3NATION STONE
OF THE N4ATIONAL LIBRAY CANBERRA 66/ 085
31st March 1366
Speech by the Prime Minister.-Mr. Harold Holt
As you have been told by Mr. Anthony, I shall
shortly have the privilege of introducing to you the best
known man in Australia. I shall be asking him then to
perform a task for which I think he has had more practice
than any other man I could name-in the public life of this,
or any other country; and those two facts alone as I
give them to you indicate the significance of the occasion
for us and of the part of leadership and wise guidance which
Sir Robert has himself played in relation to the building
behind us. 3 e is fortunate, I think he would agree, at least
in this respect, that most people who lay a foundation stone
have to go through a long and rather uncomfortable period
of waiting as the weeds build up around it and the time
marches on before there is much visible sign of achievement
imposed upon the stone which has been laid.
But here we see a building well advanced along the
road to completion and already signifying to us in its lines
the distinction which Mr. Anthony has referred to so
eloquently as he has addressed us in the course of his own
speech. I know that there are many people to whom thanks
and tribute should be paid on an occasion such as this,
and I shall mention them in a minute or so. But, Sir
Robert who has had such a leading part to play in the
development of this beautiful Australian capital which in
every year that passes unfolds itself in greater beauty
and distinction for the observer he would be interested
to know that not only is the N~ ational Library project quite
obviously so well advanced but another great interest of
his was advanced a stagc further this week when I received.
from Sir Daryl Lindsay as Chairman of the Advisory Committee,
the report on the proposed National ZArt Gallery for the
N'ational Capital. Sir Robert had a large part to play in the
decision to establish here a National Art Gallery and to
set up tiic Committee which would do the preliminary thinking
on that matter for us.
vie all know, ladies and gentlemen, that a building
such as we find behind us or you, in front of you does
not just happen and my colleague the Minister for the
Interior has told you something of the planning and toil
which has gone to make it.
lHe has also paid proper tribute to those involved
and I would like to add the thanks of the Government to him
because he has had a very active part to play in the overall
project; and to Mr. overall ( no pun intended-by that
previous reference to Mr. Overall and to all those 
associated with them in What clearly will be a notable and
enduring addition in what is already a very handsome Capital
City. The building will allow the library to bring
together for the first time in Australia a collection of
more than a million volumes and its vast collections of maps,
manuscripts, pictures and films, this will make it possible
for these great resources to be put to their best use.
The Government has appreciated the difficulty of providing
a satisfactory service from the past and present widely
separated temporary buildings and it is grateful to the staff
of the National Library for their dedicated services in
these circumstances. I would like to add a word on what the building
means to the Government and to the Nation. It marks the
fulfilment of processes which~ began with the first Australian
Prime Minister in 1901, and which have had the warm support
of successive governments and parliaments since that time.
I mention the Parliament because, of course, the
National Library grew out of the Parliamentary Library, and
until separation of the two libraries was begun in 1961, the
National Library was developed by the presiding officers of
Parliament and the Parliamentary Librarians of the day.
They were advised by successive Library Committees representing
both Houses of the Parliament and all parties in the Parliament.
I recall with pleasure I had the privilege of serving as a
back-bench member of Parliament on the Library Commtittee in
earlier years. Special recognition is due to my Colleague,
Senator the Hon. Sir Alister McMullin, President of the
Senate who presided over the Library Committee from 1956-1961,
this was during a period of great development and has smoothed
the process of separation since.
The growth of the National Library has been further
accelerated since its act of 1960 under the guidance of the
Council of ninu members with the National Librarian as thieir
Executive Officer. The Govrernment is grateful to these men
and women of wide and varied experience from throughout.*
Australia who have given their services freely in the national
interest. Their Chairman, Sir Archie Grenfell Price, well
known to most of you present as a scholar; is recalled by
me as a very valued parliamentary colleague during some of
the years of War.
The National Library Act of 1960 was a recognition
by the Government and Parliament that a strong National Library
was essential to the research and inquiry neoded to support
Australia's unprecedented National growth. It will
supplement what has been done by Government and others for
universities and research workers generally. As Sir Robert
said when introducing it, the Act did not create a new
institution but would define the functions and role of an
institution which would increasingly play a National role
of the greatest importance similar to that of the great
National Libraries in other countries. 
4V It is perhaps significant that the countries
which have shown the greatest development in this century
are those with the greatest collections of Library material
for research. United States is, of course, perhaps the
most notable example to which our own National Library
owes a great deal.
What should the Australian people expect of their
National. Library It is the, place whiere they should hope to find
the most detailed information about their own cbuntry and
the most important facts and opinions about-other countries,
and especially about those with which our future is likely
to be closely linked. The National. Library is assembling
the records of the past, as well as those which will
reflcZ, current activities. For we cannot-understand the
present or plan for the future without a knowledge of the
past. This is especially important where Australians in
relation to themselves and in thcir growing association with
other countries whose civilizations are so mucil older than
our own. It is well to remember that these older civilizations
include our Asian neighbours and therefore the Library is
actively collecting material in many A sian languages as well
as in English and European languages.
All this will be of great value to the Parliament,
to the Departments of Government, to the Universities and to
research and enquiry where ever it takes place. Through
teleprinter links and inter-Library loans and new communications
of the future, the resources of the Library will bewaailablo,
as they should be, to Australian people everywhere.
And before I turn to my task of calling on Sir
Robert may I on behalf of the Australian Government and indeed
I believe I can say on behalf of the Australian people, pay
a special tribute of thanks to Mr. Harold White who has given
such distinguished service to the Library through so many
years. He has become if not a Canberra institution
certainly in our eyes a Parliamentary institution in his own
right and I speak in warm terms of the gratitude which we
Members of the Parliament, whether in Government or in
Opposition, or whatever individual status may be, foel for
Mr. Harold White and through him for the very able staff
which assists him so pleasantly and agreeably in the service
of the parliament as well.
Now I have earlier paid some quite inadequate
tributc to the role of leadership and guidancQ exercisud by
Sir Robert M4enzies through his record tcrm of leadership as
the Prime Minister of this country.
It is therefore, I am sure everyone will ngree,
entirely appropriate that the Foundation Stone of this
building should be set by him and that he should be today
looked to as the loading figure in a celebration which will
be long remembercd in Canberra and which will by virtue of tho
distinction of the building which it touches and the purposes
which that building serves, mark as one of the more_ notable
days in tho development of Australia's National capital.
I ask Sir Robert Mvenzies if he will lay the
Foundation Stone of the National Library. 



66/ 04
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 51/ 1966
BRITISH ELECTION RESULT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
Mr. Wilson and his colleagues are to be congratulated
on their clear-cut victory.
* I feel it will strengthen the United Kingdom and
benefit the Commonwealth generally now that the inevitable
uncertainty resulting from -m evenly divided Parliament has
been remedied. There has been, by practice and tradition,
very cordial relations between Australja and the United Kingdom
Governments regardless of domestic political philosophies.
I have personally met many senior members of Mr.
Wilson's administration and look forward to continued co-operation
in our mutual interests.
CANBERRA, 1st April, 1966 



FOR RELEASE 6 P. M. FRIDAY 1ST APRIL 1966
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 30/ 1966
CHANGED DATE FOR THE OBSERVANCE OF CO1MONWUlALTH DAY
Statement by the Prime IMinister, Mr. Harold Holt.
It has been decided, in consultation with the Premiers,
that Commonwealth Day will in future be observed in Australia on
the day on which The Queen's Official Birthday is celebrated,
instead of on the present date, May 24.
We think of The Queen as Head of the Commonwealth as
well as Queen of Australia. It therefore seems fittU. ng that we
should combine the two observances, which are so closely linked
in spirit, and have in recent years/ 1been separated by only a few
days. The British Government recently announced its intention
to combine the observance of Commonwealth Day and The Queen's
Official Birthday. Our decision therefore will maintain the
practice of a jcint observance in the two countries of these two~
events in the life of the Commonwealth.
In future, the flying of flags by the Commonwealth on the
Monday of the weekend which has hitherto marked the Official
Birthday of Her Majesty, will now mark also the observance of
Commonwealth Diay.
The Premiers will be announcing details of the arrangements
to be made for the observances in the States.
CANBERRA 1ST APRIL, 1966.
Backgzround Note:
The present date of Commonwealth Day, May 24, is the date
of Queen Victoria's birthday. Empire Day was celebrated on that
date between 1902 and 1958. Since then, the day has been known
as Ccmmonwealth Day.
. The Queen's Official Birthday has been celebrated
throughout Australia in recent years on the Monday following the
second Saturday in June ( Her Majesty's actual birthday is on
April 21). Prior to that, the date of the official observance
varied, although it was normally about the middle of the year. 



66/ 046
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 33/ 1966
AUSTRALIAN PA INTING FOR QUEEN MOTHER
At G:'-vernment House in Canberra today, the
Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, presented The Queen Mother with
a painting by the Australian artist, Clifton Pugh.
Called " Burnt Landscape" tit is tne of two
Australian paintings being given to The Queen Mother by the
Government and people of Australia to mark her current visit.
The second painting, " Storm Approaching
Marree", is by Kenneth Jack and was painted in 1965. The
Pugh work is dated 1964 and depicts the aftermath of a
bushfire. CANBER~ RA,
4th April, 1966. 



FOR PRESS: 66/ 052
P. M. No. 32/ 1966
KOOYONG BY-ELECTION RESULT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Kooyong result has given to the Federal
Parliamentary Liberal Party a very able young recruit who
should have a long life of fruitful parliamentary service ahead
of him. His majority is considerably below that attained by
Sir Robert Menzies in 1963, but it is unrealistic and misleading
to attach the significance to the percentage of movement which
Mr. Calwell has done. It is notorious that by-election
figures tend to run against the Government of the day. In
1965, Sir Robert Menzies, then at the height of his prestige
as a national leader with a record tenure of office, scored
his highest vote in Kooy' , ng in an election which increased the
Government's majority from one to more than twenty.
Another factor which undoubtedly affected the
scale of movement was the fact that both the A. L. P. and the
which had merely put in a token campaign against Sir
Robert at earlier elections, each mounted a most vigorous and
thorough campaign on this occasion,. Each saw in the by-election
an opportunity to score tactical political gains and campaigned
accordingly. In the circumstances, whatever he may say
publicly, privately Mr. Caiwell can take little comfort from the
result. The D. L. P. vote has increased by approximately the
same proportion of the total as the A. L. P. vote.
The A. L. P. attempted to convert the Kooyong by-election
into a national forum on the issues of South Viet Ram and the
National Service scheme. In the result, the combined vote for
parties supporting the Government's policies on both these issues
has been nearly two-and-a-half times that secured by the A. IL. P.
CANBERRA, 4th April, 1966. 



66/ 051
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 35/ 1966
POSTAL DISPUTE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
A Committee of Cabinet has discussed further today
the situation arising from the Australia-wide stoppage last
Friday in the Mail Exchange Branches of the Post Office organised
by the Australian Postal Workers' Union, and the further
industrial action since taken in the capital city exchanges at
the instigation of the A. P. W. U. The Union has taken its action
to try to secure its demands regarding the manning of the
mechanical letter sorting equi ment being installed by the Post
Office, capable of performing the task of letter sorting very
much more speedily and efficiently than the existing manual
methods. These actions by the Union are in gross and flagrant
breach of the undertaking given by its representatives as a
vital condition of the terms of settlement on 8th April, 1964
of the Sydney Mail Office dispute of that time. The President
of the Mr. Monk the Federal President of the A. P. W. U.,
Mr. F. Waters and the Federal Secretary of the A. P. VW. U., Mr.
G. Slater, all personally signed that agreement. The undertaking
given was in the following terms
" For their part, the A. C. T. U. and the A. P. W. U.
will not support any stoppage of work on any
industrial issue in future but will negotiate
and failing agreement, will go to Arbitration.
In the event of the men stopping work the
A. C. T. U. and the A. P. W. U. agree that the
prescribed penalty provisions of the Act will
e appropriately applied."
Mr. Monk has referred to the action of the A. P. W. U.
as a repudiation of this agreement. As a signatory to the
agreement, he has refused to associate himself with the breaches
of an undertaking so clearly given.
The Commonwealth Government takes a most serious view,
both of the Union's action in disrupting an essential public
service and in violating its undertaking.
Inconvenience and hardship and economic loss are being
caused to the public by the bank-up of millions of letters.
There are serious delays in the handling of all mails, whether
commercial or private, including delays both ways in overseas
mails, and interruptions affecting letters to and from servicemen
at home and overseas. These all result from the course of action
which the Union is pursuing in breach of its pledged word.
Mr. Calwell has stated quite falsely that there has
been a continued refusal by the Postmaster-General, Mr. Hulme,
to have adequate consultations. There has been no refusal, or
failure, or reluctance on the part of Mr. Hulme to confer with
the A. C. T. U. and representatives of the A. P. W. U. on matters in
dispute. He has already talked with Mr. Monk and the officers
of the A. P. W. U. As recently as 29th March, I wrote a personal / 2 
-2-
letter to Mr. Monk telling him that in the spirit of the 1964
agreement, Mr. Hulme would again confer with Mr. Monk and with
the General President Mr. ' aters, and the General Secretary
Mr. Slater, of the A. P. v. U. " to discuss the extent to which the
present staff should be employed on the letter sorting machines
and related matters." The Union rejected this offer. Without
regard to the public convenience or to its own written undertaking,
it chose direct action instead.
Following persistent attempts to secure areement by
negotiation, the Pub hc Service Board and the Post Office have,
in a further attempt to remedy the situation invoked the
Arbitration process contemplated under the 1964 agreement.
Application has been made to the Public Service Arbitrator,
Mr. E. A. Chambers. Mr. Chambers has written to the A. P. W. U.,
the Federated Public Service Assistants' Association the
Director-General of Posts and Telegraphs, and the Public Serviee
Board, referring to the great public importance of maintaining
the normal flow of the mails, and also to the specific agreement
by the Amalgamated Postal Workers' Union and the A. C. T. U. to
have recourse to arbitration. He is convening a conference
for 5 p. m. on Wednesday, 6th April, to resolve outstanding
issues raised by the applications.
The Government looks to all participating in the
conference with Mr. Chambers to produce a basis for an immediate
resumption of normal operations. There is a duty to all
sections of the community to achieve this. Quite patently, no
responsible government can tolerate continuing interference
with the effective performance of the postal service.
CANBERRA, April, 1966. 



FOR PRESS : 66049 P. M. No. 34/ 1966
NEW COMMONWEALTH LOAN FOR BRIGALOW SCHEME
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
It will be recalled that at talks in Canberra last
month, I assured the Premier of Queensland that Queensland's
request for financial assistance for the development of further
Brigalow lands in the Fitzroy River Basin of Central Queensland
would be brought promptly to the Cabinet for its consideration.
This Cabinet consideration has now taken place, and I have
been very pleased to write to the Premier conveying the
Commonwealth Government's approval of his request. The terms
of my letter are as follows
" Dear Mr. Nicklin,
Since our discussion in Canberra on 4th March
my Government has considered your request for financial
assistance, in the form of a loan for the development
of further Bri galow lands in the Pitzroy River Basin of
Central Queensland.
The area that you now propose be developed
consists of some 6 million acres in the Mackenzie-Isaac
River Basin north of your State's Central Railway Line,
and is separate from and additional to the areas
currently being developed south of the railway. As you
know, the Commonwealth undertook in 1962 to rovide
assistance of up to 614 500,000 to finance he cost of
the current Brigalow Scheme, although you have advised
me that, on the latest estimates it is expected that the
final cost will be some 63,000,00 less than this.
You also advised me that the estimated cost of
the proposed new Brigalow development is $ 11,500,000,
towards which the amount not now expected to be required
for the current scheme could be applied. You asked
whether the Commonwealth would be prepared to provide
assistance by way of a loan to finance the project.
In considering the proposal, my Government had
before it your reports on the progress being made with
the current Brigalow Scheme and was impressed with the
success which as attended this development, despite some
difficulties caused by drought. It was also aware, of
course, that the area you now propose for development
has been the sub ject of an investigation by the Bureau
of Agicultural Economics, which reported very favourably
on its economic potential.
I am pleased to inform you that the Government
has agreed to your request for financial assistance in
the form of an interest-bearing loan of up to Wii, 560, O00 2 
E, 2
" to finance this new project. This amount, of course,
includes the amount that the Commonwealth will not now be
required to provide for the current Brigalow development,
which you have estimated at $, 000,000.
It will be necessary to enter into an areement
covering various matters of detail concerning the
financial assist. nce proposed, and if you are agreeable,
I propose that Commonwealth and State officers should confer
on this in the near future.
With your areement, I propose to release the terms
of this letter to the Press. Yours sincerely,
HAROLD HOLT."
CANBERRA April, 1966. 



IPTR-PPLIK 1 TRYU1ION
SPELCH OF ' JELCOIE, BY THE P-RIME I1INISTER. MR. HAROLD HOLT
AT PAFIJIMENT HOUSE, CA1U1BERRA 12TH APRIL. 1%
Mr. Chairman, Mr. President, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and
Gentlemen: Thank you for that very encouraging reception.
It is a much more enthusiastic one than I usually receive in this
Chamber. Indeed, as I look around the Chamber, I was a little
discomfited at the outset to see how crowdod the Opposition benches
had become, but as my gaze wanders further afield, I see that quite
notable members of the Opposition are scattered on the Government
side, so that itself is an encouraging sign.
I am very happy to be able to add the w-arm welcome
of the Australian Government and the Australian people to the
meeting of the I. P. U. here in Canberra. ' 4c feel that not only is
this most timely and opportune, having regard to circumstances
unfolding around us in this area of the world. But that it is an
honour to Australia which vie value, I assure you.
You were speaking, M11r. 4) eaker of the symbolism of
the Chair, and could I just round off your story because there is
one chapter which I think would be of interest to our fellow
Parliamentarians. As Er. Speaker, our Chairman has told you, our
Chair, a replica of that in the House of Commons, was presented
to us by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Branch there.
In the period of the blitz, the House of Commons was bombed, and
the Speaker's Chair was destroyed, so we were able to build a
replica of our Chair and send that back to the House of Commons,
and so the Parliamentary tradition, despite wars and threats to
peace, can continue through the centuries if men and women of good
will only have the determination to sec that this is so. And I
believe that there is some happy symbolism in that for us.
I hope you will find in the warmth, the sunshine
and the tranquillity of the Canberra scene also a suitable setting
for this gathering and that there in that warmth and tranquillity
there will be a symbolic atmosphere created for your discussions
in the days that lie ahead.
I said that we Vlere gratified that you had chosen
Australia. This is, I believe, the niost representative gathering
of Parliamentarians ever to have been held in this country.
There have been conferences here of various kinds in the past,
some largely attended by 1dembers of Parliament and our Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association has met here more than once, but I
question whether we have had so representative a gathering from
all parts of the world, all the continents, and from so many
differing conditions and habits of life as we find represented
in this gathering. Surely it is a hopeful sign for the future of
mankind that men and women from the Parliaments of the iworld
can meet togother in friendship ; u-ith a detormiration to find a
better-ae understanding of ea. ch other, to become better informed
0 090 .12 
-2-
about the countries of the world and to take advantage of the
conference meetings to learn something in more detail of the host
country itself. And this is an aspect, of course, which is
particularly prized by us.
We in Australia want to be better known and better
understood because it is through that better knowledge and
understanding that friendship ripens and the causes of animosity
or dissension tend to disappear. And here in this area of the
world, I believe it is the first time that you have met for your
Spring meetings which, as Mr. Speaker pointed out comes in the
Australian Autumn, but the first time that you have met outside
Europe. The first time, therefore, that you will have met in this
Southern Hemisphere. And we believe that here are to be found
and by " here" I mean in the total area of Asia some of the most
compelling and difficult problems that the world has to face at
the present time, and I shall say a word or two on that in a moment.
But another reason why I welcome your presence here
is that we become so conscious that we are living in turbulent,
troubled, restless and rapidly-changing world, and I think we
become over-conscious of that fact because it is thrust upon us
every day by our newspapers, by the modern media of communication,
the radio and the television. Bad news travels fast and good
news tends to be no news so far as the journals of public dissemination
are concerned. The sensational, the challenging and the
troublous, these are the things that hit the headlines, and I
believe it necessary for people in public office, for their
national Parliaments, to get a more realistic and balanced
perspective from time to time of what is oing on, certainly in
their own country, and so far as the rest of the world is concerned,
what is going on in the rest of the world. If you have a daily
diet of trouble and strife, then you begin to think that this is
the sort of world we live in, but of course it always has been
a troubled and difficult world.
Ours happens to be the generation which is told of
these troublous occurrences within minutos virtually of their
happening in almost any part of the world, and each day as we
listen to the latest bulletin of news, we are made conscious of
these things. And then, of course, we can't always rely, as
faithfully as we would wish to do, upon the information which
reaches us. In a world which is highly competitive as to its
political systems and its ideologies, there tends to be in the
propaganda directed from one country to another again a distortion
of fact which makes honest and objective assessment the more
difficult for us. And so hbo valuable it is to have people
coming together in a spirit jf friendship, informed minds capable
of assessing an argument or a situation, and in this way adding
to the sum of human understanding and human knowledge about one
another, and as you go back to your Parliaments, capable of
faithfully and objectively reporting what it is that you have been
able to learn. And so there should be a good dividend for a world
that is striving for peace and social justice from the meeting of
so many representative minds in the di scussions of this week. / 3 
-3-
I thought Mr. Chairman, that it miht be useful
if for a few minutes I tried to sketch in something of the country
in which you find yourselves not to act as a sort of travel
agent or a tourist organisation but because certain things have
been attempted here which may be helpful to others, just as we in
turn are helped by what is achieved in other parts of the world.
No country has a monopoly of achievement or expertise. Science,
fortunately, is more international than politics and so we can all
profit from the achievements of each other.
This is a country in which we have had to call very
heavily upon science and upon skill. Most of you, unfortunately,
will see comparatively little of it. As you probably know, it is
the oldest continent geologically; the largest island approximately
the size of the United States in area if you exclude Alaska
from the United States, but we don't enjoy the same favourable
terrestrial conditions throughout the whole of the continent that
the United States would. There is a coastal fringe which is
reasonably well watered, but ours is largely an arid continent
and we have to struggle over much of our areas with a harsh,
unyielding soil which calls for the skills we can bring, the
application of science, the addition of fertilisers, trace elements
in deficient soils and the development of legumes that can flourish
where otherwise the lack of water would destroy any herbage at all.
This is the sort of problem which challenges our attention, and: so
water conservation, irrigation schemes, the supplementing of the
soil, these are some of the tasks to which a country which has been
one of the great suppliers to the rest of the world of foodstuffs
and rural production must turn if our production is to continue to
increase. But we have found also that it is necessary for us
also to accumulate the resources out of which development can
oroceed and so we have become one of the highest savers per capita
in the world. Just on 27 per cent. of our gross national prodpct
represents savings and our expenditure on capital equipment is
exceeded, I believe, in per capita terms by only one country in the
world and that is Japan. But fortunately, in addition to our own
savings resources, we have been able to create a climate favourable
to. enterprise and to capital and Australia has attracted investments,
risk capital, from many parts of the world and this has brought
with it new skills, new techniques, new industries, and as a result,
a country which before the Second World ' Jar was thought of largely
as a country of rural production its wool, its wheat, its meat,
butter and sugar known around the markets of the world has so
diversified and developed its secondary industries that to no doubt
the surprise of many of you, we have fortunately now in secondary
industry about the same section of our population that you would
find in the United States of America. In percentage terms to
population and work force, it is approximately the same as in the
United States. Now the most recent development which makes for a
more significant and important Australia in the eyes of the rest
of the world has been a series of quite fabulous mineral discoveries.
It is only a few years ago that we maintained as a Government, a
prohibition on the export of iron ore because we couldn't see
reserves that seemed to be more than was needed for our own
Australian steel industry. Then came the discovery litarally of / 4 
-4-
mountains of high-grade iron ore and in WIestern Aistralia, one
of the States of the Commonwealth, there it has been assessed
that some 15,000 million tons of high grade iron ore, of a
percentage of 65; any of you who are knowledgeable of these
things will pick up the percentage and its significance but all
I am told is that it is very good iron ore, and already firm
contracts have been arranged between Australia and Japan for the
supply of this iron ore, I think I am right in saying to a total
value of2,360 million, and we have been told that there will be
other markets, even markets in Europe for this iron ore despite
the problem of distance because of its quality.
Then bauxite, a basic material for aluminium, has
been found in what may prove to be the largest bauxite deposits
anywhere in the world. But when ou add to this Pandora's box
of mineral treasures the copper, he lead, the zinc, new
discoveries of nickel and manganese, you will, I think, gain some
concept of the basis for our confidence that not only will the
country continue to grow in strength and prosperity but that in
the years ahead our export income from mineral production will
probably match and exceed that which we derive from our largest
export item, that aell-known commodity, Australian wool.
Now, I have mentioned these things because they
have been achieved in a comparatively young country, ( our first
settlement was in 1788) and with a comparatively small population
of people making the most effective use that we could of our
work force and applying as effectively as we could thC mod6rn
aids which mechanical equipment, electronic and other engineering
development can produce for us. And so wc have been able to
sustain a high rate of growth, a high rate of population growth
by the standards of Europe, although, of course, not by the
standards of Asia or South America. But for any of our United
States or British friends who are here today, it may interest them
to know that if their population rate were to be geared to the
sme rate of increase as that of Australia, in the United States
you would need to build annually more than half a million
additional homes above that which is now proceeding and in the
United Kingdom about 170,000 homes. So you will see that when
you add to the problem of the home construction the need for
schools and hospitals and modern amenities that go wiith an
increasing population, then you have an indication of the total
problems that we face in this country. I could qrhaps sum it
up by saying that our broad objectives are those development,
of what are still relatively undeveloped national resources, to
build population for these purposes, to give full employment to
our people, not only because this is a cardinal aspect of national
policy for any well-managed country these days but because a
country of loss than 12 million people must make the most
effective employment of its labour force of w'hich it is capable.
Then, because we are a country of small population
in a troubled and restless are-of the wrorld, we must apply
rather more of our substance to the build-up of our defence
capacity, more than we wJould crish but certainly no more than the
hazards that we feel , e must face in the years ahead would require
of us. And so with development, defenco, risin72 standards for our
people and a rising programme of intornztional aid, we are trying
to behave responsibly and as a good neighbour in this area of the
world. 
I am able to tell you that Australia has not shirked
its responsibilities in the field of international aid and that
we rank per capita fourth in all the countries of the world in
relation to the aid distributed through a variety of channels
and organisations. Now that, Mr. Chairman, gives a very sketchy outline
of what is occurring in this country. It may interest you to
know further that our system is one based principally on free
enterprise but one job in every four in Australia is provided by
the Government through one of its many utilities or through one
of the many Government services. So in a sense we have a mixed
system with the Government attending to the sort of public utilities
which don't normally call for a competitive system. Where
competition is desirable, we try to arrange matters so that there
will be competitors in the private field, ensuring an effective
and satisfactory service for the public.
You will have noticed those of you who have had any
time in the country that we don't go in so very much for
apartment dwelling in the way that you find this in Europe and
in parts of Asia, and indeed in most countries of the world.
The general run of Australian likes to live in his own home with
his own car and a small garden to look after, able to get away
to one of the pleasant places that can be visited in what is for
most of Australia, a temperate and very agreeable climate.
And we are glad to be able to report to you that as you fly over
the cities and see the tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands
of homes that you will see underneath you from the aircraft in
Sydney, Melbourne or one of the other capitals of the States of
the Commonwealth, the homes will be occupied by homo-owners.
Seventysix per cent. of the houses occupied in Australia are
occupied by people who either own that home or are in process
of acquiring it.
Now I have said sorething on the economic side, and
turning perhaps to something more agrecable, a lighter feature of
our national life, we enjoy in this continent a remarkable range
and variety of experience. I mentioned that it is a country in
which much of it lies behind a coastal fringe and most of it is
very arid indeed. But it is a country of contrasts and paradoxes
in that in the North of Queensland, quite recently I was met by
a body of people who at a time when I had taken deputations in
the South of Australia wanting financial relief against some
drought which was occurring in their part of the world, in the
North of Queensland, I had a deputation of people wanting
financial assistance because they had had so much rain that they
couldn't plant their sugar crop. So we have a country, as
described in one of our documentary films recently ' e run from
the tropics to the snows". In the north of Australia you have the
sort of rain forest which is typical of tropical countries, and
rain forest so thick and lush that it is attractive to botanists
from all parts of the world. Then by contrast, you come down
hero to the Australian Alps and we can show you more snow than
is to be found in Switzerland. So you have a country in which
tropical production and temperate production can be achieved
making the nation very largely self-sufficient in the production
of items of this character. / 6
L 5 
6
As to production, we have been able to make a gesture
quits recently which I hope the developing countries will find
helpful. We have provided a preference for the entry of their
oroduction into Australia and this was examined closely recently
by the GATT and the GATT approved of this arrangement and we are
hopeful that what we have provided in that direction will spread
by way of example to other countries.
Now I don't want to dwell too long, Mr. Chairman, on
Australia, but it is not an easy country to discover in a matter
of days. Some of you may have already come in contact with our
decimal currency. It is only about two months February 14th
since we made the changeover from pounds, shillings and pence
to a decimal system of dollars and cents. Those of you who have
acquired a range of the coins will find that on the side of the
coin opposite the effigy of Her Majesty The Queen will be reproduced
an Australian animal, and each of these animals is unique to this
country and will not be found anywhere else in the world;
geologically the oldest country with some of the strangest and
weirdest of animals. In fact so weird that somebody has written
a book about us calling us " They're a ' Jeird Mob". You may find
that so in your experience of us as the week prococds.
But here is an exciting country, and having at a period
of great change in the circumstances of the nations of Asia,
a role , we believe, to play of increasing importance in the years
ahead, a role as a bridge of understanding between the countries
of the West and the countries of Asia, a role as a groat supplier
of foodstuffs, of raw materials, of minerals to the growing
industrialisation of Asia. Here we arc situated with a handful
of people in an area of the world in which there are 650 million
Chinese more than 400 million Indians, some 110million Indonesians,
' 100 million. Pakistanis, Itink it is-altogether some 1,500 million
people in Asia .: ith a birthrate which should, if it maintans its
present trend, see a doubling of that population, if this is humanly
practicable and possible, ( this, anyhow, is the way the curve is
proceeding) by the end of this centur e. ll, quite obviously,
if this hungry world, and so much of Asia is a hungry area of the
world, is to be fed and supplied, growing industrialisation calling
for the raw materials and the more sophisticated equipment of
a developing economy, then quite obviously Australia has a part
to play in that developing process.
But there is . the darker side totho problem of Asia,
and here perhaps are to be faced some of the greatest hazards
which mankind has to meet in the years loading to the end of this
century, and it will be the firm intention of this friendly
country to do what it can to make an effective contribution towards
the attainment of peace and justice, social justice, justice as
between countries in our own area of the world and indeed throughout
the world as a whole. To some of us when we look at the problems
which confront us in government, the picture looks so dark at times
as almost to encourage despair, but we must recognise that despite
all these problems and difficulties, however painfully slow the
process may appear to be, there is developing a more sensitive
conscience around the countries of the world in relation to those
less favoured, there is a growing acceptance of responsibility to
do something about those things. In my own public life, I have
participated in discussions in such bodies as the International Bank,
/ 7 
-7
the International Development Association, the International
Monetary Fund. We have contributed to the recent discussions
of UNOTAD the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
There is the United Nations show, SUNFED, which also is doing
good work in its own direction. And out of these processes, some
dividends occur from time to time. join together on an Indus
waters scheme or we are able to help on some constructive project
of one kind or another. e in Australia have a tremendous
responsibility in relation to Papua and New Guinea, trying to leai.
there virtually a Stone Age people to a viable independence within
the earliest practicable period of time consistent with their own
wishes, and if any of you have the opportunity to travel through
that part of the world before you return home, I think you will
find it a splendid examiple of what enlightened government is able
to achieve with the co-operation of a people seeking better
standards of literacy and of health and of economidc independence.
These are some of the victories of peace which perhaps
are even more glorious than those of war.
tr. Chairman, I have no wish to detain you from tour
important discussions. It has been said by some wise man that
it is better to travel hopefully than to arrive, but as in most
statements of this kind which are superficially attractive, there
are of course the exceptions. I hope that your visit to Australia
proves one of theim. I have no doubt you travelled hopefully,
looking to the experience of discovery of a new continent and
perhaps for many of you a new and somewhat strange people. You
will find us a very friendly people and wie would have no better
Uish than you would enjoy your stay with us and find it of
increasing and helpful interest to you and that from the discussions
of the I. P. U. hero in Canberra will be a contribution to the better
understanding among peoples whaich will be the best foundation
of the peace and social justice to which vie all aspire.
I hope that you enjoy your stay vi th us and that you
return feeling that Australia is a continent which must be revisited
not once but many time s. 



FOR PRESS 66/ 0
P. M. No. 36/ 1966
DEVELOPMENT OF EXMOUTH TOWNSHIP
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold HWlt and
the ifremier of Western Australia, Mr. D. BranI
The ' ommonwealth and Western Australian State
Governments are to continue their financial suppnrt for the
development of Exmouth, the support township for the United States
Communication Station at Iorth iest Cape. The township In being
constructed by the Viest Australian State authorities.
This was announced today in a joint statement
released by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold lt, and the Western
Australian Premier, Mr. Brand.
The overall cost of housing and other public
facilities and amenities is estimated to be in excess of
47, OOOOO. This expenditure will be shared between the
Commonwealth and State with the Commonwealth providing the
greater share. In the development of Exmouth, the aim is to create
an attractive town of good standard, with an integrated community
@ f Australian and American families.
The pDpulatiDn of Exmouth is expected to reach about
2,000 by the end of 1967.
In the first phase 6f development, which is nearing
completiDn, forty-six houses have been built for Australian
families, and 130 are under construction for American families.
An office has been built for the Civil Commissioner
and his staff. Certain public buildings including a police
station and court house, health centre and library, emergency
centre and fire station are nearibg completion. A nursing
st ok five small wards is also nearing completion.
There will be -an integrated school in the t. wn for
Australian and American children. Twc classrooms built by
Australian authorities have been in use for a year, and six
classrooms are being built by United States authorities at their
expense. A children's playground and pre-school kindergarten are
also being developed. A hotel-motel has been opened and other commercial
developments include the completion of a store, garage and transport
depots. The second phase for development at Exmouth, which
is now being commenced, will include the building of an additional
8p4o ohl. ouses for Australian families, a community hall and a swimming
The number of classrooms at the school is to be
increased further, and full hospital facilities will replace the
nursing post now under construction. o/ 2 
-2-
A programme of tree and grass planting for streets
and park lands will be undertaken, a nursery of shrubs and trees
has been established, bowling green, cricket oval, tennis and
basketball courts are nearing completion mand various social
clubs have been launched.
In releasing the statement in Canberra, Mr. Holt
said " The develpment of the township at Exmouth will
make an impirtant contribution to the operation of the
US Navy's chmmunication station at North ' Vest Cape.
" I need hardly emphasise the significance for
australia -anmd her Allies of the rapid and successful
completion of this whole project. But in addition tu
this defence significance, the Exmouth development will
add an aspect of decentralisation to the many other
projects now under way in WJestern Australia, bringing
greater diversification and balance to the activities
of the State."
C.. NBERRA,
17th April, 196 



JAPAN/ AUSTRALIA BUSINESS CO-OPERATION COMMITTEE
FOURTH JOINT MEETING-HELD) AT CANBERrA. A . C. T.
l') th April l) 66
Speech by the Pri~ iie Minister. Mr. Harold Hlolt
Sir Edward Varren, Mr. Adachi, Mr. " Nagano, my
Ministerial colleagues, David Fairbairn, Mr. Anderson,
Ministerial colleagues and Parliamentary colleagues that
I see around the room and members of the Australia/ Japan
Business Co-operation Committee, Ladies and Gentlemen.
( I think that should just about cover it).
This is one of those happy occasions when, if
the politician speaks with two tongues he is applauded for
it rather than condemned, and with the help of my very able
assistant on my left, I shall try to tell you some of the
thoughts which come to the mind of an Australian Prime
minister on so felicitous an occasion as this. And I
assure you it is a very happy occasion for the Australian
people; and on behalf of the Australian people, speaking
for their Government, I extend to all of you who have come
to participate in the important work of this committee a
very warm and friendly welcome. We hope that you will
enjoy your stay with us and that your discussions will be
fruitful and con,; tructive.
This Committee iv a very happy manifestation of
what I regard as a great peacetime achievement, a positive,
constructive co-operation which has worked, ao Sir Edward
WJarren has so graphically outlined to us this morning, to the
mutual advantage of our two countries and indeed to '% he
advantage of world trade in general.
Sir Edw-. ard Warren has given us the figures which
illustrate the dramatic growth in trade which has occurred
between our two countries. It has been quite phenomenal
by the experience of Australia in its trading with any other
country in the world, and as he forecast, we confidently
anticipate that in the years ahead, Japan will assume the
leadership in the role of the largest customer for the
products of this country, and we, in turn are, on the
evidence of the growth of trade in recent years, an
improving and increasing customer for the products of Japan.
It is the essence of good negotiation that all
parties to it feel that the outcome of the negotiations has
been of advantage. It is a bad negotiation when one party
feels that it has't worked out fairly in its case. But
ever since the treaty was entered into between Australia
and Japan, trade relations have been harmonious and
co-operativie. There have been, of course, occasions of
difficulty, but these have, as a result of friendly discussion
and negotiation, usually produced a satisfactory result for
us and we confidently anticipate that in this spirit we can
advance the interests of our two countries as trade grows
between us. 
2.
We are on the threshold of another important
phase in ) ur trade relations, as the vast mineral projects
now getting into production in various parts of Australia
come to supplement the already large volume of trade between
US. I believe that this growth in trade will have a
dramatic impact upon the economic thinking of other countries
observing the development of trade, the strength of
production whichi will f low from this from Japan to other
parts of the world. And so, although our achievements up
to this point of time have been great, he would be indeed
a pessimist who did not see in the future a tremendous
growth and increase in the volume of trade between us.
When Therc is such interdependence as has developed
between our two countries, and interdependence of trade on a
scale which has become important to us both, then inevitably
problems arise and even some dangers to thc economy of each,
because we have developed so strong an interest and
participation in the economic development of the other,-that
whatever happens to one country is of consequence to that
othce" country. And this gives importance to the e:: istence
of your own Committee. The closer our interdependence
becomes, the wider its scope, the more important it is that
we should have at a high level of consultation people from
both countries who can help to iron out the difficulties,
who can inform each other as to economic developments in the
other country and in this way develop a more constructive
and harmonious teamwork which will produce the most favourable
results for each of us. I believe we are fortunate and
I speak for the Government and our people in that there
should have been from the outset such a high level of
representation in this Australia/ Japan Business Co-operation
Committee. Those from Australia, of course, are well known
to you and as you have no doubt already discovered, they
include some of the outstanding figures in the industrial
and commercial life of this country. Of those who come to
us from Japan, most of you I know only by repute or of the
vast organisation which you represent. But I am glad to s
see in your company today, a very old friend from my own days
as Treasurer of the Commonwealthin the person of Mr. Honie.
I give him a warm welcome, and he is, I believe, a
representative of the high calibre of membership of this
Committee which means so much to the prosperity and to the
strength of our two countries.
lie have a mutual interest as two great trading
countries you, I think, ranking seventh in importance in
world trade and Australia ranking twelfth we have an
important interest together in the development of satisfactory
international trading relationships, and so we wish to see
come out of taie KennmV Round of negotiations a further
liberalirsation of the trade of the world.
We have also a mutual interest in seeing the
restoration of peaceful conditions in the countries of Asia
and in particular in war-torn South East Asia. We have
been able to demonstrate in our own trade one with the other 
what can be achieved under conditions of peace, and we share
a vision of the growth in trade anid prosperity and wellbeing
which could occur in the countries of Asia if conditions of
peace could be re-established there. There is a growing
willingness around the world, particularly from the United
States where PreLident Johnson has undertaken to outlay
at least one billion dollars in peaceful reconstruction
and economic development in South East A; Aa if peaceful
conditions can be re-established There is this willingness
to help, and we with you in Japan, have a mutual interest in
promoting to the best advantaga that we can causes which will
assist in restoring peace in this troubled area of the world.
We have in A-. ia a population today of some 1,500
million. It is an awesome thought that by the end of this
century that population may have doubled and all the
indications are that this will occur. I believe myself
that not sufficiont thought as yet is being given by the
more advanced industrialised nations of the world to the
problems which will be presented to the world by this quite
dramatic developmient in the population structuie of Asia in
particular and the world as a whole. Japan and Australia
have an important part to play in meeting both the
opportunities and the challenges which will develop from
this remarkable economic phenomenon of our time.
One of the happy recent developments has been the
creation of the As~ ia D -, velopmnent Bank, and the importance of
this is clearly recognisud by your country from the evidence
supplied in the major contribution of $ 200 million which you
have committed yourselves to supply to the resources of the
bank. Australia, too, has recognised the opportunity here
for constructive assistance around the whole of the Asian
area and we have, as you know, subscribed, or committed
ourselves to the extent of $ 85 million to the planned total
of $ 1,000 million ( American) to be the initial capital of
the bank. This ia a hop
we expect to see emerge in this part of the world.
It may interest you to know, gentlemen, that of
the prospective investors who come to Australia front
overseas, an increasing proportion, as they discuss these
matters with me, are looking to Australia these days, not
merely as a market for the products of their manufacture here,
but are seeing in Australia a base or launching place for
their own increasing trade in the countries of Asia. And
so we become, as a result of these processes, an even more
important trading partner with Japan. Vie can only
anticipate favourable omens for the future in the light of
opportunities that we see ahead of us.
No doubt we will have many problems to meet along
the road but our two economies are so clearly supplementary
or complementary to each other that we would be lacking in
any normal spirit of optimism if wie did not foresee a
tremendous~ growth of trade in the years ahead between our
two countrie. s, contributing to a more peaceful and prosperous
Asia and indeed, we would hope, contributing to the trade
of the world. 
4.
It is with that background to your discussions that
I now formally declare your meetings open and extend to you
my best wishes for fruitful diucussion and a valuable outcome
from talks together which I assure you, on behalf of the
Australian Government, we regard as being oi great
importance to this country.
My best wishes to you all. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 37/ 1966
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA
The following senior officials will accompany the
Prime Minister on his forthcoming visit to South East Asia
Lieutenant General Sir John Wilton, C. B.,
Chief of the General Staff, and
Chairman, Chiefs of Staff Designate.
Mr. P. J. Lawler, Deputy Secretary, Prime
Minister's Department.
Mr. G. A. J~ okel, First Assistant Secretary,
Department of External Affairs.
Mr. C. Vi. Clugston, Acting First Assistant Secretary,
Department of Defence.
Dr. W. T. Gibbs, will serve as medical adviser
to the Party. The Prime Minister's personal staff will
comprise his Private Secretary, Mr. F. W. Jennings, and his
Press Secretary, Mr. A. Eggleton.
CANBERRA, 19th April, 1966 ~( IN 



I. M. No. 38/ 1966
VISIT TO SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Statement by the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr'. Harold Holt
on his arrival in Singapore
I am at the beginnin7 of a short 7isit to
South-East Asian countries which will take me in the coming days
to Viet Nam, Thailand, Malaysia ( includinr a visit to Kuchin*
in Sarawak) and Sinpapore. At this time J am in Singapore
purely in transit, but I shall be meetina Singapore Ministers
for discussions at a later stage in my tour.
My visit is designed to take me to those
South-East Asian countries where Australian forces are serving.
Australia has now and immediately in prospect some 8,000
servicemen in the region. Australian forces are involved in the
defence of these c~ untries under arrangements based on mutual
understandin7 and partnership. We are determined to be a Rood
ally. I shall be explaining to the GQvernments in the region
the active steps which Australia is taking to expand its defence
effort and to shape it for the requirements of collective regional
security. We have taken part in the defence of Singapore
and Malaysia for many years and are proud to have made a
contribution to the preservation of security and stability in
this region. Our forces are now oammitted in a combat role in
Viet Nam, at the request ef the Government of the Republic of
Viet Nam, in assisting the Vietnamese people in their struggle
to defend their national independence aqainst communist aggression.
This awression in the Puise of " a war of national liberation"
or " people's war" is being relentlessly waoed through techniques
of infiltration, terror, subversion and direct military attack.
My visit will not be confined to the immediate
military and security problems, important as they are. I hope
to have discussions with Governments about what Australia can do
to assist in the achievement of social progress and economic
development. The Australian Government wishes to ensure that
the role we play in the fields of economic development, technical
assistance, education and in developing the skills of the region,
is vigorous and prcductive. Australia, of course, is already
closely enap-ed in these matters through the Colombo Plan,
ECAFE, the new Asian Development Bank mand in other ways. / 2 
2.
Recent years have seen Australia and most of the
countries of South and South East Asia come much closer together
undcr the pressure of events. This has been accompanied by a
marked growth of understanding, mutual confidence and respect.
It emerges clearly from our political and diplomatic relationships
that, despite the separateness of our histories and of our
cultural backTrounds, our national aims and external attitudes
are very similar indeed respect for national independence,
pear--and stability, economic development, widening opportunities
and conditions of freedom.
This is my first visit abroad as the Prime Minister of
Australia. I am 4lad that it is being made to the region of
South-East Asia where we believe that we have with friendly
neighbours a stron. sense of common interest and mutuality of
purpose. SINGAPORE, 21 April, 1966. 



PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT, FOR MEMBERS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY
PRESS GALLERY. AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA. 21ST APRIL. 1966
Q. Can yuu tell us Sir, whether you are goino to make
any statement today, before you P-o away, on the call-up
of aliens for National ervice?
MR. HOLT: Well I can rrive you some comment on both those
matters the alien call-up and the question of the votinace.
I can rive you comment in the sense that work hae been
proceeding but no cinality has been reached. On the voting
aspect, Cabinet has considered the matter and has come to a
view which it wishes to discuss with its own party room
supporters. It is clearly desirable to have the widest area
of aoreement 6n a matter of this sort and I would expect to
be in a position to take this up with members of the Government
parties shortly after my return.
On the alien matter, I did indicate a general view of
my own in the House some time ap-o, and at the same time said
that there were some complications about the matter arisinp
from our international relationships and practice on these
matters between countries. Work has been proceedino at
Departmental level. There has been some further consideration
on it in Cabinet, but at the moment we are awaitinp, the outcome
of discussions which have been takinp place through our
Department of External Affairs and some of the countries which
would be affected so far as their nationals are concerned,
if the Government were to proceed with a scheme alcng these
lines. I was told when I last enquired that there would
probably be three or four weeks of time involved in bringing
this matter to a sufficientl advanced sta-e for Cabinet t2
have another look at it. But we shall press on with it when
the information reaches us.
Q. Any particular countries heavily involved overseas
countries?
MR. HOLT: Well, I think most of you know where our main sources
of migsration come from. It is not difficult to list them.
Q. Any indicating any opposition?
MR. HOLT: Well I am not well enough informed on it myself to
comment on that at this sta-e and I don't think it desirable
to make piecemeal comment about it. When we are in a position
to say firmly what the policy is to be and what problems, if
any, persist with that, I shall do so. I would hope that it
will be possible te do this before the end of the Session.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, reparts have been floating around
that the United Stsites Government has consulted Australia on
the possible bombing of Hamoi, and the reports say also that
we have told imerica at this staoe that we are not very keen
on it. / 2 
-2-
MR. HOLT Well, as I said in the House the other day no
particular sirnificance should be read into this in relation
to the matter you've mentioned that there are virtually daily
exchanges between Australian Governmental representatives at
some level or other in relation to some aspect or other of the
conflict in Viet Nam. I don't think it is desirable to make
running comments on the substance of these discussions. We
are both involved in military operations in the area and
naturally, matters of a tactical kind or a strategic kind
are discussed from time to time between us, and I don't want
to get into a practice of commenting on possible tactical
moves which mip&amp; ht be made in the military field. But the
President of the United States has stated quite emphatically
that it is not the intention of the United States Government
to destroy the economy of North Viet Nam or to prevent it
from maintaining a viable existence and we have supported
that view. I have said this publicly myself.
Q. Can you say what our attitude is to the bombing
of Hanoi, Sir? Do we elieve in it or don't we?
MR. HOLT: No, I'm not Poins to comment because your question
has to be read against the background of what has been said
about our objectives. Our objectives are not to destroy the
economy, the livelihood of the people of Hanoi or to prevent
North Viet Nam continuinP as an economic entity.
Some of you were interested, I understand, as to
whether I would be participating in the Queensland elections,
and I can tell you quite firmly that at the invitation of
the members of my own party in Queensland the Parliamentary
party and the eryanisation I have arreed to participate.
I did have a talk with Mr. Nicklin about this before finally
making up my mind on it, and he made it clear to me that I
would be welcome so far as he was concerned,
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, your talk with the Indonesian
Ambassador yesterday has aroused some interest. I wonder if
you would care to tll us what your hopes are for closer
relations and also for the removal of the points at issue?
MR. HOLT Well, I had a very friendly talk with the
Indonesian Ambassador. He was gracious enough to express on
behalf of his Government very warm appreciation for Aujtralia's
gesture in pivine some assistance recently at the time of the
floods in Java and it is quite apparent from what he said
that the promptness with which Australia acted and the
genuine frienaliness behind the move on our part was received
with pleasure and appreciation by the people of Indonesia.
We both expressed the hope that the relationship between eur
two countries would improve in the period ahead. He made it
clear to me that I would be welcome in his country if I found
an opportunity to visit it. It was known to us both that,
havinr regard to the timetable and the fact that I was
limitinp my visit on this occasion to those countries in which
Australian serricemen were stationed, this would not be an
opportune or practicable time from my point of view. But
we had a very cordial discussion and I know that his Government
is well aware that Australia has a continuing desire to
maintain a course of friendship with Indonesia. We look to
a future in which there will be practical opportunities for
us to develop, not only mutually advantageous relations but
mutually advantageous trade, and for our part in Australia,
we regret the continuance of the policy o confrontation which
hinders the full development of this relationship. 
Q. Was there any invitation to go to Indonesia, Sir,
or vice versa?
IVIR. HOLT: I didn't interpret the discussion as a specific
invitation to visit Indonesia in the course of this visit
but I don't think any particular significance should be
read into that. It was well knowTn tohim that my opportunities
were limited, that the timetable had been fixed. But he
did, I repeat, make it clear that I would be welcome if I
found it practicable in the future to make a visit, and I
would hope to do so.
Q. Have we a standing invitation to Sukarno to come here?
MR. HOLT: I understand there was an invitation..........
Q. Would you be ready to go when the time was suitable?
MR. HOLT: I am always ready to travel in the service of the
nation where it can be of value to Australia, and I vould so
regard a visit to Indonesia, but this is not within the realm
of present planning. I also have a desire to visit, of
course, the Philippines and Taiwan and other countries in
the area of particular interest to Australia, but
opportunities have not so far arisen.
Q. Japan, Sir?
MR. HOLT: dell I have had two visits in recent years to Japan
but, of course, a country of such importance to Australia
would certainly call for frequent exchanges of visits from
Heads of Government or senior ministers of the governmnt.
Q. Sir, just to complete the Queensland election answ: rer.
Do you know cxactly ahen you hope to go there and where
MR. HOLT: I understand they are planning a couple of meetings
in or around Brisbane, one in Brisbane itself, one at
Ipsvich and another meeting in North Queensland, probably
Townsville. This would be on the Thursday and Friday of
the week prior to the final week of the carpaign, whenever
that is.
Q. WYould you hope to go to Bingil Bay?
MR. HOLT: Don't put temptation in my path. It is getting
awfully close in relative terms when you got up that far.
This would depend on what der-ands there are on me down hero
at that time, but I suppose even a Prime Minister is
entitled to have a weekend off some time. If not off, at
least, someplace that is agreeable to him.
Q. There is still some speculation, Sir, that there
will be a snap election follouiing your forthcoming visit.
MR. HOLT: Well I don't think that is terribly sensible ' 1,! hen
regard is had to the fact that there is an election in
Quconsland. Vie don't like having overlap ing elections
in this country. The word " snap" I don't think you
can have an election undc-r five or six fecks from the time
that you announce that you are going. / 4 
Q. On the matter of visits, if I could just refer to them.
Is there any intention of holding a Prime IMinister's
Conference in London this year, do you know?
MR. HOLT: Well, I am not able to speak with any authority on
that. Arising from the Lagos Conference, there was, as I
recall it, an expressed intention of having some further
meeting to discuss issues which had been raised ther~ e in
July in London, but whether that was a firm. arrangement or
not, I am unable to say. I imagine that Mr. W rilson, with
an election to be faced himself, was keeping his own mind
fairly open as to what should. be the planning thereafter.
I am not in a position to give any definite informa. tion.
Q. SiDo you propose to go to London in the winter recess,
MR. HOLT: Well, that-is a strong possibility but it will be
affected perhapsb. 6he auestion of a Prime Ministers'
Conference and it could be affected by the course of events
in Australia, but I think it is clearly desirable that there
should not be too delayed an opportunity taken to contact
the leaders of governments of such importance to Australian
interest, and the United Kingdom and the United States
certainly stand in that category. President Johnson has
been good enough to indicate to me that ho would very much
like to see me there and this would, of course, be considered
in any planning I might do for overseas Journeying later
in the year. Incidentally, while on that, I had a visit
yesterday from the Ambassador for India who conveyed tome
a fomal invitation from the Govcrnment of India
You mean the High Commissioner.
MR. HOLT: Yes, I'm sorry, the lligh Commissioner to visit
that country and this, of course, will also be a matter of
considerable interest and value, but I can't see the
opportunity arising in the early future. I took the
opportunity on behalf of the Government to issue -at the
same time a most cordial invitation to the Prime Minister
of India to visit Australia wihenever that mnight seem
practicable to Mvrs. Gandhi.
On the French nuclear tests, Sir, has Australia given
landing rights to French military planes to fly across
Australian territory?
M. HOLT: I would like to refer you on the detail of that to
Senator Gorton. The matter was raised and there were
certain assurances given, I understand, .1hich were regarded
as satisfactory by our adviscr3 in the External Affairs
field and by the MAinis ter, but I don't claim to be abreast
of the detail on it.
Q. Broadly, we do let them, Sir, subject to those
conditi ons?
Mk~. HOLT. This was the arrangement, as I understand it. / 2 
Mr. whitlam, Sir, wants you to release Gunner O'Neill.
from the unpleasant predicament in which he now finds himself.
Are you likely to be sympathetic?
MR. HOLT: I am sympathetic to most of my fellow men. Many of us
run into trouble of one kind or another at some sta,-e of our
lives, but I did say in the House yesterday that I would
examine this matter with my collearues, the Minister for
Defence and the Minister for the Army. I have raised the
matter with the Minister for Defence and it is currently
receiving his consideration, and no doubt he will in turn be
in consultation with the Minister for the Army, but these are
matters in which a great deal of weight must be given to the
view of the Service people who themselves know the situation
in their own Service and the conditions which give rise to
good order and discipline needed to sustain morale. We
would, of course, be very much influenced by their judgment
after our own dispassionate examination of the facts.
Q. Sir, do you wish to say something about your trip today?
MR. HOLT: Iell, I think you know the details. I will be in the
House until the end of Question Time. It will be a quick
journey from there. We have had to use the Civil Aviation
plane to catch the 12 o'clock aircraft leaving Mascot, so
assuming the fog has lifted there there was some fog there
this morning, I understand I shall, because of the time
factor, just go from one aircraft to the other. That's one
reason why we are meeting you people here this morning.
It won't be practicable to do that in Sydney. I have on
board with me several of the official party the Chief of
the General Staff, the Chairman-designato of the Chiefs
of Staff Committee, General Wilton, will meatus in Perth,
and we proceed from there to Singapore. Tomorrow morning,
I think it is, we set off for Saigon from Singapore, so
that by lunch-time tomorrow wo should be right in the heart
of the matter.
Q. Sir, the W. A. Premier after his recent talks with you
suggested that he expected a decision on the Ord this session.
Ib you think this would still. lld?
MR. HOLT: Well, I would have thought that this was one of the
matters that would be considered in a Budgetary context
so that it would be a matter considered not later than in
a Budgetary context...
Q. So you would suggest little hope of seeing it this
Session?
MR. HOLT: Vell, I don't think that adds up to anything much.
It has to be a Budgetary matter, so even if a decision wore
taken on it beforehand assuming it were a favourable
decision you would have to mako some Budgetary provision
for it, There is no desire on our part to delay consideration
of it. It may well be that Cabinet will be looking at it
ahead of the Budgot but this matter is currently in the hands
of the AMinister for National Development and when ho brings
it to Cabinet is a matter which at this stage is in his hands.
e../ 6 
Q. Will you be officially meeting Premier Ky in
Viet Nam?
MR. HOLT: Oh, yes.
Q. Do you think this could be taken by the Vietnamese
as a sort of de facto interference in their internal
politics.
MR. HOLT: ~ ell I would most certainly hope not and I would make
it quite clear in my own statemens, if that seemed necessary,
that this was not so. I have made it abundantly clear,
I would have hoped, and this would ? have been reported in
Saigon and other capitals which I shall be visiting that
the principal purpose of my visit is to make contact with
Australian Servicemen in the field, and to dcvcloo in this
way a more intimate awareness of their problems and the
conditions under which they are tc serve. But quite
obviously, it is desirable when visiting thse countries,
to take such opportunities as I can find of talking to
people who are either the Heads of Government or in a
position of authority in the Service or governmental field.
The other aspect which must not be overlooked is that
Australia is increasiinly and this is how it is seen in
the eyes of the countries we shall be visiting a
country giving assistance in a variety of forms; not merely
military assistance as we are in respect of , Mlaysia and
Singapore and South Viet Nam, but technical assistance and
material assistance through the Colombo Plan and other
agencies, a major contribution to the about-to-bc-formed
Devolopment Bank for Asia. In these and other ways, Australia
looms fairly large in the eyes of the people of these
countries, the more so because so frequently our assistance
is related to personalities who go there to do a job for
Australia and it is quite heart-warming to find how well
they are received, what a splendid impression they make.
I don't know if any of you saw a documentary recently on
Cambodia in w hich a motor repair shop run by a couple of
Australians was one of the popul: ar features of the industrial
life of the place. They had been given a mass of buses of
various kinds from various countries. You know, the large
volume of aid from countries like Russia, the United States
and elsewhere. But nobody knew how to make the buses run
if anything went wrong with them and our boys have been
training people there and doing a very good job and in the
process apparently making a lot of friends for Australia.
When the Prime Minister . f Thailand ,; as here, he was telling
me of the technical training school that we have established
in his country, designed for peopo. L" g. oing into the Services,
but has become so -wll and favourably knovnthat apparently
employers bombard the place and popleo who are being trained
to lure them away before they -ver got to the army, but at
least the economy of the country derives some benefit from
this. W1ell, I think that is about all.
Good luck, Sir' 



PRIE HINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA 661/ 067
The following is text of Speech by
Vietnamese Prime hinister Ky and the Australian
Prime Minister, Mr. Holt's reply. 22ND APRIL. 1966
Speech by Prime Minister Ky
On behalf of the Government and the people of Vietnam,
I have the honour of welcoming you to this country.
Your visit of today has a very special significance
since it takes place at a time when we exert ourselves to repel
Communist invasion and build a new society for Vietnam with the
staunch support and assistance of your country especially with
the participation of the gallant Australian soldiers.
It is more than an evidence of friendship, or a reason
for strengthening unity between cur two countries.
Your visit has the value of a pledge a pledge to
stand in the forefront of the cause of justice, freedom and human
happiness. Such a pledge is all the more valuable since it has
come voluntarily, is fostered by a vigilant spirit and motivated
by altruism. The people of Vietnam will never forget what the former
Prime Minister Robert M1enzies once said: " The Republic of Vietnam
is one of the frontiers of human freedomn', and therefore to
abandon that country now would mean a Communist takeover and
imperil neighbouring countries in South-East Asia.
Also, your Excellency, allow me to say that the five
points that you yourself defincu recently concerning the problem
of Vietnam are indicative of the chivalrous spirit of the people
of Australia. The valiant and brave soldiers that Australia has
generously sent here to share the fighting and 1, ictories with us
for the past year and who will be strengthened soon let alone
Australian aid under various other forms are the materialisation
of the ideals I mentioned earlier.
' Je, the Vietnamese people, very highly appreciate such
friendship built on sacrifice and generosity.
, Ve will never betray the friendship of our friends and
allies. With the trauitional and indomitable spirit of the
Vietnamese people, with the resolute determination to win of the
present generation, with the strong support of our allies, we will
fight to repel invasion, tc achieve entire freedom, to give our
people a new and happy life ana also to bring a substantial
contribution to consolidation of world peace.
This, we believe, will be the most efficient way of
showing our gratitude to our friends for their support in this
critical hour of our history. 
Speech by Australian Prime Minister,
Mr. Harold Holt
Your Excellency, I am very appreciative of this warm
welcome that you have given me on behalf of the people of your
country. Australia's friendship with your country is well
established and I think you know of our admiration for the gallant
resistance which the people of South Viet Nan have been making
against the Communist aggression which has threatened you for so
many years. have seen this not merely as a resistance in order
to preserve your own national integrity, but we have seen it as a
resistance which is in the interest of a free people, no: t only
throughout South-East Asia but indeed free people throughout every
part of the world.
I For as long as Communist aggression persists, as long
as the Chinese philosophy of Communist domination persists, then
free people everywhere throughout the world will be threatened,
and you have been in the forefront of this resistance.
r e, with the United States which is making such an
enormous contribution for security here, and other allies who are
lending assistance to you are proud that there is an Australian
force and other Australian elements here in your country making
the contribution of which you have spoken in terms of such
appreciation. we hope, your Excellency, that as our enlarged force
reaches your country that we will be able to join with you not
| merely in the military tasks, of overriding importance though they
be, until peace and stability has been restored here, but while
our troops are with you we hope that they will be giving you
assistance also in other important fields of civic administration
S-in health and sanitation, in education, in transport, in road
construction, in a variety of positive and helpful ways which can
enable you or assist you to build that better South Viet Nam
which I know is your own personal aspiration and the objective of
the people of your country.
It is perhaps of interest to your people to realise
how close we have become to each other as a result of the
improvements in modern transport.
To me it is something of a revelation that I could be
answering questions in the House of Representatives in Canberra
yesterday morning up until 11.15 an. here I an the next day in
company with you and able to convey our greetings directly to the
people of your country.
We recognize with you that the tasks ahead here will
be difficult anc. they may be long, but we share your own determination
and resdlution and that of the United States of America, to
see that freedom is preserved in this country and that by tne
force of that example the forces of freedom will be encouraged to
make their own resistance wherever Communist aggression may
threaten. WVe believe that you are performing a great service to
the free people of the world, and I express on behalf of my fellow
countrymen our gratitude and appreciation to you.
* i 



PRIME MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST AS:
SPEECH BY THE PRIIE MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT,
TO THE AUSTRALIAN 105 FIELD BATTERY AT BIEN HOA,
VIET NAM 23RD APRIL, 1966
Major, Gentlemen I have had an , pnortunity today to see our own
Australian servino men on the spot and I'am very lad to be
able to brin, to you not merely the good wishes o? your fellow
countrymen, ut the pride we feel in the reputation ou've
built for Australia by your service in this area of the world.
We regard this as a critical battle area. We regard
the issues for which you are fighting as amongst the most
important that any group of countries could fight for in this
day and generation. This is literally in our jud-ment one of the great
critical battle areas for the forces of freedom in the world
today, and Australia has madea valuable contribution.
Although our numbers have been small the assistance to morale,
the actual achievements in the operations of war in which you
have been engaged have been greatly appreciated by the people
and government of South Viet lam and certainly they have been
greatly valued by our Allies of the United States and of the
other Torces who are fighting in this area of the world.
I came here knowing that you had built up in the
infantry and the artillery a splendid reputation, but I can
assure you that the comments made to me by the Prime Minister,
by the Head of State, by the Head of the American forces, have
all confirmed the high reputation which we had gathered you had
established for yourselves here. You ha, e served with
distinction to yourselves and, of course for pride in your
own country. ; ie think of this area as one in which not only is a
' battle to be fought and win for the freedom of the people who
are wanting to live out their own lives in peace, but here is
an opportunity in this part of the world, through the civic
jobs that you have been carrying out, to establish that the
age-old enemies of mankind can be conquered. And this is perhaps
the most rewardin6 tart of your duties, other than those in the
actual military operations themselves.
I am going to s-ay a fe.' '.' ords to you on Anzac Day
so I ,. on't give you too much of a uash here this afternoon but
although I -' as a very poor gunner for a few months in the A. I. F.
myself, I think recognise a good regiment of artillery
when 1 see one and I conrratulate you. Maaor Tedder, and all
your men, on a first-class artillery oattery representing
Australia in South Viet Nam.
I know how much you are all lookin.' forward to getting
back to Australia. You y'il find a wonudrfuT welcome for you
on your return and until then good fortune in your operations
and a happy journey on your way home. 



PRIME MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, gave
a dinner to return hospitality extended to
him during his visit to Saigon. The Prime
Minister of South Viet Nam Air Vice-Marshal
Ky, was the principal guest. 24TH APRIL, 1966
Mr. Holt said I would like to thank you again, Mr. Prime Minister,
for the warm welcome which you and members of your Government
have given me during my visit. I will leave Viet Nam with a
lasting impression of The courtesies and kindnesses which I have
received as your guest.
May I say also that this visit has been of great value
for the discussions we have conducted together and the information
I have gathered at first hand here.
As you know, Mr. Prime Minister, we in Australia feel
that the Vietnamese people's resistance to communist aggression
is of vital importance o free men everywhere. Until the
communists, especially those in Pekin*, learn that they cannot
achieve domination over others by their sinister techniques of
infiltration, sabotage and terror, there can be no lasting peace
nor personal freedom in Asia or indeed anywhere in the worl.
May I also say Mr Prime Minister, that the Australian
eople deeply respect ana admire the qualities of courage,
fortitude and resolute independence which are part of the national
heritage and character of the Vietnamese people.
We are proud, Mr. Prime Minister, to stand with the
Vietnamese people in their determined resistance to communist
aggression and in their efforts to achieve rising standards of
living. Mr. Prime Minister, Excellencies and gentlemen, I
invite you to raise your glasses to the Government and people
of Viet Nam to victory in their struggle for independence to
success in their efforts to achieve a better life in conditions
of security freedom and justice and to the deep bonds of
friendship between Australia and Viet Nam which have been
strengthened by our association in this common cause. 



PRIJE MINISTER' S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASI A
ANZAC DAY SPEECH M1ADE BY THlE PRILE h1INISTER.
IMR. HAROLD HOLT TO AUSTR', LI. AN AN-' ZE1;' JLNA' D FORCES~
AT BIEN HOA, SOUTH VIETNAM~. APRIL, 1966
It is 51 years today since Australian, New Zealand,
other British and allied forces stormed the heights of Gallipoli
and together wrote an imperishable chapter in the history of our
two countries. It wasn't a military success in that the objectives,
the military objectives, were not achieved, but it was a victory
of the spirit it revealed in young countries which hrnd not been
tested in a national strife of this kind before.
It tested qualities of character, of mateship of
manhood and the resolution to go on with the military task, and
because it developed so much significance for Australia and New
Zealand and because it ma~ rked our comradeship together in arms
and it crried with it the lessons for our couantrymnen of what the
cause of freedom can mean to a liberty-loving people.
Ye hove, from that time on, celebrated Anzac Day as
perhaps the most significant commemoration in our national
calendar, and wherever Australians and Nowi Zealanders are to be
found around the world today, they will be pauising and
commemorating this . nzac Day observance.
They will be commemorating the fallen, those who gave
their lives that we, in our turn, could know the blessings of
liberty. But they will also be coimmemorating the national
progress that we have mnadte, the progress that has bcen largcly
influenced by the inspirations that flowed out ol' the Gallipoli
tradition. And for you and for our own poople in our countries,
and those that are in other parts of the world, Anzac Day today
will be taking on a deeper significance in that here gathered
again on a field of battle remote from their own countries the
Anzacs are together again, fighting again, for the cause of
freedom. It is characteristic of this precious boon of freedom
that the battle for it is never finally won at any time or by any
generation of people: each generation in their turn have to take
up the challenge, the price of liberty is still eternal vigilance,
and our two peoples h! ave never waited for the battles to come to
them. They have clearly recognised the threat to liberty
when it has emerged and they have quickly responded to. the need
to come in resistance to it and again here today we see the
evidence that our two countries have recognised clearly in this
struggle in South Viet Nan a challenge to liberty not merely the
liberty of the South Viotnamese people, but to the liberty of free
peoples everywhere. 
That is one of the factors which makes this, in my
judgment, an historic struggle because if success can be achieved
here then that will influence the lives of literally hundreds of
millions of people throughout Asia and, perhaps, less ciirectly
but importantly, it will influence what occurs around the rest of
the world. So you may feel that you are engaged in an historic
struggle and it is historic for one other good reason: that is
that, on few occasions, can it have been said in earlier military
history thant those who were actively enga gcd in the military tasks
have at the same time regarded as vital to complete success, that
they should engage in the constructive, positive task of assisting
the people of the threatened country to build~ a better order of
life for themselves. ';-hat yo-have been doin.. in your helpful, friendly
positive and constructive way to assist the people of the area in
which y'e served towards a better life, itself becomes a mode.
on which we would hope there c'an be build a very much greater
structure. It has been an inspiration to me to iind that in the
Government of South Viet Nam, in the forces of the United States
and other friendly forces and in our own ranks, there is this
determination to make the military victory a supplement to the
victory of' peace in building a better standard for the people.
You in your own way have added another bright chapter
to the story of Anzac.
You have conducted yourselves in the finest Anzac
tradition. I have hcaru. nothing but commendation wherever I have
turnG-d for the contribution that the Australian and New Zealand
Forces have xna: Ze.
We may be snail in number but it is the quality and
character of m-anhood that -makes its impact upon the people who
observe what wie are doing anu you have mcasured up to those tests
and have come through splendidly.
Your fellow countrymen feel a pride in you that will
make for them this Anzac Day one of the brightest in our
celebration of that long series.
They will wish that you comc successfully through your
engagemnents and that you will in uue course return to your two
countries which we can tref, sure as countrics of liberty countries
which rank amongst the most splendid in the world for what they
can give to their people.
So good luck to you all and en behalf, not merely of
the Government and peoplc of Australia, but cn behalf of the
Government and people of New Zealand as well, we congratulate you,
we thank you and we are proud of you. 



PRIE } I INIS' 7 Ii'S TOUR Of SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Final
Press Ccnferencegiven by the Prime Minister,...
Mr. Harold Holt in Bangkok, Thailand 26TH APRIL, 1966
Ladies and gentlemen, this gathering had actually been
arranged when it was thought I would not be having any
discussions with you at the airport on my arrival, but we did
have, as you will recall, a short interview there, and perhaps
what I should do today is just give you a brief account of what
has been covered today and then give you an opportunity to ask
me anything you like about these activities.
We shall not have a great deal of time together as you
will have already gathered, as my Australian colleagues with the
press have discovered, there has not been very many time slots
left on the programme for me by those who have made the
arrangements. , Je find that toaay has been another , ery crowded one.
This morning I was able to return the visit to the
Prime Minister and to meet him and his colleagues in the Cabinet.
You may remember that when he was in Australia he and
two of his senior ministerial colloagues had discussions with us
in the Cabinet Room at Canberra and I regard it as a very fortunate
development that so soon after our talks there, after an
interval in which very important developments have occurred in
this region of the world, and following so closely on my own visit
to South Vietnam and other visits by Ministers here to other
countries in the region, we have been able to have a very
inforiatie and, I think I can claim, mutually valuable exchange
of views. Following those talks our Ambassador here, ir. Loomes
had a working lunch at which I was able to meet several of the
senior diplomatic representatives from the United Kingdom, the
United States and New Zealand together with many of our ovm
senior officials and that providud a useful opportunity for
further talks. After lunch we made the journey by heli-copter to His
Majesty's -palace wihere we had the aavantage of a very interesting
talk with the king.
He asked me to convey his greetings and good wishes to
the people of Australia and expressed his appreciation for the
co-operation which we have developed between our two countries.
Tonight I am to be entertained to dinner by the Prime
Minister and this will round. off for me what has been a very
pleasant and I think quite valuable visit to Thailand.
Tomorrow morning we leave for Kuala Lumpur to begin
another phase of my tour of those areas of South-East Asia in
which Australian troops arc stationed.
QUESTION: vhat impression have you formed regarding Thailand's
security position in relation to the Coniunist insurgency in 
the north-cast?
MR. HOLT: ffell we did discuss thuse matters but I don't think that
as a guest in the country it is for me to offer my assessments
publicly of the local situation.
I w., ould say that the Government is very sensitive to the
danger and pressures which come froma Commnunist infiltration.
They are aware of developments in various parts of the
country and I gathered that the Government was capable of dealing
effectively with them.
Q. In the course of your discussions with the Thai
Government was theD possibility raised of further strengthening
under th(; aegis of SEATO a bigger Australian force in Thailand.
12. HOLT: I don't know who has bccn conveying an impression that
at any stage I referred to an enlarged Australian force, I think
that if you will study the language of any comment I have made it
does not give rise to that interpretation.
I havc indicated the extent to which we have announced
the contribution which we have announced in the various places.
I haven't sought to enlarge on that or to enlarge our
contribution.
Q. It was reported in one of the papers this afternoon
that you may send more troops to Thailand?
MAR. HOLT: I don't know whure the report emanated but there is
no foundation from any communt which I have made. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 39/ 1966
PRI1' E MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA 661/ 063
Statement Released by the Prime T. Minister,
M1r. Harold Holt on his arrival in Bangkok, Thailand.
26th APRIL, 1966
This morning I was with Australian servicemen
commemorating Anzac Day at their operational base in Vietnam.
Less than two hours later, this afternoon, I was
with the Australian Air Force Squadron at Ubon.
The fact that I w-s able to visit Australian Forces
in Vietnam and Thailand in this short space of time is a
forcible reminder of the proximity of events in South-East Asia
and consequently of the vital importance of the efforts which
have been made, both bilaterally and jointly, within the SEATO
framework for building-up defence preparedness.
Australia is duterminca to bc a good ally and its
Government is fully alive to its responsibilities.
These include Australia having a military capacity
enabling timely and effective contributions to collective regiona4
security. Australia is at present meeting connitments in
Vietnam and Malaysia. Relations between Australia and Thailand have
quickened and expanded remarkably in recent years.
It w. s a great honour for Australia to receive a
State visit from Their Majesties the King and Queen in 1962.
I look forwaru to the audience which His Majesty
is graciously giving mc on the present trip.
I also look forward to meeting again your Prime
Minister and the M7iinisters of his Government who earlier this
year paid an official visit to Australia.
In the discussions between the two Governments in
Canberra we found an identity of views on Vietnam, both
Governments recognising the essential nature of the conflict
as Communist agression through infiltration, terror, subversion
and direct military attack.
My visit to Bangkok will enable us to carry this
discussion forward, in the intimate manner of close allies.
I shall have the benefit of the views of the Thai
inisters and in turn will give an account of my visit to
Vietnam. I have come away from Saigon reinforced in my views
of the crucial nature of the struggle in Vietnam and fortified by
the steadfastness and determination I found there. 
Australia and Thailand work together as friends and
partners in regional and internationial agencies for social and
economic development, includ~ ing thc Colombo Plan, the Asia
Development Bank and ECAFE, the latter having its headquarters
here in Bangkok. Rc have the same approach to rcgional co-operation
for economic development, technical aid and the sharing of skills,
In our bilateral associations and through international
instrumentalities Australia has become fully acquainted with
Thailand's notable record of domestic achievements in economic and
social progress. It is a matter for satisfaction that in a modest way,
Australia has participated, through programmes of economic aid in
this record of growth of developments.
It is Austrolia's intention to continue with these
joint enterprises which are planned and carried out with the
efficient and purposeful co-operation of the Thai Government.
I look forward with much pleasure to my short stay in
the beautiful anu historic city of Bangkok with its happy blcnd
of the charmn of tradition and the revolution of modernisation.
-11, 1-11, 



PRIME MINISTER'S TOUR OF S( UTH-EAST ASIA 4 r C)
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIIE MINISTER,
iR. HAROLD HOLT, AT SAIGON. 26th April, 1966.
Thank you Mr. Linh for your introduction and good
morning to you ladies and gentlemen.
As Mr. Linh has explained to you, I have a prepared
statement. I thought having regard to the need for translation,
in respect of some of the members of the press, it might be
desirable t0 have a statement preparea which coulu be translated
before-hand and so it gives an outline of what I wish to say.
But you can supplement this to a certain extent by
questions you may wish to ask.
You will appreciate, of course, that I am an official
guest and the head of the Government in my own country and that
does place some limitations upon the range of comments that one
woula otherwise, perhaps, be able to make in a visit of this sort,
but I think we shall be able to cover the ground adequately enough
together. This morning sees the conclusion of my official visit
to Viet Nam. Later today I visit Ubon in Northern Thailand where
an Australian Air Force Squadron is stationed.
From there I go to Bangkok, and subsequently to
various centres where Australian F'orces are serving in Malaysia
and Singapore. I have felt it important to go to all these centres
because there is an impression in some countries and even among
some people in our own country, that because Viet Nam is so very
much in the news that we are not doing very much anywhere else.
Jell, in point of fact, we have a military obligation
and have undertaken military assistance in other centres and I
shall be visiting these before I return to Australia.
I am deeply appreciative of the welcome which has
been given to me in Viet Nam anu of the many evidences of
friend-ship ana warm feeling for Australia which I have
experienced. I have haa inforim. tive ana useful exchanges of views
with the Chairman of the National Leadership Committee, with the
Prime inister and with other Vietnamese le. aauers, as well as with
Australian, United States ana other officials.
These contacts, together with the observations I have
been able to make in visits to military anac other estabñ ishments,
have given me a closer insight into the situation in Viet Nam and
into current problems.
MiIy conclusions and assessments have strongly confirmed
the earlier judgments on which we have based our policies. 
It was not necessary for me to come to Viet Nam to come
to a firm conclusion as to the course of action Australia should
pursue. we have aecidcd that course some considerable time ago
but it has certainly strengtheneu an, confirmea the assessments
which we haa earlier maqe in deciding those policies.
As Prime Minister of Australia I was able in person to
convey to the Vietnamese Government the admiration and support of
the Government and people of Australia for the South Vietnamese
people in their struggle to preserve their national independence.
Our support for the Republic of Viet Nam has included
moral support, International Political and Diplomatic support, as
well as Military and Economic assistance.
Jo have a great interest in the effort of Viet Nam to
achieve internal stability.
At the same time, we comprehend that this is no easy
task, and the Government and people of Viet Nam may be assured of
our understanding and awareness of the difficulties they face.
This country has for years been under Communist attack
systematically designed to destroy the growth of its institutions
and its structure of administration.
The Republic of Viet Nam also has faced great problems
after the end of dolonialism in bringing about national stability
and cohesion. But the will to resist Communist aggression and to
prevent Communist domination is common to all the different
elements other than the Viet Cong anu its so-called liberation
front. This has been a constant factor throughout a period
of political change.
I have discussed the m. ilitary situation with the most
senior military and diplomatic figures in the Government, the
United States representation and that of Australia.
All have confidently expressed the view that the
iilitary threat can be successfully dealt with.
There are political difficulties which all recognise.
The task of the United States ana Australia and of
other allied countries is to help resist the aggression and ensure
the security of the country while it establishes the basis for an
enduring stability. The aspirations of the Vietnamese people are the same
as those of many other newly independent countries of South and
South-East Asia, namely the right to the full and free exercise
of sovereignty and national inaependence.
Each has the right to the forms of Government and
society of its chcice and to develop its own approach to the
problems of aconomic and social development. 
In resolutely waging its own struggle for freedom,
South Viet Nam is making a major contribution to the security of
the whole region. The problems of security and development are, of
course, interdependent. Efforts to provide and preserve security by dilitary
means need to be complemented by measures designed to raise
standards of living.
It was with particular interest, therefore, that I
have learnea about the Vietnamese Government's revolutionary
development programme. I knew, of course, of it in general before I came
here but this visit has enabled me to learn about it in much more
detail. The programme is designed to counter the Communist
threat to the villagers by providing protection and in various
useful ways building a better life for the people in rural areas.
Yesterday morning I visited the Revolutionary
Development Cadre Training Centre at Vung Tau where teams are
being given comprehensive training for these tasks.
I was most impressed by the dedication of the
instructing staff and the thoroughness and realism of their
training programme. Of special interest for me, of course, have been the
visits to Australian military and civilian personnel serving in
Viet Nam and the discussions I've had with them have been full of
interest and valuable information.
Our present force is small but it is a highly trained
and effective force, which includes a body of instructors working
directly with the Vietnamese Armed Forces imparting their
knowledge ana skills to improve the performance of thousands of
others. ie are now in the course of trebling the size of the
present Australian effort to 0., 500 men.
This will be a self-containca task force with two
battalions, a special reconnaissance squadron, its own air
transport support, artillery and so on.
In addition, the auvisory training programie will
continue. I have been greatly encouraged by what I hive seen of
the work and the morale of the Australian Forces.
Wherever I have gone I hnve been given glowing accounts
of their standard of performance.
They clearly have a well developed sense of purpose
and a proper pride in their achievement.
They well understand the need for what they are
doing. 
In their military operations they have added to the
security of the local villages and they themselves have had the
satisfaction of seeing the villagers react favourably to the
greater protection they have brought.
They have participated gladly in work of civic action
through giving medical and dental services, help with sanitation,
school construction, and the teaching of English.
The careful searches conducted by the battalion have
led to the recovery of supplies of rice sufficient to feed many
thousands of Viet Cong over a considerable period.
In addition, they have helped save rice harvests for
the villages and have denied then to the Viet Cong.
They also fully realise the nature of the struggle and
that the contributions they can make to security, welfare and
social progress must suppleilent operations of a purely military
kind. I visited several hospitals and, of course, took
particular interest in the admirable work of our own Australian
surgical team at the Bien Hoa Provincial Hospital.
I believe much more needs to be done through
international effort in the medical field.
I have been deeply impressed by the high morale and
devotion to auty shown by all these Australians in the difficult
and often arduous conditions in which they are fighting and
working. I would sum up comment on my visit by saying that it
has been of absorbing interest, it will be of endu ing benefit in
my discussions with my Cabinet colleagues ana for assessment of
any future developments, and I shall take away with me an abiding
impression of the resolution, the detennination and devotion to
the cause of freedon of the people of South Viet Nan themselves.
No cox. ment on the current situation coulu ignore the
tremendous part being played by the United States of America, its
forces and its material contribution.
This, I believe, is an historic struggle which is
proceeding in South Viet Nan today.
It could very well mark a turning point in history and
if we can succeed not rimrely in gaining the military success but
in establishing a better world order, or its foundation, or its
example, in tnis area of the world, then I believe that those
friendly forces and in particular the United States of America
whose contribution is so vast, will have made a notable contribution
to mankind's unending search for freedom and a better world order. 



PRL. -INISTR'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
at Government Hodse Dinner in Bangkok, Thailand 26TH APRIL, 1966
Your Royal Highness, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
I thank you, Prime K inister, for your kind expression
of welcome tonight and I thank your Government and people for the
warmth and hospitality which I and my party have enjoyed since our
arrival. It was my great privilege to have an audience with His
Majesty this afternoon.
I am delighted to pay this official visit to your
country so soon after your own visit to Australia on which you
were accompanied by senior 1.1inisters of your Government.
Your visit to Australia was a source of great satisfaction
and encouragement to my Government.
Although this is my first visit as Prime 1. inister, I
have visited Thailand on previous occasions and on each occasion
I have had the pleasure if I may use the words you have
employed of observing at close range the way of life and tiinking
of the Thai people.
Your way of life is indeed peaceful and freedom-loving,
in keeping with the beautiful environment of your country.
A visitor like myself sees something of your rich
cultural heritage in the beauty of form and colour of your
traditional building and works of art and handicrafts.
This heritage, there can be no doubt, lives in the
hearts of your people.
You have referred, Prime Minister, to the positive role
of Australia in this region.
VIe in Australia have come to expect from Thailand a
beneficial and deeply-informed contribution to regional affairs.
Your country, with its long history of sovereign
independence and its deep-rooted national life, has surely a
most significant part to play in the future.
Australia's origins and traditions arc very different
fron your own. le have no cor'parable background of long participation
in the affairs of South-East Asia.
Our two countries, however, work closuly together in
fruitful association. The friendship and close co-operation which Thailand
extends to us greatly enhances our feeling that we have a
constructive part to play in the region as a whole. 
As modern Governments we share the same goals of bringing
to our pcoples the fruits of prosperity and national development.
Our two countries both take a comprehensive view of the
problems of the region.
* 4e look outwa. rds towards regional co-operation and the
sharing of skills and technology.
Australia and Thailand recognize that the security of
the region is vital to the stability and progress to which we are
dedicated. Our two countries arc fully conscious of the critical
nature of the struggle now being waged to ensure the freedom and
independence of' the region.
, iec share the same conviction that through our own efforts
and in partnership with the effort of others this historic struggle
can be won. May I now invite all of you to join me in a toast to the
good health and happiness of His Excellency tV. i Prime Minister of
Thailand, tfo-the continued advancement of Thailand, and to the
further strengthening of the close relations oar two countries
now enjoy. 



PRD'hE 11INISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Statement distributed by the Prime Minister J~
at Press Conference in Saigon. Vietnam APRIL, 1966
This morning sees the conclusion of my official visit
to Vietnam. Later today I visit Ubcn in Northern Thailand where
an Australian Air Force squadron is stationed.
From there I go to Bangkok, and subsequently to
various centres where Australian forces are serving in Malaysia
and Singapore. I am deeply appreciative of the welcome which has been
given to me in Vietnam and of the many evidences of friendship and
warm feeling for Australia which I have experienced.
I have had informative and useful exchanges of views
with the Chairman of the National Leadership Committee, the Prime
Minister and other Vietnamese leaders, as well as with Australian,
United States and other officials.
These contacts, together with the observations I have
been able to make in visits to military and other establishments,
have given me a closer insight into the situation in Vietnam and
into current problems.
Miy conclusions and assessments have strongly confirmed
the earlier judgments on which we have based our policies.
As Prime M1inister of Australia I was able in person to
convey to the Vietnamese Government the admiration and support of
the Government and people of Australia for the South Vietnamese
people in their struggle to preserve their national independence.
Our support for the Republic of Vietnam has included
moral support, international political and diplomatic support, as
well as military and economic assistance.
We, of coairse, have a great interest in the effort of
Vietnam to achieve internal stability.
At the same time, we comprehend that this is no easy
task, and the Government and people of Vietnam may be assured
of our undcrstanding and awareness of the difficulties they face.
This country has for years been under Communist attack
systematically designed to destroy the growth of its institutions
and its structure of administration.
The Republic of Vietnam also has faced great : problems
after the end of colonialism in bringing about national stability
and cohesion. But the will to resist Communist aggression and to
prevent Communist domination is common to all the different
elements othe~ r than the Viet Cong and its so-called liberation
front. 
This has been a constant factor throughout a period
of political change.
I have discussed the military situation with the most
senior military and diplomatic figures in the Government, the United
States representation and that of Australia.
All have confidently expressed the view that the
military threat can be successfully dealt with.
There are political difficulties which all recognise.
The task of the United States and Australia and of
other allied countries is to help resist the aggression and ensure
the security of the country while it establishes the basis for an
enduring stability. The aspirations of the Vietnamese people are the same
as those of many other newly independent countries of South and
South-East Asia, namely the right to the full and free exercise,
of sovereignty and national independence.
Each has the right to the forms of Government and
society of its choice and to develop its own approach to the
problems of economic and social developmcnt.
In resolutely waging its own struggle for freedom,
South Vietnam is making a major contribution to the security of
the whole region. The problems of security and development are, of course,
interdependent. Efforts to provide and preserve security by military
means nced to be complemented by muasures designed to raise
stndard~ s of living.
It was with particular interest, therefore, that I
have learned about the Vietnamese Government's revolutionary
development programme.
This is designed to counter the Communist threat to
the villages by providing protection and building a better life
for the pcople in rural areas.
Yesterday morning I visited the revolutionary
development cadre training centre at Vung Tau where teams are being
give n comprehensive training for these tasks.
I was most impressed by the dodication of the
instructing staff and the thoroughness and realism of their
training programmlae. Of special intuercst for me, of course, have been the
visits to Australian military and civilian personnel Sc~ rving in
Vietnam and the discussions I've had with them.
Our present force is small but it is a-highly trained
and effective force, which includcs a body of instructors working
directly with the Vietnamese Armed Forces importing their knowledge
and skills to imiprove the ? õ erformiance of thousands of others. 



PRIUM E MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Press Conference given by the Prime Minister,
Mr. Harold Holt on his arrival at
Bangkok Airport, Thailand 26TH APRIL, 1966
I would like to say how thankful I am to be able to
take this opportunity to return so soon the visit which your Prime
Minister has recently made to Australia.
As you may hPve learne., the principal purpose of my
visit has been to visit the various countries of South-East Asia
where Australian servicemen are serving and I have just come from
four days in South Vietnam where we have Army and Air Force
servicemen in Saigon at both Bien Hoa and Vung Tau.
. e also have certain civilian units serving in that
country including a surgical unit,
Quite recently we had taken a decision to treble
Australia's representation of military forces in the Vietnam area
and the first battalion of this task force marched through Sydney
on the day I left Australia as a pro-embarkation march before coming
to replace the battalion which has been on service in South
Vietnam. It is only last Thursday that I left my own country,
indeed on that morning I was answering questions in the House of
Representatives. The following day, at the same time, I was with our
troops in Saigon. Today we have been conducting together in Bien Hoa
our Anzac Day service.
Anzac Day for us is one of the most solemn and
significant days in the national calendar as Australian and New
Zealanders celebrate together the anniversary of their landing at
Gallipoli 51 years ago, and your Excellency, this particular
occasion has become a symbol in the minds of the countrymen of
Australia and New Zealand of the need for each generation to fight
its battle for the preservation of liberty, and we felt that there
was special significance in our meeting together on this solemn
day of commemoration at Bien Hoa where Australians an. New
Zealand servicemen are again fighting in this later generation in
the cause of freedom and personal liberty.
WTe have flown from there ( Bien Hoa) to Ubca in your
north where there is an Australian Air F.-rce unit stationed and
after my visit here where I look forward to having talks with your
Prime Minister, and other senior members of the Government and of
meeting His Majesty which it will Live me great pleasure to do
again now for the third time.
Somn years ago I had the honour of escorting His
Majesty and Her M'lajesty, The Queen, round the Australian Pavilion
at Lausanne in Switzerland where we had an exhibition and then
later they came to Australia and I was able to welcome them.
Now I greatly look forward to returning that meeting
in their own country. 
After these talks I fly t-Nalaysia anu after
Kuala Lumpur and Singapore I will be proceeding to Borneo.
At each cf these places I shall be having talks with
senior members of the Governmunt and at the same time visiting
Australian servicemen. I think that what emerges from this visit is how close
we have all become, how the problems and the dangers of the one
have become the matters of concern for the other.
I was heartened by what I learned in Saigon.
I talked there to senior members of the Government of
the United States administration, with our own Australian
diplomatic service. I fuund thei all expressing confidence in the
outcome of the military situation although they do have some
concern over the current political difficulties, but at least
they are convinced that the Viet Cong cannot win and that
increasingly from now forward the military success will be with
the forces supportin. the South Vietnamese Government, the
Republic of Vietnam. One of the most heartening, and I think the most promising
develqments, I think your Excellency, is the determination
expressed by the Government of the Republic of Vietnam, by the
United States administration and by cur own Australian authorities
and other friendly forces, to combine with the military
operations services of a positive and constructive kind to improve
the well being of the peoples in the areas that they release.
They have a programme of civic action which has been
carefully planned and is being vigorously pursued.
We visited yesterday one of the institutes where
cadres of men are being trained to go into' villages in support of
the defensive capacity of the villages, but at the same tine to
give specialist service and training so that the economic strength
of the village anm the well-being of the people can be materially
improved and perhaps in this kind of combination of collaboration
for purposes of security and welfare we have one of the really
important answers to the people of Asia in general.
e can all watch with interest what develops in this
direction because success will be a great victory for those who
value freedom.
QUESTION: Recently you introduced conscription in Australia
I am wondering if this might make it possible for you to have more
troops free to come to Thailand in the near future?
MR. HOLT: , ell, we have commitments in a number of directions;
naturally there develops a cortain amount of pressure from various
sources for us to increase our establishment in each of those
places. I do not doubt that it would be desired that we should 
3.
have more people in Vietnam or more pcople in Borneo but you must
remember that Australia is a country of less than 12,000,000
people, that we are currently trying to develop a continent the
size of the United States olo America and that we have this
combination of tasks, the normal tasks of a modern Governnicnt,
which are difficult enough, but added to those are the tasks of
increasing our defonce establishment and of the development of
projects which if carried through will add to our own capacity
to extend further aid,. further military assistance to other
people in need of it in this area of the world. 



PRIM. Eli ISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Press Conference given by the Prime Kinister,. o
Mr. Harold Holt at Kuala Lumpur 27TH APRIL 1966
Well ladies and gentlemen I didn't propose to make any
extensive statement of a general kind because most of you will
have had the statement I made for my visit here, which outlined
where I've been, what the general purpose of the visit has been
and our plans for the remainder of the tour.
You will have gathered that my principal purpose when
I first planned this journey was tc make contact with Australian
troops wherever they rre stationed in South-East Asia.
Indeed, from the time I took office as Prime Minister,
this has been one of my most pressing priorities in my own view
and I have taken what turned out to be the first opportunity,
indeed made some rearrangements of plans to achieve this because
Parliament is still in session and part of the explanation, the
largest part, for the compression of this visit to so many
countries into so short a space of time is to enable me to return
to the Parliament for the remaining weeks of the session.
The visit, however, as we have gone along and as
became fairly evident when we were planning the details of it
with the Governments of the countries concerned, has developed
into quite a considerable diplomatic exercise, quite apart from
the purpose I've outlined to you and it has been a most valuable
experience to have had intimate political discussions in each cf
the countries I have visited with the senior political and
diplomatic personalities of that country wherever we have gone.
I have already been to Vietnam where most of the time
planned for the journey had been allotted.
We are, as you know, actively engaged in military
operations in Vietnam in support of' the forces kf South Vietnam
at the request of its Govrnment and in association with the
United States which has such massive iepresentation there.
Not only was I able to make observations and have
discussions on the spot, but it was an o. pportunity tc make a
fresh assessi-ient of the prospects in that area.
I f-und thec,, I say very frankly cnc.-, uraging as to the
future. There are some tough times ahead, perhaps for a long
time ahead, but I'm sure that the Viet Cong cannot finally
succeed in South Vietnam and with that knowledge, the South
Vietnamese people themselves m. ust be heartened continue a
struggle which has been for then a long drawn cut crisis of so
many years duration nearly 20 years duration for many of those
who have been actively in the fight throughout.
But with thu massive assistance now available to them,
with the encouragement and heartening effect of the knowledge
that there are friends arnd the world willing to co: n tc their
aid until this task is resolved, there has been a lift in the
morale of the S: cuth Victnamese themselves a. nd as to our c. wn
troops, I found then in splendid spirit and well meriting the 
high commendaticn which had boen expresscd often by all with
whom we spoke. But apart from the Victnamese situation, the visit to
Thailand and tc this country, and then later in Singapore, will
enable me to have an up-to-date assessment on matters which are
of mutual interest and concern to us in this area of the world.
Xe, oi coarse, share your own concern with the
continuation of the Indonesian policy of confrontation and our
own assistance is continuing with your forces, the forces of the
United Kingdom and New Zealand, in resisting this confrontation
process. ihat will emerge from the changes which have been
taking place in Indonesia?
I think it wiser to defer judgment on that until there
is clearer evidence that there has been some change of heart, or
change of direction.
But, quite obviously, if judged merely on the number
of people of Communist sympathies who have been disposed of
violently in Indonesia, there is undoubtedly a strength of' anti-
Communist which, when the disorders can be finally suppressed,
do open up some prospect of collaboration with the countries of
the free world. However, I think it not fruitful at this point of time
to speculate at any length on what might emerge there.
Having said that, and with your knowledge that I will
be visiting the remaining centres Butterworth the Borneo
points of interest to us and various other centres around this
country, I think the most useful thing I can do for you at this
point is to ask if there are questions which occur to you on
which you would liike an answer.
I can't guarantee to answer them all, because, on
domestic matters I am, as you will appreciate, a guest of your
Government in this country and it's not usaal for those so
situated to coimmient on matters of domestic political concern.
QUESTION: ( By Straits Echo and Indian papers)
iIr. Prime œ 1; inister, you said you would make. a fresh
assessment in the area, that is Vietnam.
In the light of your assessment, is there any likelihood
that you will increase your military assistance and presence in
Vietnam?
iYM. HOLT: The Australian assistance has already been publicly
indicated. It was made in the light of considerable knowledge of
what the situation is there.
It represents a trebling of our existing forcc in that
area, something more than a frebling of that existing force, and
you must have in mind that Australia has commitments and
obligations, or even in the absencc of commitment or obligation,
is making a military assistance in other parts of South-Tast Asia, 
I've already mentioned what we are doing in relation to
this country. fe have certain responsibilities in respect of Papua
and New Guinea which enjoys a common border with Indonesia, and
the arrangement, so far as our own troops in Vietnam are
concerned is that their tour of duty will be approxijratol, 12
months. So we will need to have replacement forces for the
troops in that area.-
In order to meet all these different tasks and
obligations, we have found it necessary to introduce a system of
national service, and so, at this stage, I would point to what we
have alreauy undertaken to do.
I have said in Parliament that the Government reviews
from time to time the contribution that it is making, either
overall or in a particular situation.
But the strength of force wnich I have indicated to
you is the only decision which the Government has taken on this
matter and relates to at least the foreseeable future.
Q. ( Local Rep. AAP Reuters)
Can you tell us what were the topics of your discussion
with Tun ñ. azak today?
HOLT: ie had a talk which has ranged over quite a wide area,
but as Tun Razak commented to me, we don't have problems between
each other, we have matters of interest.
. e have one or two matters of mutual concern, but the
relations between Australia an alaysia are very friendly
relations. co-operate in a number of fields.
: c have bucn glad to give some assistance in directions
which he was good enough to say were of help and much appreciated
by him and his Government.
But naturally, we had some discussion on the Indonesian
situation. I dia give him an account of my own impressions of the
situation in Vietnam.
I was particularly interested in what your Government
is doing in the fiela of rural development, because w firmly
believe, and this . Ls true of the Government of South Vietnam, of
the American authorities there, or our own advisers, that
considerable contribution to military success, and a continued
stablilty in South Vietnam will be the amount of energy and
purpose put behind the programes of civil action or
revolutionary development as they call them.
This would supplement the military effort in much the
same way as in the days of your own guerrilla activity where it
was found necessary to support with economic and social welfare
programmes. 
2.
Q. ( Straits Times)
Sir, in view of your commitment in Vietnam, what are the
chances of il1alaysia gettin,. extra troops in case she asks for them?
Extra Australian troops.
14R. HOLT: Well, I think this would have to be viewed against the
total range of our comiuiitments, but I believe that the forces
currently available are adequate to meet the military requirements
of' the current situation.
I don't think it's likely to worsen.
hatever view one takes of the situation in Indonesia,
I frankly don't think the military situation is likely to worsen.
There may be some prospect even of improvement, but I
don't dwiell on that.
Q. How does Australia view the friction ,-which exists
between L'i,, alaysia and Singapore?
Has this been part of your general discussions here?
MR. HOLT: Naturally vie, as friends of both *,. alaysia and Singapore,
are interested in the continuation or establishment of' good
relations on a firm basis between these tw.-o areas.
Quite obviously it has an importance in our own eyes
for military co-operation, and the successful progress of trade
between our countries.
The economic well being of' Singapore has a bearing on
the economic well being of '.! alaysia and vice versa.
For our part the economic well being of two friendly
countries has some concern for us, certainly a very real interest
for us. But these are problems which, quite obviously, have to
be worked out between the two Governments of the areas concerned.
It's not for us to try to meddle in what are the
domestic affairs of those two Governments.
Q. ( Far EL-astern Economic -Review)
Sir, looking for a change of heart or change of
direction in Indonesia, would you regard Indonesia's offer of
recognition of ], ingapore as a change in direction?
12. HOLT: I think it could be.
I know it was accompanied. by some reference to an
increase of' confrontation against ialaysia, but the situation
there is capable of thc interpretation that the generals are
proceeding gradually. 
I don't think it is helpful to the situation generally
for us to try to pursue the possibilities in public debate.
I would prefer to see how these things work out.
Q. ( Far Eastern Economic Review)
Sir, you spoke of the Viet Cong: they cannot finally
succeed, I think were the words you chose.
WJere you referring to the situation inilitarily or
politically or both?
MR. HOLT: I would say both.
I'm certainly confident that they will not succeed
militarily. I don't mean by that that they won't do damage here or
there, or be a serious m~ ilitary problem perhaps for some long
time., but I do believe the military strength which has been built
up is so massive and is being so well applied, is being supplemented
by well thought out schemes of civic action and rural development,
that the Viet Cong are not going to achieve the objectives that
they have set for themselves.
It may very well be that, as they find the military
situation becoming more difficult for them, they will either revert
to more off the guerrilla type activity w,, hich marked their earlier
phases of operation, or they may it's not a question of or, in
an exclusive sense, " and" they may, " or they may, whichever
way things work out, turn their attention increasingly to the
political situation an-j with so many different groups and
different sects, different interestsY, there's a fertile field
for trouble making.
The other possibility too, which I think has to be
thought about quite seriously, is that the Communists may shift
front to other areas of South-East Asia and there are some signs
that they have been iioving: in other directions, particularly
Thailand, Laos. This could be intensified.
Q. ( Straits Times)
There have been reports that because Singapore and
11alaysiQ have-been unable to draw up fornal riachiftery for
defence arrnnngements, Australia havs found it difficult to put
forward. some kind of defence plan for Singapore.
Are those reports true, or have you anything to say on
that?
MR. HOLT: So far as I am aware, our Dlans have been going ahead.
It may well be that because of the lack of an agreed
defence arrangement between the two countries, that there has
been some delay in completion of' the plan, but I would~ n't be
speaking in any critical tone of that.
Indeed, I would find this matter mnore closely in the
province of my colleague, the Minister for External Affairs, or 
possibly the Minister for Defence.
But quite obviously the closer the teamwork, and the
relationship, the collaboration, the friendship between Ialaysia
and Singapore, the more advantageously we believe this operates
for all of us who have common interests in this area.
We certainly don't wish to complicate the problem of
either negotiation or mutual discussion by including views which
may not necessarily be welcome views.
We watch with a sympathetic interest the efforts which
both countries are making to establish a cordial and co-operative
relationship. 



PPP' PRI.. E INISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
at 1:-1alaysian State Dinner, Kuala Lumpur 27TH APRIL, 1966
Deputy Prime Minister, Ministers, Excellencies, gentlemen.
I am delighted to pay my first official visit to Malaysia
as the Prime Minister of Australia.
I am, as you may be aware, no stranger to the charm of
your country and the warmth of your hospitality.
My last visit was in September, 1964, when Commonwealth
Finance Ministers rc here.
Even in the limited time available for observation since
my arrival this morning it is readily seen that M'alaysia has
continued its solid progress and development.
My colleagues and I have greatly appreciated the
opportunity you provided to us to hold discussions today with
yourself and members of the Cabinet.
This has given us a body of useful knowledge and a
valuable insight into the policies you are pursuing.
My colleagues and I appreciated the privilege we were
given today of an audience with His Majesty the Yang Di-Pertuan
Agong. You Sir, and many of your fellow Ministers and your
senior officials have greeted me as old friends.
There is in our consultations and exchanges an intimacy
and an underlying mutual respect which has aeveloped over many
years of close co-operation.
This fueling of close friendship gives an aaaed depth
and value to the continuous interchange between our two countries
in so many fields.
M1alaysia has overcome many difficulties in recent
years. The successful way in which you have met and overcome
the challenges that have arisen is a clear indication of the
inherent strength and resilience of your multiracial community.
Hand in hand with the effort to preserve your sccurity,
you have made rapid advancement in the economic and social fields.
It was good to learn from you personally today, Tun
Razak, of your Government's rural development programme.
This importpnt activity clearly owes much to you for its
inspiration and its effective and purposeful execution.
The co-operation between our two ccuntrics is now a
matter of record and history having developed ovr a period of time 
in many areas affecting the national life of both of us.
We are joined along with other Commonwealth countries
in military arrangements for defence and security.
The relationship between the Armed Forces of our two
countries is a close one.
Our two countries share a determination to preserve
national independence, stability and freedom
; e are glad to assist you with technical assistance and
to have your young men and women at our universities and technical
institutions in substantial numbers.
Our trade expands steadily and thure is a growing
Australian investment here.
It is a refreshing experience to visit Kuala Lumpur with
its individuality, its atmosphere of modern progress and colourful
growth. For Australians, develcpment-minded as we arc, this is
a stimulating atmosphere.
We feel very much at hone too, in your democratic
environment and we admire the flexibility of outlook and the
political wisdom which , alaysian leaders bring to the country's
complex national affairs. 



NOT TO BE PUBLISHED OR BROADCAST BEFPORE
4.30 P. M. ON THURSDAY 28TH APRIL, 1966
FOR PRESSNO. 350
STATEMENT BY THE TREASURER,
THE HONORABLE WILLIAM McMAHON, M. P.
REGIONAL TAXATION OFFICE TO OPEN
AT WOLLONGONG, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Commonwealth Treasurer, the Hon. William McMahon,
announced today that a branch of the Taxation, Office would be
opening at Wollongong, New South Wales on 2nd May, 1966.
The office will be located in the Manchester Unity
building, corner Keira and Market Streets, Wollongong, and will
operate along similar lines to the now well-established centres
at Canberra and at Newcastle in N. S. W. and Geelong in Victoria.
The facilities to be provided will extend to all taxes
and include the answering of enquiries and receipt of payments.
Taxpayers who find themselves unable to meet their obligations as
to the payment of tax or lodgment of returns by the due date
will also have the opportunity of discussing their problems at
this office.
CANBERRA A. C. T.
28th April, 1966 



A DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFARS.
CANBERRA.
FOR THE PRESS
( Released only in Canberra) PR4 29th April, 1966.
SURGICAL TEAM NUIRSES IN VIET NAML
The Minister for External Affairs, Mr Hasluck, today issued
the following statement about arrangements being made for the departure
of four nurses from the Alfred Hospital in Melbourne to join the
Australian Suirgical Team at Bien Hoa in Viet Nam.
" On 31st December, 1965, I announced the departure
for Viet Nam of a nine-member surgical team sponsored by
the Alfred Hospital, Melbourne. This is the second
Australian Surgical Team to be established in Viet Ham
under our SEATO Aid Programme. The first team which
was from the Royal Melbourne Hospital was based at Long
Xuyen some 80 miles south-west of Saigon and was succeeded
last October by a team from St. Vincent's Hospital,
Melbourne. Four nurses will be leaving on Sunday, 1st May
( flight BA725) to Join the Bien Hoa team. They are
Miss Miriam Steer, Miss Rosalie Moy, Miss Josephine
Champion, and Miss Carolyn Milne. The nurses are taking
the place of the four nurses who were original members
of the first' Alfred Hospital Surgical Team, Miss Mary Rigg,
Miss Heather Beveridge, Miss Daphne Amos, and Miss Barbara
Phillips, who are returning to Australia, after four months
in Viet Ham, on 11th May ( flight BA712). The other girl
serving with the team, Miss Kathleen Hirst, the
radiographer, has volunteered to stay at Bien Hoa for
a second term.
The Surgical Team at Bien Hoa, which has a population
of 70,000 and attracts patients from the surrounding areas,
many of whom are civilian war casualties, is meeting an
acute need for trained surgical personnel in Viet Nam and
we are glad to be in a position under our SEATO Aid arrangements
to be able to help the people of the Bien Hoa Province in
this way. I wish to thank the authorities and the surgeons,
doctors and nurses of the Alfred Hospital for the willingness
with which they have made their services available to make
this contribution to the well-being of the Vietnamese peoplefif 



PRIME MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Speech given by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold f
at a Government Luncheon at Sjgapore in reply to a'
speech of welcome by the Singapore Acting Prime
Minister, Dr. Toh Chin Chye 29TH APRIL, 1966
Mr. Deputy Prime Minister, your Ministerial colleagues
and distinguished guests
Thank you very warmly, Dr. Toh, for your warmth of
welcome to me and to those who have accompanied me as we have gone
about this phase of our journey here in Singapore.
As you have put it to us, Australia has a long friendly
association going back throu h some of the dramatic episodes of
this uarter of a century which has now passed since the militar
operations in which we found ourselves involved at the time of I
Second World War. And that represented a watershed of history in
the life of the Australian people as far as this area of the world
is concerned. You have stressed the fact that the first major journey
I have made as Prime Minister has been to various centres here in
South-East Asia. I don't think this follows, that I have for the
first time realised the importance of the area.
This can I think, represent a new phase in the relationship
between Australia and the area, but of course we have been
actively interested in this area of the world at least dating back
to the lime that I have mentioned.
There was first our involvement with you here at the time
of the Japanese invasion. There was later our association through
the lon and difficult period of the emergency when the guerilla
activities had to be eliminated, we with other friendly Commonwealth
forces. And now, in association with other Commonwealth forces,
wteh ath avwee htahvies bpehaens e liofn kerde sitsotgientgh erth ei np rsoomcee ssoefs thoef mcoornef rsoingtnaitfiiocna, n tso
episodes and phases of historical development in South-East Asia
over these years in the military field.
But, of course, there has also been an active and regular
contact between us in the field of trade and commerce.
You have always maintained a very active entrepot trade.
lany Australians have passed through here, either as tourists or
en route to the United Kingdom and Europe, and you have come to be
known to us I think, better than almost any other country, and
certainly almost any city, in Asia.
More of our people are aware of what Singapore has to
offer this very colourful, rich and most exotic city which for
many Australians is the first point of contact they make with the
countries of Asia.
Now we find ourselves considering together some problems
which you have directly in your own economic efforts and your own
security, but we also find we have a common interest and concern
in developments in the South-East Asian area. / 2 
-2-
And it is in relation to these that my own visit has been
of considerable value to me, and I hope that as a result of the
discussions that I have been able to engage in with yourselves,
and with the other Jovernments that I have been in contact with
in recent days, our store of knowledge will have been increased
and we will be better equippoed to inform our own judgment as to
the courses we should be following in the future.
We are together in one of the critical periods cf the
history of mankind as I see it, and there will be in the period
ahead of us three factors which will not only make this a
critical area for the future of mankind, but which will involve
our omwn countries very directly.
The first of these is the revolution of change that is
going on in Asia generally; not merely a revolution in the expecations
of people, their hopes for a better order of life but
actual changes which are taking place in the way of life that they
have known for centuries.
And secondly, there is the impact which inevitably will be
made increasingly in the years ahead from the rapid growth of
population in the area. The better health standards, a higher
rate of survival and so, taken all round, such a rapid mte of
growth of population that it has been estimated that the fifteen
hundred million people of Asia will be some three throusand million
by the end of this century.
Now this quite obviously poses problems of adequacy of
supply, the need for efficient distribution, the removal of the
causes of strife so that the productive efforts of the area can
be rost effectively prganised to meet this situation. And yet
while we are facing these tasks, we have to contend also with the
cancerous growth of communism in certain parts of the area to
which I refer.
There is the communism of China itself. Well, we don't
contest the right of any country to make its own choice of the
kind of government or system of society by which it wishes to
live. What we do contest is the efforts made by the aggressors
to impose their systems on those who would prefer the system of
their own choice, and just as we have joined together in resisting
the aggression which threatened to dislocate your own country's
domestic and economic life, so we have felt bound to join with
others in resisting that aggression in Viet Nam.
I have come from there with a feeling of encouragement as
to the future, without understatin the many difficulties, both
of the political, economic and military kind that lie ahead.
But I think that daylight can be seen, and that there is a
prospect for stability in the not too distant future.
Now we are linked by our geography, by our history, by the
destiny which places us together in the midst of these quite
historic developments, and with a tradition and practice of
friendship between our two countries which should encourage us,
and indeed enable us, by our own discussions together, to make
some contribution to the future of this part of the world.
It is in that apirit that I have joined in the talks with
your colleagues this morning. It is in that spirit that I hope
That Australia's friendly association with your country will
continue through the years ahead.
Please convey to your Prime Minister, when you are next
in touch with him my own best wishes and those of my Government.
We hope that we sall be seeing him again soon, and that in the
years ahead, Singapore will find a way through its problems. 
I -3-
What you-rhave -said to us about your trade difficulties and
the need to ind some solution of that will be studied sympathetically,
as a good friend of the country should. And you wi1ll be
hear n from us on that matter after I have been able to discuss
these hings which we have had outlined together for us today and
which I know you already communicated on in more detail with my
own government. We shall discus', those when an early opportunity
presents itself.
And so, good wishes to you, and through you to the people of
Singapore and my thanks on behalf of my colleagues here with me
today and myselT for the generosity of your hospitality and warmth
of your greeting to us. 



PRIM~ E MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASI
Statement issued by the Prime Minister. Mr.
Harr' 4d Holt. on arrival in Sing~ apore 29TH APRIL, 1966
As I explained when I passed through Singapore last
week, my visit here is part of a comprehensive tou~ r to the countries
of South-East Asia where Australian Forces are station,, d Viet Nam,
Thailand, Yeayalsia, and Singapore.
Australia, as a fellow member of the Commonwealth, has
been followin, with interest the developments here since Singapore
became an independent member. This is the first occasion on which
the Prixae Minister of Australia has officially visited Singapore
since it assumed its new status.
The Singapore 31overnment has recently announced that it
will send a senior official as High Commissioner to Canberra. It
is gratifying that Canberra should be included in the initial
overseas appointments made by the Singapore Jovernment. This is a
recognition of the friendship and the many mutual interests between
our two countries in defence and security and in economic and other
affairs. Australia, of course, has maintained a substantial official
representation in Singapore for many years.
I look forward to discussions with Sigapore Ministers.
As was done in Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur, I expect to give them an
account of my visit to Viet Nam. There will also be exchanges of
views on the various regional questions of concern to both
Governments. Australia has observed with close attention the
systematic and constructive efforts of Singapore to develop its
economy and to create new employment opportunities through
industrialisation and expanding trade. This requires peace,
stability and assured security. If these conditions exist, sound
forward planning and the efficient and rational use of resources
can be accomplished. Through the combined arrangements in -the defence field,
Australia is able to add its efforts to those of other Commonwealth
countries to preserve the conditions of security and stability.
Australia and Singapore enjoy positive benefits as
good neighbours. 
2-
Increasingly useful relationships are growing in trade
and business, in education and in professional and technical
training. Cqntacts between our two people in these and other
fields, such as tourism, are multiplying with the development of
rapid communications. Australia is a country with an expanding Industrial
base and an increasing technology.
Further areas ) f co-operation will undoubtedly arise
between our two countries as Sing apore develops along similar
paths. 



PRIME MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Press Conference , iven by the Prime iviAst: er,-, Mr. Harold Holt
at Siniapor Airport 30TH APRIL. 1966
I thought it might be useful if I had a few comments
of a general kind to make, as this really is the wind-up of my
tour of the various countries of South-East Asia I have been visiting,
and then provide an opportunity a rather loner one than I was
able to give you before for any questions which you might wish
to put to me. I am sure those of you who live in this region or who
have studied its problems closely will appreciate what a valuable
experience it has been for me to visit in a relatively compressed
eriod of time so considerable an area of South-East Asia
ince leaving Australia I have of course covered a considerable
territory, going first from here to Viet Nam spending some days
there then on to Ubon in Thailand and into Bangkok for disucssions
with the Government of that rountry, coming from there then to
Kuala Lumpur for further discussions with the Deputy Prime Minister,
later meeting with Tunku Abdul Rahiman at Butterworth where he came
to join me at the dinner given by the Air Force mess.
But in addition I have been able to see Australian
troops on station at various points in Malaysia and West Malaysia
and more recently, including today, in Borneo.
Yesterday I was able to make, after having had the
very useful talks with Dr Toh and other senior Ministers of the
Government here a long delayed but very welcome visit to the
Singapore naval base. Ihave been talking about Singapore naval
base for many years and this is the first time that I have been
able to study it visually and at first hand with the senior officers
who are stationed there. By flying over it in a helicopter,
one got an admirable view of the base and its relationship to this
area as a whole. As you will know, Australia attaches considerable
importance to a continued British maintenance of the base and in
my talks with the representatives of the two Jovernments most
closely affected, I find that they too have an appreciation of the
contribution to stability and security in the area which we all
derive from the considerable British presence here, that is
represented by the base and its establishment.
I was impressed, too of course, with the considerable
part that the operations at the base play in the total economy of
Singapore and I can imagine how important it is on that account
also to the Jovernment and people of Singapore.
But a visit of this kind spread over so wide an area
and confined in point of time to little more than a week is I
believe, very helpful to perspective and to a judgment of events
in the area. While I have concentrated on the countries where
Australian troops are stationed, it is a fact that in each of these
countries there is a common threat to be met. It varies in degree.
It has been more intense at one point of time or another in one
country or another; the threat of communist subversion, infiltration,
ageression is, I would assert, common to all of these areas. / 2 
-2-
* The-fac+-that-Jitis. seen at its most active degree and
its most aggressive form in Viet Nam at this time should not obscure
from our assessment of the total situation the fact that it is not
so very long ago that we were contending with a very real emergency,
as a result of communist -uerilla activity in West Mlaysia and
affecting Singapore itself.
The Jovernmentsof each of these countries find it
necessary to either maintain forces or take police action against
threats as they arise of communist activity, and so those of us who
wish to live in peace and security and make an orderly economic
progress and developing relationship in our affairs with -ne anotner
in This area of the world have to recognise this threat and I
believe we must combine where occasion requires this of us, in
order to stave off the threat as it develops.
We have as a country done this in the case of the threat
when it presented itself here. We worked gladly in co-operation
with other Commonwealth forces. We are meeting this problem which
is part of the total problem of confrontation, in Borneo at tAe
resent time and we know from the discussions I have had with the
overnment of Thailand that this Government has become concerned by
the existence of communist subversion and an accelerated degree of
infiltration and communist activity.
Ivly own belief is that as the military situation improves
in Viet Nam and I feel confident that it will improve one has
only to see, as I have so recently done the massive effort being
put into the challenge there by the United States and other friendly
forces. the Korean Government, for example, are contributing
forty thousand troops.
I was told in Sai , on that the activity at the airport there
has made it the busiest in t~ e world. I was a little sceptical about
this. I said " You don't mean to tell me more movements in a day
there than at idlewild in New York?" and I was assured that this was
so. Well it is perhaps that there are so many movements and they
go through such a long period of each of the days that this occurs,
but it is illustrative, at least of the massive effort which is
going into the struggle there anA which I believe will have a
decisive effect upon the military aspects.
I have stated before quite emphatically, and it remains
a strong view, that the Viet Con will not win the military struggle,
and while we may face other problems in the political field and a
continuing problem for perhaps a long time to come in the military
sphere, the communists may very well turn more of their attention
as success eludes them in the military sphere to the political phase,
and perhaps to stirring up trouble in some of these other countries
that I have mentioned.
So not only does it become important for us to establish
the security ' f South Viet Nam but we must maintain together a
vigilance against any spread of this cancerous scourge through the
other countries of South-East Asia.
What I have seen has encouraged me in other directions
also, because I believe there has been a firm acceptance by all the
governments the military authorities and diplomatic representatives
confirmed this for me an acceptance by all the governments of the
need to supplement vigorously the military efforts by vzhat are
variously termed programmes of resettlement civic action rural
development and rural reforms end so forth, according to tAe
requirements of the particular situation. 9 a 
-3-
It comprises a significant part of the activities of
Australian servicemen wherever they are stationed. I found that
General Ky Prime Minister Ky was devotin, a great deal of the
time of his Government to these programmes.
We went to one of the institutes where rural cadres
are being trained for varied duties and services which they can
render in the villages and this programme literally extends to
thousands, many thousands, of individuals.
The United States has clearly indicateZ through
statements of President Johnson and through the other information
I was able to acquire there that it recognises and is devoting
considerable part of its efforts towards this material improvement
of the standards of the people.
And what is being done, viewed against the backgiound
of the changes which have been occurring in South-East Asia as a
result of the stirrings of a recognition for change, the bending
of the pattern of cenuries in some of the practices that are being
carried out as attempts are made to adapt opportunities for
employing modern technology to the age-old practices in rural
activity in these various countries, the emergence of the processes
of industrialisation and so forth all these things are part of
the lively dynamic situation in South-East Asia in particular which
represents, believe, one of the historic movements in the history
of mankind. Now how these events work out, of course, is a matter
more for speculation than for accurate assessment, but without
necessarily trying to evolve any of the theories which seem to be
confusing so many minds as to what is happening and why what is
being done should be done, I believe that mere contemplation of the
facts as they are occurring and as we know them, provides sufficient
base for or at least provide the material for the kind of
policies which the governments, the friendly governments associated
together in one arrangement or another in this area of the world
are putting forward to meet this common threat.
As to our own Australian forces they are enthusiastic,
they are devoted to their tasks and they well appreciate the need
for their presence in the areas in which they find themselves.
I found them in very good heart, functioning at a level. which I
think I can say without bombast for my country, has earned the
commendation of whichever country they have been located in.
But I think I might just say in conclusion, gentlemen,
that I shall return to my own country feeling not a necessity for
changes in policy, but strongly confirmed in the correctness of the
policies that we have been pursuing and, I believe, better equipped
as to certain aspects of detail to follow the course of events
in these various countries to make perhaps a better based assessment
of what is occurring there and to draw on a volume of detail
which has been acquired in these most intimate discussions which
should prove of considerable valine to myself and my colleagues for
a long time ahead. Although the time was short, when a head of government
is assisted, as I have been, in the most friendly and helpful way
by other governments to see as much as can be shown, and to hear
in the most intimate fashion the closest information held by those
governments, it can't fail to be a most valuable addition to
knowledge and experience and I feel that this at least has been
a very considerable dividend which I have drawn from this fascinating
tour of South East-Asia. / 4 
-4-
Well, thank You-Cop-ld I now invite perhaps this time from our
Singapore friends because we beat them to the punch in Australia
last time and I think we should respect their opportunity. The
other boys will be seeing me a good deal in Australia. Anyone
from Sin, apore who'd like to ask a question or two?
Sir, Britain has offered one million pounds in economic
aid to Indrnesia. In view of the confrontation, how does
Australia feel?
MR. HOLT: Well, Australia made a gesture at the time of the flood
experience in Java we gave some aid to Indonesia. I'm sure
that we have all retaine a hope that Indonesia would resume a
course of friendship with the countries of this area. It would
be so much more beneficial, we believe, for Indonesia itself
and it would certainly make the task of orderly and peaceful
economic progress in other areas of South-East Asia more
capable of management. But I don't think we should canvass the
Indonesian situation too closely at this time. I don't think
it would be helpful to an emergence from that situation of
perhaps a better understanding. Those who are concerning
themselves with the difficult problems of adjustment inside
their own country would not welcome advice from us as to how
they were to manage their affairs. For my part, I do take some
comort from the fact although it was a terrible event in human
terms that there has been so clearly demonstrated resistance
to communism in that country. The removal of communist influence
in large areas of the administration at least reveals that to
the extent that there have been changes, these changes have not
been sympathetic to communism.
Q" DSir, in view of the latest developments Pzd changes in
Djakarta, do you expect an early solution to the Ialaysian
problem?
MR. HOLT: Well, I think I covered that one in what I just saii.
I'd prefer not to elaborate or speculate about the situation
there. We have indicated to the Government of Indonesia that
we would hope for a better relationship in the years ahead, but
I shall await the events of the future hoping that there will be
some brighter developments. But one can hope without necessarily
being optimistic.
Q. Sir the Singapore Government felt that the strength
and scope ol co-operation in the economic field with Australia
is too limited. Do you think that Australia would rather
modify its policy cn this point?
MR. HOLT: We have had some discussions with your Government on
this matter and I know that the Department of Trade has been
considering some views, or perhaps reguests,( I haven't had the
documentsbrought under my own attention as yet) which were
conveyed from the Government here to the Australian Government,
I understand. But we will look at this matter, of course, in
the helpful spirit that we always bring to matters which arise
between a Government of Sinoapore and he Jovernment of
Australia. We are ourselves a developin country trying to
establish industries in order to build employment opportunities
for our people and this must be appreciated, as I know it is.
It is recognised here as one of the facts in the situation, but
just how we can, either through action of our own or in
association with other friendly countries, be of assistance to
the Jovernment of Singapore in the necessity it finds to create
a considerable number of a~ ditional employment opportunities, this
has yet to be resolved. But I repeat, you will find us
approaching the matter helpfully. 
Sir, you were-widely quoted up here, not so lonj ago as
saying that you felt Australia had a role to play as a bri e
between East and West. Could you elaborate on what you ha
in mind there?
MR. HOLT: Well, elaborate is really the word isn't it. I made a
speech about this in New York which took'the best part of an hour.
Interjection: Unfortunately, only the idea was reported.
MR. HOLT: The Ameroa/ Asia Association had a conference in New York
last year at which they invited me to speak, and this was the
subject on which I was to speak. Jreat Britain, of course,
in the case of Malaysia, has maintained very considerable forces
here, but I am speaking of other aspects in which Great Britain
understandably has not been as active, for example in the Asian
Development Bank. That's roughly the sort of thing I had in
mind.
Q. Is it too soon to talk about another tour, Sir as
lengthy tour?
MR. HOLT: In Asia, yes. I've got to get through an election first.
Q. Sir, there is some controversy about sending your National
Servicemen to South Viet ham. Have you had any change of heart
at all as a result of this tour?
MR. HOLT: I haven't. I most certainly haven't had any change of
heart. In fact, one sees the need for a National Service
component in the Army even more clearly as we study the situation
in these various areas. What I think has lingered in the
minds of many Australians is a recollection of what occurred in
the two WorlU vars, when Australia, without waiting for the
threat to come to our own shores, joined with Allies to resist
the aggression which developed and the military action which made
a global war out of each of the crises of that time.
Now, we have had very substantial voluntary enlistments.
It is not perhaps generally known that Australia sustained
nearly hal a million casualties in the two World Wars. I am
sure that most people in the United Otates would be surprised
to know that we lost more Australian servicemen killed in the
First World War than the United States did. So that when our
peetle think of an operation of war, they tend to think rather
in erms of these two great world wars in which we had such a
massive contribution of the nation's limited man-power.
But the situation here differs very notably from that.
We are not engaged in a world war. We are engaged in resisting
aggression in its most sinister and subversive orms, aggression
which at times takes the form of military action but which calls
for skilled troops, for hard-hitting, efTective, mobile military,
air and naval force2. And this is what Australia is trying to
provide. We believe that with the National Service component, we
shall be able to maintain the orderly regular contribution to
our military needs with the least disiocation to the general
national effort required in other directions as well. / 6 
MR. HOLT ( Contd.) Here we are-with a continent the size of the United
States-to-develp and less than twelve-million to perform
that task, so at the present time we are trying to carry on a
programme of national development and associate with that an
increasing provision for defence by way of these contributions
in various parts of this area of the world.
I think that as people see more clearly in perspective
the National Service element they will reli'se that this is
not only the most efficient way but I believe the fairest way
for the young manhood of the nation to serve. TheyT are
selected by ballot and certainly those who have been so
selected have accepted the obligation in a manly fashion.
NOTE During the changeover of tape, one or two sentences were
missed. Mr. Holt said that the addition of a National Service
component was the most efficient way of maintaining an
orderly commitment, the efficiency of which would be
greatly assisted by this scheme.
MR. HOLT Thank you, gentlemen. 



fATEMB~ NT BY TIM, PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
SYDNEY AIRPORT ON HIS RETURN FROM HIS TOUR OF
SOUTH EAST ASIA. 1st May, 19GG
Well, gentlemen, I don't propose to say a great deal
in detail here for very obvious and good reasono.. The first
is that just having come off a rather long and tiring flight
after what has been a very heavy programme, literally more than
sixteen hours a day in active operation of one kind or another,
this is not the state of mind or body in which to make
carefully considered statements about matters of the degree of
importance that I havre been deLling with. And the other good
reason is that in these circumstances, the first detailed report
I should be making is to my colleagues in Cabinet and then to
the-Parliament. I expect to be talking to my colleagues on
Tuesday mornino when we will have a meeting of Cabinet, and
either that same day or on one of the later dates in the week,
to Parliament. But I can say in general terms tj~ iat this journey has
been one of the most rewarding experiences of a lifetime and I
am going to derive tCremaendous benefit from it for myself
personally in the strength of conviction it will b~ in to
judgments and assessments of particular situations, and -the
value it will possess, I believe, for my colleagues as I am
abole to contribute on a better informed basis to our discussions
on external and defence matters. There is no effective
substitute, as most of us have discovered, for contact directly
on the spot, either with a situation or with personalities, and
this has proved very true in relation to the quite exntensive
journey I have undertaken. Although I have only been away
from Australia for some ten days, we have covered discussions
in four countries in that time and I must haire visited twenty
or more significant locations either of military operation or
extensive governmental activity. For example, I have been
talking about the Singapore naval base for many years but it
wasn't until now that I was able to ins-pect it and get a
thorough briefing on operations there, fly over the area by
helicopter and come back with a pretty clear idea of what was
going on there. In Viet Ham, although the issues have been clear
enough in my mind for a firm judgment to be made and for the
government to have definite policies in relation to Viet Nam,
it is only when you are on the spot and see for yourself what
is going on, sometining of the atmosphere of the city, that
these matters tend to fall into perspective. For eizample, you
read day by day of episodes occurring in Saigon arid people
get the impression that the place is in a state of turmoil,
that chaotic condiLions exist in the city. Saigon has a
population of just on two million people and it is rather like
the reporting that gjoes on about a bu! hfire in Australia as
read by somebody in London. They wonder whether we are all
in a holocaust. Wlell, as vie know, it could be occurring
1,500 miles from where we are. And in Saigon, life goes on
a little more hazardous than in some other places, but the life
of the city goes on, affected by the dioruptive action which
the coimunists bring to it. For example, I was asking about
-their electricity supply, which is clearly inadequate for a
city of that dimension, and they were telling me about the 
hydro electric power which they had in the north, but every
time they f ixed it uap, the~ iet Cong cuit thc wires so tney had
no electricity from that hydro-electric station.
W~ hen you came Ito our own troops you get pictures
from read i nj day by day accounts of what is going on there, of
our troops having a very heavy time almost on an uninterrupted
cycle of operations. W17ell, of course, this is not the way the
Army fuinctions. They do engage in operations of a very
uncomfortable and dangerous kind, but then they come back to
the camp. They are there in camp for refurbishing, refreshing
and spending, some of them, a bit of time on rotation at Vung Tau
which is the recreational seaside centre we have taken aid
equipped for just this very purpose. Some of their time they
go out on their programmnes of civic action to which we attach
a good deal of importance as the positive constructive side of
helping a people less fortunate and less able to look after
themselves, and the need for this is clearly perceived and now
determinedly pursued by the Government of South Viet Nam and by
the American authorities concerned and by our own troops. But
in a variety of ways, the reality differs from the impressions
which one might have otherwise have gained. There are some
things which one can report as definite improvements over what
we have known before. The standard of the Ar~ my cooks has
certainly improved since the last world war not just because
they turned it on for me but '-hey excplained that their cooks now
go thirough food school training and they are a pretty keen lot.
I had a buffet meal with the boys at Bien Hoa which I uwouldn't
have found surpassed at eell, who 1. will I givie a boost to?
the Chevron Hilton or the Southern Cross aiotel or any of
tiese other illustrious establishments.
And another thing which represents a great improvement
is that fatalities from battle casualties are occurrinU at only
half the rate taat occurred in Korea and the Second World War
because thanks to this helicopter service, they get the wounded
men out of the battle area to ei-Lher a casualty station or a
hospital in about less than half the time that they have ever
been able to achieve in earlier . battles.
There are various points of interest of that kind
which one encounters and I -merely mention them illustratively
again to illustrate that all is not grim in the life that ia led
by the troops there.
I paid visits to Terendak and Butterworth two of our
stations in Malaysia and they are most; delightful camp establishmnents,
lovely green lawns, swimmuing pools. At Terendak,
the men had just left for their tour of duty in Borneo but I
met some 450 wives there, in charming suimmer frocks with
small children darting about in all directions. It wras an
indication of an aspect of military service which we don't
normally read about and I merely mention these matters because
I think that a journey of this sort does enable one to get a
better balanced perspective.
But as to the main purpose, this, I t~ iink, has been
well publicised. originally my idea and thirs goes back to
my first days in office was to seize the opportunity as early
as it presen-Led itself, of visiting our troops in thie field. 
A This has now been done and I have, I think, visited most of
the centres, if not all the principal centres in South East
Asia in wnich we have our troops stationed. And I found
them in splendid spirits with morale high. Those who had
been there any length of time were, naturally enough, looking
forward to coming back to Australia, but I found no
indications of any dissatisfaction with conditions in the
service or the life they were living. They were keen, alert,
obviously enthusiastic about the job they were doing, with
a clear idea those that I talked to, anyhow of the need
for them being there and what the job was all about.
And when you reflect on it, in the four countries
they have all been facing the same threat, perhaps in differing
degree, and the degree of intensity has varied fromi time to
time. It wasn't so long ago that i. was the communist guerilla
activity in Malaysia that was giving us the concern. The
communist activity continues there as it does in Borneo. In
Thailand they are concerned abouL'-increased communist probing
and infill-ration and, of course, you find it exemplified in
its most active form currently in Viet Nam.
So that in the countries I visited, it was of great
value to have talked closely, intimately with the heads of
œ jovernment and be taken completely into their confidence as
to their view of things and the even%' s-occurring in their
country. I feel that Australia has strengthened its friendship
in each of these areas and that is one of the continuing
dividends which we shall derive from the visit.
Now this is almost beginning to take the character
of a report to Parliament and I said at the outset this was
not to happen. But I feel encouraged by what I have seen.
I hope to report fully on it to my fellow Australians, but I
can say this with great certainty, that if they had gone
through the same ex~ perience with me they would share my pride
in the quality, character and ability of service which is being
given by so many Australian men and some Australian women in
these various theatres which I have visited.
I could just add, perhaps, a postscript about the
National Servicemen. There were a few that I encountered
who had gone forward either as special units or as part of
some advance party, and both they and the men of the Regular
Army were clearly going to get along very well together.
They were welcomed by the Regular Army volunteers. I believe
that the National Servicemen will add a chapter to Australian
military history of which they will be proud and which we will
come to applaud. 



OLD) WESLEY COLLEGIANS' ASSOCIATION CENTENARY 66 / 084
FOUNDERS' DAY DINNER
TOWN HALL. MELBOURNE 2nd May. 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Presicient, Many Distinguished Guests and Fellow Collegians-
It would be a wonderful thing, as so many of you
are finding, to be at the Wesley Centenary Dinner. A very
remarkable thing to be not only at the Wesley Centenary Dinner,
but to be there as guest of honour, and to be there both as
guest of honour and as Prime Minister of the country. Well,
I think even Ken Hadley and Maurice Sloman, with whom I have
had an occasional game of poker in my more leisurely moments
of past years, would agree that is a hand which takes some
beating. And so, Trevor, I feel a great sense of pride in
being here in those various capacities this evening. The sum
of their totality makes my own enjoyment and relish of what is
for me a notable and historic night quite a moving experience.
I listened with very great interest to your rather
detailed judgment. It has confirmed a suspicion I've had for
many years that the congestion of the courts is due to the fact
that the judges do not apply themselves to the business of law
but allow their minds to wander. Anyhow, I am certainly
indebted to you for your researches because I've been reminded
of so many of the happy occasions which slip into the limbo
and only reappear on very rare occasions if they appear at all.
You mentioned some of these unanswered letters and I apologise
to several hundred people in this company who were good enough
to send me congratulations and good wishes a few months ago
when the high office of Prime Minister came my way. I can
only say by way of exculpation that the list of unanswered
letters runs into the thousands mark and I do hope some tine~
to be given sufficient opportunity by my Cabinet and by
Parliament and the people to say a personal " thank-you" to you,
but at least this medium can be taken tonight to pass on an
interim and very warm-hearted acknowledgment to you all.
But one of the dividends that I secured out of
this appointment was not merely the host of letters of good
wishes but so many of those who wrote to me were school friends
of many years back that I hadn't heard of perhaps for a
generation or more. Included amongst them, although I had,
of course, been aware of his presence in the intervening period,
was a letter from Eddie Wells and Eddie had been at the Prep.
when I was there I think he was Headmaster of the Prep.
School but certainly he looked after all of us who were boarding
at Stella in those days. Eddie wrote to me to remind me that
in 1922 I secured 100 marks for algebra in each of the three
terms. Now I think you will agree, gentlemen, that for a
Treasurer that is a pretty remarkable achievement. Had it
come before the change in office, I would have taken even more
encouragement from it. As it was, I was very glad to slip
into the somewhat easier calculations of decimal currency.
But Eddie I encountered tonight, he addressed me as " Sir" 
It was the first time in the history of our relationship over
many years that I haven't been doing it that way from my end,
and so Prime Ministers do enjoy some privileges.
Gentlemen, it is for all of us tonight a wonderful
occasion. There isn't one of us in this room whoisn't proud
of what he still reg rds as the best school of all and I
exclude some of the philistines who have crept in by virtue of
that traditional Wesley courtesy which obtrudes itself from
time to time. But for those of us who have passed through,
or in the case of some of the senior boys who are still going
through the final stages of their studentship there, we shall
treasure always in a corner of our hearts and you made a
reference, Trevor, to that song I had to sing. Dickie Adamson
of whom I'll say a few more words in a moment or two, was a
very remarkable man, of course, in very many respects, but he
knew how to contrive a song so that the emotion desired from
the comparatively unemotional students with whom he had to deal,
came forward at the right moment. I defy anybody to sing the
leaving song, which is usually reserved on speech night for the
senior boys leaving the school I defy anybody at whatever
stage their voice has gone -contralto, breaking or baritone
or whatever the case may be -without an involuntary sob coming
into the voice, the music is so arranged. And so you sing on
the final day at the speech night actually this leaving
song, and in it we talk about the school still having a corner
in our hearts, and I am sure that is true of all of us. And
it is a warm corner, something to which we can turn when we
are amongst our contemporaries, when we read with pride and
satisfaction of what a fellow collegian has accomplished, or
find that some well known Wesley fnmily and I have run across
so many of them here tonight has sent on another son to carry
on the famous tradition of the father.
A great school makes a great contribution to the
national life. It gives, as the Headmaster has said to us,
qualities of character, and it brings an individuality which I
think every community finds of advantage to possess. we don't
want all to be cast in the same mould, and even when you are
a school inside a particular system of schools, as the Great
Public Schools are in this State of Victoria, each school
somehow develops its own atmosphere, its own character, and
Wesley undoubtedly can claim that individuality and Wesley
undoubtedly can claim that thanks to the men who have gone
before in the headmastership and who today stand in that office,
there are qualities of character which any Wesley boy worth
the salt will acquire and will carry with him through his days
wherever his tasks or his inclinations may take him. And this
for an Australia of less than twelve million people is a
tremendously important thing if we are to face the great
responsibilities and challenges of developing a continent the
size of the United States, if you leave Alaska out of the
picture, and we are trying to do it with our ll, 500OOO0; against
something over 200 million in that country, then the people
must be people of quality and people of character if we are
to make our mark and have some influence on what is happening
amongst the 1,500 million people to the north of this country
who are finding themselves in a dynamic period of rapid and
revolutionary change. It is not sufficient for us to produce 
people, we liave to produce leaders, we have to produce people
of character and quality. And I believe Australia is doing
just that. One of the lessons I've learned as I have gone
around in this last ten days, although it was a lesson well
perceived from many earlier voyagings, is that the best expoct
that Australia makes is the export of its own people I am
not recommending that we export them wholesale, because we
are busily trying to import people to build a nation around
us, but the Australian where he goes in the main is a person
I use that terms " he" generically because, as a matter of
fact some of the Australian " shes" abroad are pretty good,
too, and I met the daughter of orne of our most distinguished
old boys, Keith Reid's daugher, at the surgical unit in Saigon
in the last few days where she was doing a great job for
Australia also. But here Australia is making its presence felt by
the good Australians that have gone to serve in one capacity
or another, narticularly around the South East Asian arc to
our north. There are a couple of Australians in Cambodia, a
country of whose politics we don't entirely approve, but
there has developed a curious friendship between the government
of that country, and one of the reasons for this is that there
are two fellows there who have taught them how to mend the
buses when the buses break down. Now, other countries make
handsome gifts of hundreds of buses. They compete for the
favours of Cambodia. Some will come from the United States,
some will come from Russia, some will come from China or from
somewhere else, and that's fine. The buses are received but
when the buses break down, nobody knew how to fix them. well,
a couple of Australians are running a training workshop in
Cambodia and are amongst the two best known men in Cambodia
and they have built up a great store of goodwill for this
country. And that rather illustrates the sort of thing I
have in mind. You spoke, Headmaster, about this generation of
students I heard and what a wonderful thing it was, what
a moving thing it was to hear th voice of Dickie Adamson
tonight giving us something of the philosophy which we had
absorbed from him in which he talked of the criticism of that
particular generation of young Australians by their elders
and expressing his own view that it was a better generation
than the one before. I, having come in contact with a good
many of Ithe generation which succeeded me, endorse his
judgment as far as today's generation of young Acstralians
go. They are better educated, I believe, than wewre, they
have got more assurance and I believe they have got as much
earnestness and determination to do what they believe is the
right thing to do, provided their own intell!. gence can be
satisfied that this is the right thing. They have a more
challenging judgment, perhaps, than an earlier generation.
The slogans are under questioning because they find themselves
in a restless turbulent world in which the standards of the
past have come under increasing challenge. But the stuff is
there, and again I have seen this confirmed over the last ten
days by the quality of manhood and womanhood that I have
encountered in the various countries that I have visited.
We talked of Dickie Adamson and what he meant to
us, and I mention him because he happened to be my own
headmaster. Any generation of Wesley collegians who had 
another headmaster to guide them will think, I have no doubt,
in very similar terms about -the man who guided the earlier
years of their own lives. But a headmaster, a good headmaster,
has his own special brand of immortality. It is an
immortality of influence which goes into the hearts and minds
of those to whom he is giving leadership, and it extends from
them perhaps through their families, perhaps in the leadership
which they in turn bring to others, but it is a species of
immortality which is very genuine and goes very deep. I shall
never forget I am sure nobody who was at Wesley in my time
could forget the impact which the character and personality
of Lawrence Arthur Adamson made upon us, the precepts which he
gave to us, which have become embedded in our own make-up and
which have illuminated so clearly for us so many of the paths
along which we have had to proceed as we have made our own way
through life. I have no doubt that in my own public life the job
of assessing what was the right thing to do in a situation has
been greatly assisted by the clear perception which Dickie
Adamson brought to the great precepts of human conduct.
Perhaps I could illustrate by an example the way
he used to go about it with us. He was, of course, a man of
legal training and he sometimes thought in legal terms, but
on one occasion, I remember, we had some discussion with him
I was one of his prefects at this time, so was Spot Turnbull,
my old room-mate in the eyrie just the two of us, in one of
those towers in the older Wesley, and somehow or other I
couldn't have persuaded him adequately at the time as to the
political course he was to follow later but, still, you can't
achieve everything. We are still very good friends and I
did have the pleasure of introducing him to the young lady who
became his wife. I would have you know, Mr. Justice Rapke,
that this rather flippant reference of yours to the dancing
prize calls for some amplification because I was in that state
of bondage at the time which afflicts the boarder I don't
know whether there has been improvement since but the only
way I could escape from the prison was to go to dancing class
on a Friday night at St. Catherine's School. Naturally,
being there one developed a certain proficiency in order to
secure the more agreeable partners that one saw around the
room. The incentive was there and finally came the accolade.
I can't claim ever to have mastered the Charleston to which
you have referred. There are some people who would be unkind
enough to say in politics that I had learned the Twist fairly
early in my career.
However, we discussed with the Headmaster at that
time what seemed to us to be a curious application of the law
because two sets of of fences had been committed within quite
recent time of each other. A group of schoolboys returning
from Geelong, having no doubt conquered either Geelong College
or Geelong Grammar as the case might have been, felt that the
occasion called for some celebration and were found by some
intrus ive master drinking a bottle of wine in the railway
carriage and were duly reported to the headmaster. The other
episode concerned a group of boys who, no doubt, for good cause 
decided to ink the navel of one of their colleagues. Now
the headmaster administered a much lighter penalty on the
boys caught drinking the wine which seemed to us at school
by far the more heinous crime, than he inflicted on those
who had inked the navel of their follow student, and seeking
enlightenment we discussed this with him, and he explained
it quite logically and simply. He said the wine-drinkers
were engaged in a social misdemeanour, perhaps of some harm
ultimately to themselves but not damaging the interests of
others or interfering with the liberty of others. But those
who inked the navel of the schoolboy, that was an assault
upon the person and a grave interference with his own personal
liberty and course of action. Now, gentlemen, here was a
typical example of the logic, of the sense of principle which
Dickie Adamson had. We remember him with great affection.
I remember him with a very deep gratitude.
The generation which you now have to look to,
Headmaster, face challenges of even greater complexity than we
did in our time. We are in this restless rapidly-changing
world, but Australia is so peculiarly placed as in effect a
Western country in an Asian world, finding it of increasing
importance to trade, to collaborate, to join for purposes of
mutual security, tc confer on matters of mutual interest and
concern. And here is a test of the Australian qualities which
we believe are well enshrined at Wesley, of tolerance, of
character, of courage and of mateship, and when you think of
it that by the time this generation that I speak of the new
generation reaches its own maturity, the population of the
world, certainly of Asia will probably have doubled, and
Australia which today has this handful of people in the sea
of humanity of which I speak, will have to exercise a role,
a significant role in helping to shape the outcome of these
opportunities and challenges and problems as they open up to us.
Well here, I repeat, are claims upon the kind of
quality that a great school can produce. Wesley has a proud
record of achievement over its first one hundred years. The
purple and the gold those royal colours which we bear so
proudly and see carried so proudly by those who represent the
college will have to be again in the forefront of leadership
in the affairs of the years ahead. But the tradition is
secure. We here tonight, from those who were here in 1906
onwards, are all inheritors and participators in this great
heritage built for us by men of the quality and the character
and leadership as headmasters to whom I have referred. And
you, Sir, now have that trust and we know that in you the
Wesley tradition will be safely carried and that h: 74cI', t new
chapters will be added to the Wesley story.
Last night, I was turning over because I thought
there might be something there of interest to you the
publication, the very limited publication put out in 1921,
March of 1921, of the first 55 years of the school's history,
and it was clear that those who compiled the history then
were very much influenced by the proximity of the publication
to the school's contribution to the First World War, and we
as students honoured appropriately as the occasions seemed 
Fr 6.
proper, those who had served Australia in those years. And
each generation seems to have to face up to its own challenge
to freedom and the standards that it wishes to see preserved
in its own country and in other countries to whom we can
bring our own succour. And this falls again to the
responsibility of another generation of young Australians,
and I can assure you from what I have seen of the Australians
of this noew generation abroad, we have produced a breed of
men of whom we shall be eternally proud.
Gentleman, tonight you have done me the great
honour of proposing my toast. Trevor has gone through his
researches to a degree that has not merely delighted me but
has stimulated many happy recollections which I will mull over
for a very considerable time to come. I hope that in the
next 100 years you don't merely produce a couple more Prime
Ministers, but the judges, the doctors, the lawyers, the
teachers and all those who go to make a civilised cormmunity,
able to live the good lifb themselves but more importantly in
the kind of world in which we find ourselves, able to contribute
themselves to a better life for others. This will be the
product of the Wesley of the next 100 years.
And so to the best school of all, my thanks for
the great joy and the great reward of having served my seven
years there, for the host of happy memories whenever thoughts
turn back to a wonderful school. And the best wishes of all
of us, Headm~ aster, to you and the boys for an even greater
Wesley in the hundred years ahead. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA
Ministerial Statement
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 5th May 1966]
Mr. HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins--Prime
Minister).-by leave-Southern Asia today
demands and receives world wide attention
and concern. In this ancient complex,
densely-populated region the habits and
practices of centuries are bending,
breaking or yielding under the impact
of twentieth century technology and
new concepts are challenging the old.
The -revolution takes many forms,
most of them unsettling, some of
them violent and dangerous. Conflicting
ideologies compete there for the hearts and
minds of hundreds of millions of human
beings and these millions may have doubled
by the end of this century. The Communist
power seekers in Asia are trying to make
this revolution the vehicle of disruption and
instability enabling them to overturn established
authority and shackle whole communities
to their philosophy. They exploit
grievances, aggravate divisive factors, undermine
stability in order to bring about political
and administrative chaos. Behind the
Communists in South East Asia, wherever
their structures are to be found, is the
driving force of China.
China, with a population upwards of 700
million, is governed by a Communist regime
implacably committed -to its goal of a
5665/ 66 Communist-dominated world. The Chinese
Communists scornfully reject the concept of
peaceful co-existence which has brought
some respite in the cold war and an easing
of . tensions in Europe. Subversion and guerrilla
warfare, as spelled out in the writings
of Mao Tse-tung, have been directed with
planned thoroughness to the villages and
paddy fields of South East Asia. These tactics
have been eagerly adopted and ruthlessly
waged in South Vietnam by General
Giap, the leading military theoretician of
North Vietnam, and by the Vietcong, the
self-styled Liberation Front, who have
learned their lessons well from him.
South East Asia has become a critical
battleground for free peoples everywhere.
South Vietnam has become a testing point
of the determination to prevent Communist
aggression and check its cancerous spread.
Australia is standing . today with the
people of South Vietnam, our close ally the
United States of America, and the forces
of other friendly countries in resisting the
Communist threat. We see more than the
need merely to preserve the independence
and integrity of South Vietnam, ' important
though that task may be of itself. To us,
the threat is, as I have said, to free peoples
everywhere. If South East Asia is to fall 
under Communist control we face a future
in which the security of Australia is in
jeopardy. While at this time South Vietnam is the
most heavily embattled, other countries of
the area are alert to the threat also. It is
noteworthy that Korea, which so recently
was itself a battleground of Communist
aggression, has supplied more military
forces, in proportion to its population, to
aid South Vietnam than any other country.
Three successive Presidents of the United
States have clearly recognised the threat,
leading to the provision by that country of
a massive and decisive contribution of
forces and material. Australia, in company
with the free countries of South East Asia,
has cause for gratitude for this contribution
made to security in South East Asia by
American firmness and military strength.
We have admired the resolution and
strength of purpose that President Johnson
has brought to this issue.
The Communists have deliberately
chosen to carry out aggression by covert
means on the basis of long and careful
underground preparation extending over
more than a decade, in the training for
guerrilla warfare, the establishment of
secret bases and stockpiles for a protracted
campaign, the securing of routes of infiltration,
the introduction of specially trained
cadres, the application of methods of
indoctrination and terrorism against
defenceless village people. These are all
elements in the infra-structure. This is the
pattern of Communist aggression in the
conditions of South East Asia. By these
means, the aggressor seeks to escape the
full censure of the free world which would
flow from an open declaration of war in
the sense that we have known it in the
past. The enemy does not openly deploy
his forces in the manner of conventional
warfare where their aggressive actions are
readily identifiable internationally. Even
today, when North Vietnam has at least
nine regular regiments of the P.. A. V. N.
operating in South Vietnam, they will make
no admission of this. Nor, of course, do
they admit the earlier build up of Vietcong
guerrilla forces and infiltration to
which I have just referred. This is a war
largely of attrition, in which there are no
front l: ines and hostile activity is planned to
occur, and does occur, in many -widely
separated places simultaneously. I have said that Australia stands militarily
with South Vietnam, the United States and
other allies, but it is also an important part
of our thinking that we are able to play a
useful part in the building of a better world
order in South East Asia. Wherever we have
been involved in a military role in this area
over the post-war years, our servicemen,
acting along the lines their Government has
approved, have made a positive contribution
to the wellbeing of the people of the
country in which they found themselves. I
was glad to find that programmes of military
civic action-as they are called-and rural
rehabilitation and development are now
accepted as an important part of the tasks
of the military forces of all the allied
participants. There is, in addition, an extensive
programme of civilian cadre training
for service in the villages, which I shall
refer to again later. Through the Colombo
Plan, and in other ways, Australia has made
a useful contribution by civilians also.
It is against all this background that my
recent visit to several of the countries of
South East Asia should be viewed. In each
of these countries Australia has serving men
and women joining with others in holding
in check the Communist threat. The
existence of that threat is common to all of
these countries. It has varied in degree and
as to point of time. We played a part for
many years, with Britain and New Zealand,
in stamping out Communist terrorist activity
in what was then Malaya. We sent military
forces to resist Communist aggression in
Korea. We have helped in Singapore and
Borneo. We have given assistance in various
forms to Thailand, and now we are to
increase earlier military aid in South
Vietnam by providing a task force.
On taking office, I decided to seize the
first opportunity I could take to pay a visit
to our Australian troops at their various
stations. I felt it desirable to have direct
personal knowledge of the conditions of
their service, and have them feel from my
presence with them that they occupy a high
place in the regard of their Government.
I wanted also to have in my mind that
awareness which only personal contact can
provide of the nature of our various establishments,
their environment and setting. I
wanted to make the dots on the map come
. live as known places with known people. 
A strong team of advisers, who were also
to gain much benefit and information as
observers, came with me. These advisers
included the Chief of the General Staff, Sir
John Wilton; the Deputy Secretary of the
Prime Minister's Department, Mr. Lawler; a
specialist on South East Asian affairs in the
Department of External Affairs, Mr. Gordon
Jockel; and Mr. Clugston, of the Department
of Defence. All those gentlemen, together
with the other gentlemen who were
with us, were of great assistance. I acknowledge
with appreciation the help that they
gave me. Facilities were provided, at the
expense of their employers, for members of
the Press who desired to accompany the
party, and about 20 newsmen, photographers
and television cameramen, most
of them of senior status in their organisations,
accompanied us. I express my appreciation
to them for what appeared to me
to be a consistently high standard of
reporting. In the course of the tour I visited Vietnam,
Thailand, Malaysia, including both
West Malaysia and Sarawak, and Singapore.
I shall say something about each of these
countries. There were advantages in being able to
travel at short intervals between the four
countries visited and inspect, over the space
of 10 days, activities in more than 20
localities. A head of government, in addition
to receiving the courtesies and hospitality
considered appropriate to his office,
is given means of speedy transport and
communication. He is supplied with the
most frankly expressed and authoritative
information. It is possible in this way to
gain in a short time a quick insight into
the manner in which each country is
tackling its national issues, and, at the same
time, have a more vivid awareness of the
proximity and significance that one country
in the region bears to the other. A valuable
gain from my journey has been the development
of a more intimate relationship with
leaders and senior Ministers in all the countries
visited. This facilitates future contact
and discussion on matters of mutual
interest. Vietnam, of course, in current circumstances,
was the country of most immediate
interest to us. It was of great value to confer
with the Chief of State, General Thieu,
the Prime Minister, Air Vice-Marshal Ky, the Foreign Minister, Dr. Do, and other
members of the Government of the Republic
of Vietnam. Theirs is commonly thought
of as a military Government, and in a
situation of such intensive military activity,
under constant threat of Communist attack,
one would expect the Government to
possess, as it does, a strongly military
flavour and influence. There is, however, a
greater civilian composition in the senior
levels of government than is generally
know. The Directory comprises the military
leaders and corps commanders, but associated
with this is a Ministry of twenty
members of whom five are doctors, five are
lawyers, four are military officers, using
1military to embrace the three servicesthe
Prime Minister, of course being a senior
air force officer-three are engineers, two
are economists and one is a trade union
official. Some of them have been actively
in the fight for national freedom throughout
their adult life. Our talks with them
were -frank and comprehensive. They are
determined to see the struggle through until
freedom and independence have been
secured. The day to day reporting of events as
they occur in various parts of Vietnam can
obscure the extent to which economic and
community life there have adapted themselves
to military operations persisting over
many years. Take the situation in Saigon.
It is true that terrorist incidents happen
there with disturbing frequency. Several
incidents occurred during ' the period of my
visit. Sometimes there is loss of life, injury
and damage from Vietcong sneak raids.
But it must be realised that Saigon is a
large city of about two million people. Life
goes on with most people unaware at the
time that another hostile incident has
occurred. The shops are busy; there is plenty
of traffic about; people go about their
occasions seemingly undeterred.
The scale of United States assistance
pouring into Vietnam is enormous. It
has to ' be seen to be believed.
Saigon, I was told, ' has become the
busiest -airport in the world. The
helicopters in service are to be numnbered
in thousands. They have proved of
immense value for rapid mobility of troops
into action, and the speed with which they
rescue and transport disabled soldiers for
medical treatment has cut in half the fatality
rate from injuries as compared with that of 
Korea and the Second World War. The
choppers, as they are familiarly called, are
just about the most popular pieces of equipment
in the country..
. My talks in Saigon and at Bien Hoa
included detailed briefings from military and
diplomatic representatives of the Government
of Vietnam, of the United States including
the Ambassador, Mr. Cabot Lodge,
and General Westmoreland and, of course,
our own Australian advisers. As a result
of the information gained from them, supplemented
by what one could see of the
immensity of the scale of provision of military
equipment and logistic requirements, I
am confident that the Vietcong cannot win.
The military position in South Vietnam has
now been secured. The Vietcong have
suffered heavy losses and their casualties
have been increasing.
Sneak raids by small parties, such as that
made recently on Saigon Airport, can still
be carried out from time to time by the
Vietcong. These raids are part of the military
and political tactics of guerrilla warfare.
They make dramatic news, but they
do not weaken the hold of the South Vietnamese
Government on the areas under its
control. On the other hand, mobile forces
are now available to conduct operations
against enemy forces when they are located,
and to penetrate into territory previously
considered Vietcong strongholds.
There has been a noticeable weakening
in the morale of many of the Vietcong.
The sustained bombing attacks on supplies
and Veitcong held positions and the speed
and mobility of helicopter borne troops
are, having punishing effect. The Vietcong
are suffering from lack of medical supplies
and treatment. The number of defectors
has increased substantially and significantly
in recent months, both as a result of military
and psychological operations. The Vietcong
are now drawing on much less experienced
troops, and the regular North Vietnamese
regiments have proved themselves less
adapted to the guerrilla type of warfare in
what is for them unfamiliar terrain. They
prefer to fight in formed units. This makes
them more liable to detection and air attack.
The heavier equipment to which they are
accustomed creates a transportation
problem for them. More intelligence information
is flowing in, while detection methods
have improved. Allied forces have been
able to strike in critical areas before the
enemy was able to move. In a country of such difficult terrain, and with the tactics
and strategy employed by the enemy it may
be a long time before the Communist
threat can be subdued. But, increasingly,
areas will be cleared of Vietcong and a
more peaceful pattern of life restored. It
must be remembered that while the Vietcong
control large tracts of country, they
hold none of the major centres-they do
not command any one of the 43 provincial
capitals. The protection, rehabilitation, and
development of additional areas brought
under control is a formidable task and will
take a long time. It involves the
re-establishment of civil administration,
police, civil protection units, and a variety
of civil projects to provide medical aid,
education, communications and other public
utilities. Here again the United States
is providing massive support. Military civic
action by combat troops will, however, be
the initial step towards this ultimate
objective. The Government of Vietnam maintains
establishments for the intensive training of
cadres, each 59 in number, to be located
in the villages, specially trained to help in,
defence against Vietcong attack and to
assist the villagers to build a better life for
themselves. Those to be trained are
nominated by the village chiefs and become
equipped to carry out tasks of medical service,
education, construction of homes and
school buildings; they learn improved agricultural
methods and other activities of
befiefit to the village dweller. Since March
1964 some 20,000 trainees have already
been equipped for service along these lines.
The Australian troops in Vietnam and
elsewhere, as I discovered, also regard what
they aptly refer to as hearts and minds
as a necessary part of their activities. They
have become well and affectionately known
in the villages and the areas they serve.
They have helped in this way to improve
morale and build friendship for Australia.
SThe warmth of welcome and cordial hospitality
shown to us by members of the
Government were evidence of the appreciation
which they obviously very sincerely
feel for Australia's military participation
and material help. A bright prospect
in the Vietnam situation is the application
by all the allied participants to constructive
programmes for improvements of
standards in the towns and villages. 
All those I met in Vietnam were concerned
about the political situation and discussed
it frankly. In the middle of the
pressures and strains of the war, the
country is seeking to establish a new
system of government. This is a difficult
enough process at any time as Australians
know from their own history. Constitutionmaking
in any circumstances brings to the
forefront the competition among the
various political and regional interests. In
Vietnam, the process is made more complex
by two particular circumstances. In the
first place, the country has not been kindly
dealt with by history for easy political
evolution:. Over the centuries, religious,
regional and cultural influences have produced
a variety of groups and sects and
local loyalties. The years of French
colonialism and Japanese occupation were
followed by a systematic Communist programme
to destroy the growth of institutions
and the structure of government. In
the second place, the wartime situation
requires a strong executive government.
Rapid and effective action is needed for
the conduct of the fighting, for pacification
and for vigorous programmes of civic
action. Finding the right constitutional
expression of the relationship between the
military and civilian elements is a complex
matter not easily to be resolved. But an
awareness of the difficulties should enable
us to maintain a steady view, seeing events
as they occur in a realistic perspective. As
they are checked in the military sphere in
Vietnam-and they are being checkedthe
Communists are likely to intensify
their efforts in the political sphere, not
only in seeking to promote distractions in
Vietnam but in wider political offensives
through their agents of influence in the
other free countries of the region.
The people of Vietnam have great
toughness, vitality and pride. They are
neither apathetic nor dispirited. There is a
general will to resist Communist aggression,
and to prevent Communist domination. The
recent political disturbances appear to have
had only minor adverse effect on the
military situation. The judgment is that the
Vietnamese armed forces with the United
States and other allies can resist the aggression
and ensure security while South Vietnam
develops the basis of an enduring
stability. I have spoken at some length about the
situation in Vietnam because of its importance.
But I wish to. refer also to the general
discussions which I had in the other countries
I visited, which touched upon regional
matters of common concern. Thailand is a
country of considerable experience and
influence in the South East Asian region. It
well exemplifies the rapid ecoiomic and
social progress which can be made with
well directed aid from friendly countries.
It is able to play now, and I believe increasingly
in the future, a significant part in
promoting the security and stability of the
region. The fact that I was able to return,
so soon after the event, the visit made to
Australia by the Prime Minister, Thanom
Kittikachorn, enabled us to establish an
even warmer and closer relationship which
will, I believe, be of enduring benefit to
our two countries. I was taken by helicopter
on an hour's journey from Bangkok over
an interesting stretch of the Thai countryside
to an audience with King Bhumiphon
at his summer palace at Hua Hin. The King
recalled with appreciation the visit of himself
and the Queen to Australia. He asked
me to convey his greetings to the Australian
people. In Kuala Lumpur, I was able to review
with the Deputy Prime Minister, Tun
Razak, and some of his colleagues, the
latest thinking of the Malaysian Government
on the confrontation issue, the
expansion of the Malaysian defence effort
and problems arising for both those countries
from the withdrawal by Singapore
from : Malaysia.
In Singapore, in addition to having useful
talks with the Deputy Prime Minister,
Dr. Toh, and other senior Ministers, I paid
a visit to the Singapore naval base and had
a briefing there from senior officers and
visited those Australian Navy units then at
the base. Arrangements were made for me
to view the whole area by helicopter, and
this was certainly a very practical descriptive
way of studying this vast establishment.
Australia has long held the view that the
continued . maintenance of the-base by
British forces is an important contribution
to the security and stability of the whole
region of southern Asia. My discussions
with representatives of the Malaysian and
Singapore Governments confirmed that they
too share this view. The base has the
additional value of representing a considerable
f2ctor in the economy of Singapore. 
It directly employs more than 30,000 people
and, through its requirements, gives indirect
employment to many tens of thousands of
Singapore citizens. Although I have not
previously referred to it specifically in this
statement, we fully and gratefully
acknowledge the major support which the
United Kingdom provides by means of
its forces which are spread through
the Singapore-Malaysian area-including
Borneo-and which collaborate with other
Commonwealth forces.
Each of the Governments we met took
me frankly into their thinking on their basic
problems and national issues. They gave me
accounts, in particular, of their plans for
economic development and social progress,
and of . the thinking underlying these plans.
I came away with the impression of realistic,
modern-minded govenments and developing
administrative structures.
Purposeful efforts are being made to put
national resources into rural development.
All are agreed that the benefits of modern
life must be progressively spread into the
villages and remote rural areas. The central
Governments are aware that the resources
and facilities at their disposal must be used
to break down the traditional feeling of the
small landholders that governments bring
them no benefit.
I have spoken of the prominence given
to civic action programmes in. Vietnam. In
Thailand, mobile teams are being sent into
the remote provinces to survey the problems
and provide civic action there; national
development programmes give a major
place to agriculture and inland transportation.
In Malaysia, the experiences of the
emergency have been studied and incorporated
into national planning. The new
villages established during the resettlement
programme of the emergency have become
permanent communities. We were briefed
on these matters in the National Operations
Room, which is personally supervised
by the Deputy Prime Minister. This centre
aims at co-ordination and drive in carrying
out the rural development programme. In
Sarawak, the twin problems of providing
security and development in rural areas are
major priority tasks.
The Government of Singapore is energetically
grappling with the problems of
industrialisation and international trade in
order to provide employment for its growing
work force. Australia is playing a part in assisting
with these schemes of welfare and development.
1 was impressed by the work which
the surgical team from the Alfred Hospital,
Melbourne, is doing in the district hospital
at Bien Hoa village. I also met members
of the surgical team from St. Vincent's
Hospital, Melbourne, which is doing similar
valuable work at Long Xuyen. In discussions
with Government leaders, I was
told of the value they attach to the contributions
which our experts are making in
various civil fields such as road and bridge
building projects in provincial areas, and in
attachments to institutions. During my visit
to Kuching, the Sarawak association of
former Colombo Plan students met me to
express their appreciation of Australia's
help. They represented a numerous group
of young men trained in various professions
in Australian universities and other educational
institutions.
The major intention prompting this tour,
however, was to visit our forces serving in
various parts of South East Asia. I have
now seen at first hand the splendid job they
are doing. I have had opportunities to meet
informally with officers and men in their
service positions and at their billets. In discussions
with Government and military
leaders in the various theatres, I have heard
unstinted praise for the quality of our forces
both as fighting men and as representatives
of Australia in their contacts with local
populations and in projects of civic action.
This has been a heart warming experience.
Australia can be very proud of the men
and women of our armed forces throughout
South East Asia. The great tradition of
Australia's fighting men is safe in their hands
-with the Navy on patrol duties in Malaysian
waters, with the Army in its border
posts in Borneo, playing its part in the
crucial fight against aggression in South
Vietnam, or building airfields in Thailand
and roads under the most difficult conditions
of terrain and climate in Sabah and
with the Air Force on the alert for air
defence at Butterworth and Ubon, or providing
vital air transport in South Vietnam.
The Army cloth cap, battered and faded
in service, is to be found worn in every
conceivable variety of shaping, but with a
jaunty and cheerful pride. These forces may
not be large in numbers relative to the total
forces engaged in these areas, but they
are of the highest quality and they make a
significant contribution to the allied effort. 
They have an effect and influence out of
proportion to their actual numbers. I would
like to include in this tribute the armed
forces of New Zealand serving in the area.
I visited the New Zealand battery alongside
our battalion in its encampment at Bien
Hoa, and this unit joined together with us
on the morning of Anzac Day in the most
moving commemoration of that anniversary
that I have ever attended.
Our troops have shown themselves able
to win the confidence and friendship of
village peoples in the areas of operations;
good relations have been developed with
the local authorities and residents in base
areas; and the Governments have made
clear to us the value they place on the,
presence of our forces. Their initial
stationing in these countries involved a
degree of co-operation and mutuality of
interest between us and the Governments
concerned. Once established, the continuing
presence of our forces has contributed
appreciably to the further strengthening of
the relationship. They -have earned a high
reputation for their conduct, their military
capacity and their military civic action
work. It was clear from what I was told
in private discussion, and from what each
Government said publicly, that there was
much satisfaction in the presence of Australian
troops as a direct commitment by
Australia to South East Asian security.
I have spoken at some length about a
: number of aspects of my journey and its
background. I have mentioned the Communist
inspired instability and disruption
in southern Asia, that South East Asia has
become a critical battleground for free
peoples everywhere, and that the prime
manifestation of the struggle now finds
itself in Vietnam. I have said something
about the reasons for Australia's participation
with America and other allies in support
of South Vietnamese forces in their
defence of their national integrity. Because
of their very considerable importance, I
have referred also to various matters bearing
on the social and ccormic development
of Vietnam and other countries in
the region. I have referred also to discussions
with Government leaders in each
of the countries, and I have spoken in the
highest terms, as is their due, of our own
forces in the area, of their quality, of their standing, of the work of military and civil
significance which they do, and, I now add,
of their understanding of the role which
they perform, and the powerful reasons
for it.
I now conclude by saying again that the
visit was for me, and I would hope for the
Australian nation, a most valuable exercise.
It has produced a sharpening of our consciousness
of military and political situations
which are constantly under our examination.
I retain a vivid visual picture of many
locations and establishments of continuing
importance to us. The review has provided
a new and rewarding occasion for an up
to the minute exchange of views with other
Governments. Naturally I cannot reveal the
substance of the intimate discussions which
took place with these Governments, but the
results will be beneficial to our own future
internal counsels. The journey brought
closer personal relationships. I am glad to
report that my visit was very much welcomed
in each of the countries concerned.
They, I believe, as well as we, felt that each
derived value from it. Australia is known
among the countries of the area as a good
ally, and a reliable friend. We clearly have
a not insignificant part to play in the future
of a region undergoing a revolution of
change-a revolution surely representing
one of the historic movements in the story
of mankind. I return with a firmly based
confidence in the allied capacity to defeat
aggression and establish conditions for
peace and security. We must keep a clear
and' calm vision of what we are trying to
achieve and a resolute will to do it. My
Cabinet colleagues and I have long held the
view that Asian countries are prepared to
work closely with others in preserving
security in the region and in establishing
a structure of defence and effective power
to deter future aggression. I return
strengthened in that conviction. The
principles of collective security that we have
been following are soundly based. Our
defence policies are the right policies for
Australia at this time.
I present the following paper-
Prime Minister's Visit to South East Asia-
Ministerial Statement, 5th May 1966-
and move-
That the House take note of the paper.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA 



FOR PRESS EMBARGO: Not to be released
before 4 p. m.
Sunday May, 1966.
COMMONWEALTH HOME SAVIUG S GRANT SCHEME
Statement by the Minister for Housijna
Senator the Hon. Dame Annabelle aankin D. B. E.
The Commonwealth Minister for Housing, Damne Annabelle
Rankin, announced today that 50,000 grants have now been made
under the Home Saving., s Grant Scheme since its inception in July,
1964. Of grants paid, 73 per cent have been for the maximum
of $ 500, the average being close to $ 460. The grants paid
total approximately $ 22,800,000.
The Scheme is designed to encourage young people to
save f or their own homes by of fering as a tax-f ree gif t, a grant
of up to $ 500 on the basis of : 1for every 33 saved. The grant
is payable to young married persons under the age of 36 years
who have entered a contract to buy or build their first home
or commenced its construction, provided they have been gaving
for at least three years in a required form.
Dame Annabelle reminded prospective applicants to
apply for the grant as soon as possible after contracting to
buy their home or to have one built. Applications cannot be
accepted more than twelve months after that time. Enclosure
of the documents requested with the application will help the
Department to make early payment of the grant but lodgmnent should
not be delayed beyond -the twelve months if a document is not
available. The application should be lodged and the document
forwarded later.
The Scheme is explained in detail in the official
pamphlet " A Grant for Your Home", which is available from any
post office or bank. All young people would be well advised to
obtain a copy and study it carefully to make certain of qualifying
for a grant when the time comes for them to marry and obtain a
home. Canberra May, 1966. 



66/ 03
FOR PRESS: P. M. Y~ o. 40/ 1966
" BoODAOO" FOR VIET NAM
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Commonwealth GUovernment will take whatever
action is found to be necessary to see that these supplies
get to our troops in Viet Nam.
I have discussed the issue today with relevant
Ministers. A conference or, the matter will be held tomorrow
between officers of the Departments of Shipping and Transport
and Labour and National Service and the Australian National
Line. CANBEIRRA, May, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 41/ 1966
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND LOANT COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Arrangements have been made with the State
Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and the
Australian Loan Councijl to be held in Canberra on 16th and
17th June. I shall preside at the Premiers' Conference
and Mr. McMahon, as Treasurer, will be Chairman of the Loan
Council. CANB3ERRA, 18th May, 1966 i 



-FOR PRESS P. M. No. 42/ 1966
ORD RIVER PiZOJECT
Statement by the Prime Minister, ir. Harold Holt
Cabinet devoted a good deal of time yesterday to a
considerable body of material which it had before it relating to
the Ord River Project.
The Government has already demonstrated its interest
in the development of the Ord and its willingness to assist the
Western Australian Government in the hope that an extensive
agricultural settlement can be maintained in the area utilising
the water of the Ord for the irrigation of the fertile soil which
it can serve. The Commonwealth has studied closely the results of
the research and practical farming which have already been carried
out there. Some of the cotton yields have been very encouraging
and no doubt can be improved as a result of further research and
additional farming experience.
The Commonwealth Jovernment approaches the question
of second stage development of the Ord in a helpful spirit. It
has noted however that latest estimates of cost are of the order
of $ 70 million an. this amount seems likely to escalate against
a background op rising costs in Western Australia as it moves
through the greatest industrial boom in its history.
There are some problems associated with depending on
cotton as a single crop and these need to be carefully considered.
It would not be in the general interest to establish a community
depending upon a single crop which faces falling world market
prices and either has to rely indefinitely on subsidised
production or proves unprofitable if subsidy is withdrawn.
Wje are aware of the principal advantages which could
flow from the larger settlement on the Ord that adoption of Stage
2 would encourage. The creation of an attractive township at
Kununurra, and the enthusiasm of those . ho have taken up farm
areas are encouraging features.
However, we have noted that there is at present a
good deal of pressure on resources in Western Australia, including
a shortage of labour for construction purposes. It seems an
inappropriate time, therefore, to launch another major construction
project. Any delay arising from this cause can be usefully
employed in further analysis of the potentialities of a variety of
kinds of production. The further time will also bring additional
information on crop yields, the incidence of pests and cost per
acre of their control, and other matters of this sort.
In order that consideration of the project can proceed
in a manner satisfactory to both the Commonwealth and Western
Australian Governments, I have arranged with the Acting Premier of
Western Australia for a meeting to take place next week between
three Commonwealth Ministers the Treasurer the Minister for
National Development and the Minister for tAe Interior and
Ministerial re resentatives of the Government of Western Australia.
The exchange of views and information should assist both Governments
in tihe further consideration we believe to be necessary
before final decisions are taken.
CANBERRA, 18th May, 1966 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 43/ 1966
THE VIET NAM MEDAL
Stater:: ent by the Prime Minister, 1M1r. Harold Holt
Her Majesty The Queen has signified her approval to the
award of a special medal for service in Viet Nam, and to the
desi8n of a ribbon for the medal.
The approval follows a joint approach by the Prime
Minister of Nev,, Zealand, the Rt. Hon. Keith Holyoake, and
myself to Her Majesty for a medal which would recognise
service by Australian and Ne:; Zealand servicemen in Viet Nam.
In consultation with New Zealand + he ribbon has been
desi-ned to incorporate the colours traditionall symbolic of
the Three Services and also red and yellow, whic are the
national colours of the Government of the epublic of Viet Nam.
Supplies of the ribbon are on their way to Viet Nam and will
be issued to our men shortly. The award will represent a
recognition of the excellent service our Forces have given in
the cause of freedom and the resistance of Communist aggression
in South Viet Nam. Australian servicemen have over t e years
been found serving the cause of freedom in many parts of he
world, and we are proud on this occasion that the medal is being
made available in the ANZAC tradition.
To qualify for the medal it will be necessary for a
serviceman to have been attached to a unit posted to South Viet
Nam for at least one day or in the case of aircrew, to have
flown one sortie over Viet tam. The medal will be available to
members of the armed forces and also to accredited members of
philanthropic organisations who wear the prescribed uniform.
n all cases, the relevant service must be on or after 29th
May, 1964. The Government of New Zealand is being consulted on a
design for the medal for submission to Her Majesty for approval.
As with all medals awarded by The Queen, the obverse will bear
an effigy of Her Majesty. The reverse will carry a suitable
theme to mark the nature of the award. Themes for the reverse
are now being considered, and the 1inister for Defence will be
making a furlher announcement on this subject when approval for
the theme has been received.
CANBERRA, 19th May, 1966 



66/ 079
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 44/ 1966
COMMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT ON
STATEM. ENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION, MR.
CALWE-LL
The widely-reported statement attributed to the
Federal Opposition Leader that Australian National Servicemen
in Viet Nam apparently are being kept out of the most dangerous
battle areas until after the Federal elections is a typical
piece of Calwell fiction, utterly without foundation,
recklessly made, mischievous in its effects and offensive in
its implications.
CANBERRA, May, 1966 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 45/ 1966
DEATH OF PRIVATE NOACK
Statement by the Prime Minister. M~ r. Harold Holt
We have learned today with sadness that another
young Australian has lost his life in the military service of
his country. I offer my personal sympathy, and -uhat of my
colleagues in the Government, to the parents and relatives
of Private Noack. He was a National Servineran, the first
to be killed in action.
Private Noack was in South Viet Nam serving in
a Regular Army unit as a consequence of decisions taken by the
uovernment of this country. In deciding to send a task force
containing National Servicemen to South Viet Nam, the Government
acted on its considered judgment that Australia's highest
national interests were involved. These reach ultimately to
the welfare and defence of Australia itself. The task force
is the best organised, equipped and trained military force
ever to leave Australia.
Australia has, in its short history, paid a heavy
price in human life in the cause of liberty and national
survival. No-one can foretell what the price will be in South-
East Asia. This much we do believe, most earnestly, that
the loss of Australian life, regrettable though that will
always be, will be far less under the strategic concepts and
military system we now have in operation than under any other
policies or arrangements so far advanced.
CANBERRA, May, 1966 



66/ 078
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 46/ 1966
MR. CAL1, TELL'S TEIEVISIOU" DEBATE
Comment by the Prime M4inister, Harold Holt
This is the latest bright idea in Mr. Caiwell's
series of qdite frantic attempts to stem Labor's ebbing tide.
Not surpriSingly, he seems rattled to find that, at this stage
of his leadership, support f or the ALP, as revealed in the two
latest public opinion polis, has fallen to what must ' be about the
lowest point in his Party's history.
There is no novelty in a Leader of the Opposition
trying to provide himself with an enlarged audience by luring
a Prime Minister into public debate from the same platform.
He receives from me the same answer that Prime Ministers from
his own Party have given when similarly challenged.
The need is not so much for debate as clarification
of the alternative policies Labor would offer.
The Government's policies on Viet Nam and national
service were fully debated in the recently concluded session of
Parliament. There were almost daily exchanges on the issues
between the Leader of the Opposition and myself. W~ e have both
expressed ourselves at length, since then, at public meetings,
including some held in the current Queensland election campaign.
There is no ambiguity about the ' Government's
policies which have been supported by all members of the
Government Parties in both Houses of the Parliament. The
obscurities are to be found in the conflicting versions of
policy from Mr. Calwell himself and his understandably bewildered
oaucus,
CANBERRA, 27th May, 1966 



FOR PRESS 66/ 077
P. M No. 47/ 1966
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO THE SIXTH V. ORLD FORESTRY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister, Mr. iarold Holt, announced
today that the Minister for National Development, Mr. David
Fairb&amp; irn, who is Chairman of the Australian Forestry Council,
would lead the Australian Delegation to the Sixth W'orld Forestry
Congress which will open in Madrid on 6th JTune, 1966. Mr.
Fairbairn is to leave today, 29th May.
The Sixth U. I'orld Forestry Congress, sponsored by the
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, will be
attended by the Ministers responsible for forestry, leading
foresters, and representatives of the forest industries from all
over the world. The Australian delegation will include at least
one State Minister of Forests, senior officials from the Commonwealth
State Forest Services and from the CSIRO Division of Forest
Products, delegates representing the Australian forest industries,
and university representatives.
The Sixth Congress, the theme of which is to be " The
Role of Forestry in the Changing Uorld Economy", will discuss
subjects covering the whole field of forestry including all aspects
of forest production and the use of forests for protection of
water catchments, the control of soil erosion, wild life sanctuaries
and recreational purposes. Australia is a substantial user of
forest products and while expansion of afforestation is proceeding,
we are currently importing forest products to a value of 200M.
per annum. The Prime Minister also stated that whilst overseas
Mr. Fairbairn will visit Great Britain to discuss other matters
connected with his portfolio. In particular he will talk with the
Minister of Power about offshore drilling and legislation in
Britain concerned with oil and gas search. He will also have
discussions about developments in the atomic energy field and
about iron ore. Mr. Fairbairn is expected to return to Australia
about 11th July. During his absence, the Minister for Labour
and National Service, Mr. Bury, will act as Minister for National
Development. CANBERRA, 29th May, 1966 



66/ 076
FOR PRESS P. I. No.. 48/ 1966
QUEENSILAND ELECTION RESULT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr, Harold Holt
I warmly congratulate Mr. Nicklin, Mr. Chalk and
their colleagues of the coalition team on their fully-deserved
vote of ccnfidence. it was a personal triumph for IVMr. Nicklin to hold
his large majority intact after nine years of leadership.
The Coalition u'overnment has launched Queensland
on a programme of vigorous development. We look forward to
a continuing Commonwealth/ State collaboration.
CANBERRA, 29th May, 1966. 



6 6/ 075
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 49/ 1966
INDOIESIA/ vIALAYSIA RELATI ONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, The Rt. Hon. Harold. Holt, M. P1
The Australian Government warmly welcomes the hopeful
signs of a favourable outcome of the talks between the
Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister, Tun Razak, and the Indonesian
Foreign Minister, Mr. Adamr Malik,
The talks were held in an atmosphere of genuine
goodwill and friendship which offers the prospect of an end
to confrontation. The Government has taken a close and
informed interest in developments leading up to the meeting
in Bangkok and is encouraged in the hope that peaceful
relat ions will be fully restored between the two countries,
The Government also welcomes, as another step in
the establishment of friendly and co-operative regional
relationships, the announcement of the Government of the
Philippines that full diplomatic relations between Malaysia
and the Philippines are about to be resumed. These are
constructive developments.
Cabinet yesterday reviewed these matters and, also,
noted that Indonesia has initiated discussions with creditor
countries on the problems of accumulatod extornal debts and
economic rehabilitation, Australia itself, of course, is not
a creditor of Indonesia. Ministers reaffirmed Australia's
readiness to play a constructive part in assisting Indonesia
with its economic problems. We considered that it was now
timely for interested countries and institutions to discuss
together and with Indonesia what might be done, In the
meantime, we decided to give instructions to relevant
Departments to develop projects which Australia could
usefully undertake within the framework of our Colombo Plan
aid. programmie.
CANBERRA June 2, 1966. 



FOR PRESS LIAY No. 50/ 1966
PRIME MINISTER'S MESSAGE TO GENERAL WESTMORELAND
The Prime Minister has cabled the following message to
the Commander of UnitGd States Forces in Viot Nam, General
Westmoreland:-" Wo ar@ approciative of the warm and generous
commendation of our First Battalion RAR expressed by
you at the conclusion of tho Battalion's tour of duty
in South Viet Nam. The Australian people are proud
of this Battalion which has performed up to the high
tradition of Australian military service.
" These Australian soldiers have played
their part with the forces of South Viet Nam, the United
States and of other friendly countries in resisting
communist aggression. You can confidently anticipate
that those who succeed them will acquit themselves with
the same devotion and distinction.
" Cordially yours, HAROLD HOLT
PRIME MINISTER.
CANBERRA, 3rd June, 1966 



FOR PRESS : I P. M. No. 51/ 1966
LIBERAL NOMINATIONS PLAN IN QUEENSLAND
Comment by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt
The Queensland State Division is well known to be
strongly of the view that it should campaign actively through all
areas of Queensland in order to build support for the Party in a
growing State, and to make the policies of the Party more widely
known. It has been the practice for each State Division
of the Liberal Party to decide its own policy on the selection of
candidates and the seats whioh it will contest. W hen the position
of members of the Federal coalition ' Ministry could be affected by
these dtoisions, it has been usual for some discussion to take
place between the Division concerned and the Federal Parliamentary
Leader. I have been in touch with Dr. Hartwig, the President of
the Queensland Division, suggesting that as he will be in Canberra
for the meeting of the Federal Executive to be held on Thursday,
we take the opportunity to have a talk about the matter. He said
he would welcome a discussion between us.
The coalition Government, although drawn from two
Parties, has not at any time functioned along Party lines. WVVe have
developed a very good personal relationship. Our teamwork has been
close, harmonious and co-operative. It follows that I could not
join in opposing loyal Cabinet colleagues in my own Government.
CANBERRA, 8th June, 1966 



66/ 072
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 55/ 1966
MINISTFR TO VISIT SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
The Minister'for the Army, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, leaves for a
comprehensive three-week visit to South-East Asia on Sunday, June 19.
Accompanied by the Secretary, Department of the Army, Mr.
Bruce White, the Minister will be making his first visit to troops
serving in various overseas locations.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, said today that the prime
purpose of Mr. Fraser's mission was to visit the 1st Australian Task
SForce at its operational base in Viet Nam.
While in Viet Nam, Mr. Fraser would also inspect civil aid
projects completed by Australian troops and discuss proposed schemes
designed to assist the civilian Vietnamese population.
Mr. Fraser would visit Manila, Bangkok and Vientiane before
arriving in Saigon on June 25. He would spend six days in Viet Naam.
During this period, he would have discussions at U. S. and Australian
Military Headquarters, visit units of the Australian Task Force,
advisers of the Australian Army Training Team and the 1st Australian
Logistic Support Group and U. S. Logistic Command at Vung Tau.
On June 30, Mr. Fraser arrives in Singapore to hold discussions
Swith senior military officers, including the Commander, Australian
Arm, Force, Far East Land Forces, Brigadier F. R. Evans. He would later
spend six days on the Malay Peninsula and in Sabah and Sarawak.
The Minister would also visit the 28th Commonwealth Infantry
Brigade Group at Terendak Cantonment, Malacca, which included Australian
Army artillery, engineer, infantry and Service Corps elements. In
Sabah, he would visit the 22nd Construction Squadron Group, Royal
Australian Engineers, which was engaged on a road-building project as
part of the Australian Government Aid Programme to Malaysia.
In Sarawak, Mr. Fraser would visit the 4th Battalion, Royal
Australian Regiment, in the Bau District. He was scheduled to leave
Singapore for Australia at the end of his tour on July 9.,
During Mr. Fraser' s absence, the Minister for Health, Dr., A. J.
Frbesp. would undertake the. additional du. tles. of Minister for the Army.
Canberra, 17 June, 1966. 



FOR PPT7SS: C
PM, No. 54/ 196* 7
VtSIT TO THE UNITED STATES AND BRITAIN
Statement by the Prime MinisterBk2n. arljgi.
I shall be leaving Australia for a short visit to the United States
and Britain after opening the South-East Asia Treaty Organization ( SEATO)
Conference in Canberra on Monday, June 27.
During my visit I shall have talks with President Johnson, the
Vice-President, Mr. Humphrey, the Secretary of State for Defense,
Mr. McNamara, and other senior members of the United States
Administration. In Britain, I shall be having talks with the Prime
Minister, Mr. Harold Wilson, with Mr. Callaghan, Chancellor of the
Exchequer and other senior Ministers.
During the talks in both the United States and Britain, I will be
discussing major problems now current in the fields of foreign affairs,
develcpment and defence. However there are no specific issues which
require settling on this occasion, and the purpose of the visit is to make
personal contact with the leaders of government in both centres in
continuation of the process of close and friendly consultation which we have
established with them.
I shall return to Australia in time to participate in Cabinet's Budget
discussions, which will be held during the week commencing Monday, July 18.
Further Details
The Prime Minister' s visit follows invitations which he has received
from both President Johnson and the British Prime Minister, Mr. Harold
Wilson. During his time in ' Washington he will see President Johnson,
Mr. Humphrey, Vice-President, Mr. McNamara, the Secretary of State for
Defense, and Mr. George Ball, Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Afft irs
( Mr. Rusk will be in Australia at the SEATO Meetings). The Prime Minister
also hopes to be able to renew association with the Secretaries of the Treasury
and Commerce, but not for the negotiation of any particular business. He
will be addressing the National Press Club at a luncheon in Washington on
Thursday, June 30), and a meeting of the Australian/ American Association in
New York on Tuesday, July
W~ hile the Prime Minister is in London he will have an audience with
The Cueen on Thursday, July 7, and will be seeing the British Prime Minister,
Mr. Wilson, on Monday, July 11. He will also be having discussions with
Mr. Callaghan, Chancellor of the E~ xchequer, and Mr. Battomley, Secretary
of State for Commonwealth Relations, and other senior Ministers. He will
be addressing a meeting of the Australia Club on Tuesday. July 12.
Mrs. Holt will accompany the Prime Minister on his visit.
During his visit to Washington, the Prime Minister will be assisted
by the Aus tralian Ambassador;-Mr. J. K. Wailer, and in London by the
Australian High Commissioner, Sir Alexander Downer. 
-2-
Official advisers to the Prime Minister during his visit will be
Sir John Bunting ( Secretary, Prime Minister's Department)
Sir Laurence McIntyre ( Deputy Secretary, Department of
External Affairs)
Mr. G. E. Blakers ( Deputy Secretary, Department of Defence)
Mr. P. H. Bailey ( Prime Minister's Department)
Mr. P. C. J. Curtis ( Department of External Affairs)
Mr. J. H. Scholtens ( Prime Minister's Department)
Two members of the Prime Minister's personal staff ( his Private
Secretary. Miss P. De Lacy, and his Press Secretary Mr. A. Eggleton)
will also accompany the Prime Minister. Mr. M. W. O'Donnell will be
available as adviser in both Washington and London.
CANBERRA 17th June 1966. 



66/ O-if
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 56/ 1966
A. C. T. U. IN PRE-BUDG~ ET MEETING
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, and a
group of senior Ministers will meet representatives of the
Australian Council of Trade Unions in Canberra tomorrow to
obtain at first hand the Council's views on the economic
situation. The Council will be represented by its Senior
Vice-President, the Hon, J. D. Kenny, and Secretary,
Mr. H. J. Souter. The President of the A. C . T Mr. Albert
Mcenk, is at present overseas.
This will be the first of a series of pre-
Budget meetings. Similar discussions will take place shortly
with a group of national organisations representing industry
and commerce; and with the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council anid the Export Development Council..
CANBERRA, June, 1966 



FOR PRESS I. . ARY
P. M. No. 58/ 1966
CONDITION ' OF MR. CAWELL
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, said this morning
that he had been relieved to find that Mr. Calwell's injuries,
while no doubt painful, were of a comparatively minor nature.
He had also been pleased to learn that the Leader of the
Opposition would be well enough to be discharged from hospital
this afternoon. M= Calwell, who is in Melbourne, has asked
whether, in the circumstances a VIP aircraft might be made
available to take Mr. Calwell home.
The ' overnment readily agreed to this request and
the necessary arrangements have been made. An RAAF Convair
is due to leave Sydney with Mr. Calwell at 4.50 this afternoon.
On arrival at his office in Parliament House this
morning, Mr. Holt's first action was to seek information from
the Royal North Shore Hospital on Mr. Calwell's condition.
CANBERRA, 22nd June, 1966. 



FEDERAL RURAL CONVENTION
" THE MAXIMUM USE OF AUSTRALIA' S RURAL RESOURCES"' LlIAy.
Sponsored by the Federal Rural Committee of the
Liberal ary of Australia
AT WAGIA 9AGGA. N. S. W. 23RD JUNE, 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Chairman Senator Sim, Your Worship the Mayor Parliamentary
and Ministerial Colleagues and Distinguished Guestcs and Visit', rs
Ladi---s and Gentlemen: First, Mr. Chairman, may I, through you, thank very
warmly the Mayor of this historic city of Ylagga for his very
pleasant welcome to us all. We wanted to come to Wagga for reasons,
I think, which can be readily established-, but it is nice to know
that the people of Wagga also wanted us to be with them, and you,
Mr. Mayor, have conveyed in the spirit of hospitality which is one
of the happy features of Australian life, that welcome to us. A
warm welcome on a crisp Wagga morning makes conditions entirely
comfortable for us; at least we feel well disposed to you and to
each other. I will have a good deal to say to you on the substance
of the Conference. It's not usual for me to speak on rural matters
and I am rather enjoying the novelty of it when I come to it. But
before I do so, I hope you will feel it appropriate for me to make
some reference to the dreadful occurrence in which the Leader of the
Opposition was so painfully involved.. I do so, conscious of the
limitations which are imposed on one at a time when proceedings,
court proceedings, are pending against a charged person, but I feel
bound in my responsibility as head of the National u'overnment to
make some comment and indicate some views to you.
First, I am sure I spoke for all right-thinking
Australians when I condemned the episode and expressed our
sympathy for Mr.. Calwell personally, when I pointed to the fact
that we in Australia had a democratic tradition singularly free
from episodes of violence. But the episode has at least served
the purpose of concentrating our minds not only on this particular
incident but on those matters which associate themselves with it
in our minds, and I am going to speak very briefly, for I have no
wish to intrude unduly into the work of the conference, but we do
in Australia zealously guard the democratic tradition of coming e ./ 2 
2-
% together,. exchanging our views sometimes dissenting, sometimes
criticising, sometimes applauding, but feeling free to do so in an
atmosphere, however turbulent it may become in the exchange of words,
has in the past been happily free of this aspect of violenoce so
strilingly demonstrated to us in this last couple of days. And I
suppose in any community, whatever precautions are taken, whatever
public attitudes exist, one can't eliminate or a community can't
eliminate entirely the danger that people perhaps emotionally
disturbed or in some other way having lost control temporarily of
their normal restraints, involve themselves in episodes of this sort.
But what the Parliament must do, I believe, is examine carefully the
question whether there has been significant changes in the Australian
situation which should call for some review by us, and I believe that
there have been, that they are identifiable. We must face the fact
that we have a more diversified community than at earlier points of our
history, that there will be people in our community who come from
countries where political violence is not as uncommon a matter as
happily it has been here, that these days we do have a much more
active interest in public affairs on the part of young people who are
in employment and who have resources of their own and who have rights
and liberties of their own. to safeguard. They in turn may b~ e
influenced by methods which in countries neighbouring to us have been
employed by young people to demonstrate vigorously, and at times
violently, against government policies. And I think we shall find,
if we make some reyiew of these matters, that the answer is not to
be found in putting in another policeman or two to a public hall
or having some sort of security protection imposed on prominent
public personages, but it is to be found in community C-ttitudes, the
judgments which individuals in the community form of the conduct of
those around them, and I don't elaborate because that is not the
purpose of our gathering here. I merely say by way of illustration
I think we have as a community to decide when, for example, a public
demonstration passes beyond the border of legitimate protest into a
process of harassment and intimidation, and other examples, of course,
could be quoted from contemporary experience.
I would hope that I shall be able to consult, not only
with my own senior colleagues, but with them, in turn, with the
Leader of the Opposition and some of his senior colleagues because
the implications of an episode such as this rise above the normal
party division which exists in this country and relates to the welfare
of the nation as a whole. In the meantime, a speedy recovery to the
Leader of the Opposition and may he sustain no abiding injury as a
result of this unhappy episode. 
-53-
Well, now, ladies and gentlemen, I turn to the business
of ffhe conference and my own participation in it, and I say how
timely I think this conference is, You, Mr. Chairman, were good
enough to say that I put myself to some inconvenience to be here
at this time, I am here because my own judgment is that the subject
matters that you are dealing with rank amongst the most important
that concern public men and women in this country.
The whole welfare, prosperity, security of Australia
rests squarely upon the health and vitality and prosperity of the
primary industries of Australia. This is fundamental to our Tery
existence. No good us talking about the manufacturinLg industries
if we haven't got the means of importing the requirements of
manufacturing industries. No good us talking about improved social
standards and the services that one man can provide for another
in order to make life more agreeable -andmore than 50 per cent. of
our work force are employed in services of one kind or another to
the rest of the community if we haven't got the means which an
export income produces for us to carry these things into fulfilme-nt.
The manufacturing industries have a rather more glamorous
atmosphere and public presentation about them, certainly in the
years since the Second W~ orld WHar, and we have all welcomed the
quite spectecular increase which has occurred in Australian
manufacturing industry over that period. Rather interesting and
surprising to discover that proportionately to our population we
have as many people engaged in manufacturing industries as are to
be found in the United States of America, and they number as a
proportion of the work force some 27 per cent, or three times the
current percentage of the work force to be found in our primary
production. Understandably, therefore, the manufacturing
industries have occupied a good deal of the public stage and of
the press. The incentives given to increase exports of manufactured
products, the urgings upon the manufacturers and others to increase
their exports so that they can supplement the earnings of primary
industry, these things, too, have occupied prominence in the public
mind. But we must never forget that for as far ahead as we can
see, Australia's principal reliance for the export income which
enables us to buy the raw materials and the equipment to keep
secondary industries going and the wherewithal to maintain an
Australian community in a state of prosperity and with a high
standard of living, this aepends on the success we achieve in the
conduct of the great primary industries of this country. That is,
I repeat a fundamental consideration for any Australian Parliament
and f or a gathering such as this. 
-4
Having stated that, it doesn't produce any sense of timeliness
or urgency about a matter which has always been with us. But there
are particular aspects which do point up this timeliness.
The effect on employment I have mentionedand the effect on
the manufacturer because of our imports into this country..... it is
calculated that just on 80 per cent. or four-fifths of what we bri ng
in are imports necessary for the conduct of our manufacturing
industries, either in the foi-m of raw materials, semi-processed
matter, equipment or some other gradient of those classificnations.
And therefore if we are to increase our manufacturing capacity, and
we certainly wish to do that, it can only be done so on the basis of
an increasing export income.
It has a bearing directly on our capacity to carry through
the immigration programme because modern trends have provided
fewer employment opportunities. 0n the land, as you knowincreased
mechanisation has resulted in the percentage of the work force
dropping from 12 per cent, a few years ago to 9 per cent, today,
and that trend looks like persisting.
It is in the manufacturing industries whiich employ three
' bimes that percentage that work opportunities are likely to be founJ
more largely for the new labour coming on to the market, whether
from our own natural increase or from the migrants who come to this
country. Here again, unless we can go ahead with an increase in
our primary production, we are going to run into trouble there.
Itis timely because there are uncertainties at the present
time about the volume of capital inflow we can expect into Australia.
There are restraints indicated in the United States and in the United
Kingdom, and while it is not yet clear how substantially they will
affect the Australian position, we would be foolish to go along on
any casual assumption that there will be indefinitely for us a flow
of capital into this country sufficiently large to bridge the gap
which has shown up in recent years between our export receipts and
our export payments.
The other factor which I think makes it timely is that for
the first time in perhaps twenty years, certainly a considerable
period of years, a substantial area of Australia has been subjected,
and remains subjected to the ravages of drought, and this has caused
more hard thinking about what can be done either to avoid drought
consequences in areas where the water can be conserved, or to mitigate
the effects of drought by appropriate policies of silage or fodder
conservation and other matters of that sort. a a a 
Therefore, the incidence of drought and its effects bring
a conference of this kind appropriately to being.
Now, here again, we have seen what the primary industries
mean to the prosperity of the nation as a whole. The drop in farm
earnings from the effects of drought has radiated its influence
through other sections of the economy. If there is a quietness in
certain areas of the Australian economy today beyond that we would
wish to see, then you can trace influences flowing from the diought
very considerably to the effect which has emerged there.
Finally, there is a timeliness, if not the same degree of
urgency in giving some concentrated consideration to what Australia
should be doing, what we should be planning for the enormous
increase in demand for our primary production that we can reasonably
anticipate between now and the end of this century. We are
strategically placed in an area of the world where one-third of the
human population is within ready service of goods that can be
despatched from this country Fifteen hundred million people
of Asia, quite apart from the markets we have established in other
parts of the world, and the demographers predict that by the end of
the century on present population trends, wie could see a doubling
of the population there.
Already Australia is feeling some of the consequences of
this growth in population, associated at the same time as it is
with some improvement in the capacity to import in these countries,
As for example, Japan builds up its industrial strength, so you
find that it is looking for larger volumes of foodstuffs, of raw
materials; the Westernising influences on Japanese life are
influencing people to eat different types of food vvhich we are
capable bf supplying. This has lead to a quite dramatic increase
in the figures of trade between our owin country and Japan.
I think they might usefully be put to you.
As recently as 1958/ 59, Japan purcnhased goods to a value
of $ 204M. from this rountry. In 1964/ 65, that t2O4M. had grown
to S442M. If we take the movement of major export items to Asia
generally, we find that in 1964/ 65, we sold S284M. worth of wool,
$ 180M. worth of wheat and $ 44M. value of metals, S38M. value of
sugar. Now these are markets which even in comparatively recent
times we would have regarded as comparatively small receivers of
Australian exports, and we are, I believe, merely on the threshold
of our potentialities there.
Now, I have indicated a number of reasons why a conference
.' of this sort is timely. I have, I hope, established that the
primary industries are of fundamental importance to the progress 9 0 O/ IC 
6-
of the Australian economy and the welfare of our people.
How are the primary industries themselves measuring up
to the requirements imposed upon them? Here again a few figures
may be illuminating. I just take two of our principal items bout they could be
said to be generally illustrative. In 1948/ 49, we produced
1,050 million pounds weight of wool. By% 1964/ 65, that had grown
to 1,794 million pounds.-Wheat 1948/ 49 191 million bushels;
1964/ 65 369 million bushels. These are impressive figures.
Without that increase in production, Australia could not have
sustained a migration programme, could not have maintained the
standards which we currently enjoy today. And this is not by any
means an end point quite obviously because the requirements of
the future make the accomplishments of today look like only a pale
beginning of what lies ahead.
I don't know how accurate the projections can be said to
be but I know that the view is taken inside the Commonwealth
Departments that we shall need by a comparatively short time ahead
of us to reach an export income of just on $ 5,010M., and this
is assuming Alistralian population grow. th projected on a reasonable
basis related to current movements, and an increase in the requirements
of Australian manufacturing production as it, in turn,
proceeds to develop.
Now the UJovernment has not been, of course, unaware of
these deyelopments and requirements, and I hope ' you will agree that
in a great variety of ways, we have sought to encourage the favourable
output from the primary industries which has been reflected in the
figuxres that I have quoted to you. We have in more recent times
a&amp; opted new policy measures provision of long-term rural
finance, long a goal sought by the primary industries; we have
adopted towards the relief of drought a more liberal, approach than
I believe any government previously in the history of Australia.
Our approach this time was not on any mere basis of sort of
temporary rei~ ief to those unfortunately afflicted. Our approach
was on the basis of an economic measure designed to sustain demand,
to sustain activity in areas which had experienced the ravages of
drought, and this innovation of attitude and policy was certainly
welcomed by the Premiers of New South Wales and Queensland, and
I believe has been welcomed by those who speak for the primary
producers of this country. It has certainly been welcomed by the
farmers and graziers directly affected by the adverse consequences
of drought. But when you look down the list and I am not going to 
-7
occupy your time today in too much g. etail on it, you see the
wealth of measures adopted over recent years and in the past to
encourage the growth of healthy, efficient, competitive Australian
industry: The work of the OSIRO, the work of the Development
Bank, the various schemes of industry research, the preferential
arrangements made under the taxation structure, giving accelerated
write-off s in respect of farm improvements in these and a
variety of other ways, the Government has sought to encourage
production and to keep the growth of primary industry consistent
with the needs of an expanding nation.
This is the vital task, certainly a task which we could
only ignore at the danger to our national stability, and, indeed,
reaching through to our capacity to provide the resources for
adequate national defenoe.
And so, ladies and gentlemen, the substance of wxhat you
are discussing here today is basic to the welfare of the Australian
community. You will have those expert in a variety of different
directions to talk to you on particular aspects, and at tho
conclusion of the discussion, my olleague, Senator Gorton, who
assists me in the work of the Prime Minister's Department on
education matters as well as the handling of his own portfolio,
will be giving his contribution by way of summation.
in
You may have felt perhaps that/ talking in these rather
general terms, and a little coldly in respect of the statistics
that have been quoted that T, personally, have little far'. iliarity
with what goes on on a typical Australian farm. Wiell, I am glad
to be able to say that I can plead rather more knowledge than that.
Most~ f my boyhood holidays, right up to the time of young manhood
was spent on my grandfather's farm not very far up from where we
are, a little place called Nubba, which is ten miles from Harden
and Murrumburrah, which towns are probably well kn~ own to many
of the people of this area, and it was a Tery valuable apprenticeship
because it vas a mixed farm. It had everything on it but
not much of anything. There were some sheep, a few cattle, there
were pigs, there was an orchard, there were fowls, and the whole
gamut of a small mixed farm production. I used to ride in each
morning for the mail a couple of miles, and then round up the cows
in the evening, and occasionally take a hand at extracting the
milk from the cows in the evening. But quite apart from recalling
these days as amongst the happiest of a lifetime and recalling
that with all its heartaches, anxieties and difficulties, the life
on the land is, I believe, the most richly rewarding of almost any
that could be found in our community. I, at the same time, do
0 0 0 0 4,/ 8 
8-
recall the periods of difficulty when we knew drought and when we
could see before us the physical effects, the ravages of diought.
I remember developing some early knowledge of matters anatomical
when there was the weekly slaughtering of the sheep which had to
serve. us as food for the rest of the week. It was lamb's fry the
next morning, chops the day after and salted mutton by the end of
the week for the last two or three days. And so, ladies and
gentlemen, I assure you that when those who speak for primary
industry come to me and put their case, this does not fall on
unreceptive ears nor is there any lack of sympathy or, I hope,
understanding of the problems which those who engage in our
primary industries have to face.
Now here, in the Rural Committee of the Liberal Party, you
have a good illustration of the way our democratic system works
inside our own party structure. There is no dictation to a
parliamentarian from any outside body as to the policy lines he
is to adopt. There is sensible, well-informed discussion, and
arising from that discussion, there are recommendations which come
to us in a Coalition Cabinet. And I believe that the healthy
state of Australian primary industry, as reflected in the figures
that I have mentioned, owes much to the public-spirited work of the
men and women who comprise the Committee inside our own party
orgLanisgation and, of course, who interest themselves in these
matters in the party of our coalition. But our own Rural
Committee has been a strong body virtually throughout the life of
the Liberal Party. It came into existence, I think, Mr. Chairman
in about 1948 or 1949, and the Government has been greatly
influenced over the subsequent years by the thought, the painstaking
thought, the experience and judgment of members of the Rural
Committee which has gone into the recommendations which they have
submitted to us. with
I believe that from this conference,/ tne wealth of talent
that you will be able to drawn on as your discussions proceed,
there will be further valuable recommendations, and I can assure
you that there can be few ' bodies in Australia whose views would
rank more influentially and highly with the Cabinet of this
country than those of the Rural Committee of the Liberal Party.
And so I wish you well in your efforts together, and I
assure you that the product of your thinking will receive the
most earnest consideration of the members of my Government.
I think I have a formal duty before me in declaring the
conference open, so anything that has been said up to this point
of time can be ignored. From now on, officiallythe conference
is open, and I have pleasure in so declaring. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 59/ 1966
MEETING BETWEEN THE PRIME MINISTERS OF AUSTRALIA
AND NEW ZEALAND
Mr. Holt and Mr. Holyoake met at Parliament House
this morning, this being their first meeting as Prime Ministers.
After talks lasting more than two hours, they
lunched together with the New Zealand High Commissioner, Mr.
Hazlett. Most of the discussion between the Prime Ministers
was in the defence and foreign policy field. They went over some
of the matters which will be engaging the SEATO Council during
the week, but concentrated rather more on a joint consideration
of the developments and the outlook in South-East Asia as viewed
from Australia and New Zealand. Viet Nam and Indonesia were
included in this survey. The Prime Ministers discussed not only
the joint military operations in which Australia and New Zealand
are engaged, but also the economic advancement of the area which
they each recognise as being of first importance to the future
stability and peace of Asia. They discussed also Mr. Holt's recent
visit to South Viet Nam, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore, and the
impressions which Mr. Holt drew from it.
Britain's defence position in South-East Asia came
into the discussion. There was agreement by the Prime Ministers
that a firm, continuing British presence is important, not only
in terms of its defence significance, but in terms of the
advantages which it will have for long term world stability and
for Britain's own world role.
They discussed Commonwealth affairs in the light
of the Prime Ministers' Conference under consideration for later
this year. Brief discussions occurred also in the context of
the increasingly close trade relations developing out of the
New Zealand/ Australia Free Trade Area arrangements.
The Prime Ministers also covered the current
economic situation in their respective countries.
CAINBERRA
26th June, 1966
Later this afternoon, Mr. Holt will receive brief official
calls from the Foreign Ministers of the Philippines, Thailand
and Viet Nam. They will call on him individually.
A. EGILETON
Press Secretary to Prime Minister.
26/ 6766 



FORMAL OPENING OF SEATO CONFERENCE BY THE RT HON HAROLD HO. ' MP',
PRIME MINISTER OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA/
27TH JUNE, 1966 1MB
Mr. Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies an
Gentlemen: It is an honour for me to be asked to open the 1966 SEATO
Conference. I extend a warm welcome to you all on behalf of the
Australian Government and people. This welcome embraces not
only the Foreign Ministers and Delegations of countries with
which we enjoy close and constructive relations both in SEATO
and outside of it, but also the distinguished Secretary-General,
General Vargas, and staff of the Organisation.
Australia has become more conscious in recent times that,
through geography, trade and circumstance, we are increasingly
part of the Asian scene. Australia has good cause to value
the existence of SEATO. It has been a solid pillar of security
for us. We have honoured our own commitments to our colleagues
of the Organisation, and we are grateful for the suipport given
to SEATO's purposes by those members of the Organisation who have
made much more massive contributions.
There has been much talk of a " Domino Theory" in Asia,
This propounds the view that if one country of South East Asia
succumbs to Communist aggression, the others will topple in turn.
We can claim, from its achievements, that SEATO has successfully
applied the Domino Theory in reverse. We, and others of the area,
have lived more securely: we have been able to plan more confidently
for an expanding future. We have done so encouraged by
the fact that SEATO provides a shield of protection and a means
of constructive collaboration.
The Asian countries of SEATO have been able to build
their defences and strengthen their economies. The year under
review provides further heartening proof to that supplied in
other recent years that those countries of Asia under Communist
threat can with outside help supplementing their own efforts
meet that challenge and proceed to prosperous economic growth. 
2
We can point to countries of the region, some of them members of
this Organisation, which have recorded notable gains of economic
and social progress and are now advancing to new levels of
achievement in an environment of stability. To those of us who
live in the area there is inspiration in the visible evidences
of improvement and progress. Some countries that I have visited
recently seem transformed against my recollections of them in
earlier years. What is also heartening has been the emergence of positive
and constructive attitudes to international instrumentalities
for economic co-operation. Although National sovereignty has
only been attained by some within the last twenty years, they
display a commendable readiness to work with others and create
the institutions for co-operation. The newly-constituted Asian
and Pacific Council and the Asian Development Bank are welcome
examples.
We have welcomed also the generous undertaking by the United States
to make a Billion Dollar contribution towards economic development
in South East Asia. Developments such as these reflect a spirit
of hope more widely felt throughout the region.
Even in the heat of Military contest in South Vietnam,
there are practical programmes being evolved for better times
ahead. There is the ferment of change in Asia to-day. The restlessness
and turbulence give rise to the more dramatic episodes
which are widely publicised. But these are only aspects of
dynamic forces, some of them much more favourable, shaping
dramatic movements in human affairs affecting the whole world. / 3 
-3-
SEATO has its critics, and, of course, it has its imperfections,
but the fact is that since its formation, it has held
Communism at bay. From South Vietnam, one of the SEATO
Protocol States, where the thrust of aggression has been
fiercest, we are now receiving much more hopeful reports. But
while we have strengthened the foundations of our security,
the need for SEATO is as strong as ever.
No region to-day contains greater dangers for world peace and
security than Asia. South East Asia has been singled out by
the Communists as a critical area of challenge. They believe
that if their technique of so-called " Wars of National
Liberation" can succeed in South Vietnam, it can be employed
with similar success in many other countries.
Why did the SEATO Treaty come into existence? It was
designed to enable its member countries to combine together to
counter the Communist threat in Asia. It was built on the
reality that, left to themselves, the countries of the area would
fall to Communist pressures. It recognises that these pressures
can take many forms. They vary in intensity: they require a
variety of responses.
Thanks to SEATO, the Governments of member countries can expect
assistance not only when declared conventional Military attack
occurs across their frontiers, but they can also look for
assistance when their authority and administration are under
assault from those familiar Communist instruments subversion
and Guerilla warfare. / 4 
-4-
Communist aggression in South East Asia follows what
has become a clear pattern. It usually begins covertly.
There is long underground preparation. This includes
political indoctrination, the training of cadres and the
build-up of secret sources of supply. The initial threats
are indirect. They are concealed and they mature slowly.
The response made by the SEATO Allies must, therefore,
be carefully devised. There must be armed strength, of
course, but we cannot win an enduring victory by military
means alone. There is the battle to be won for the people's
support, and to win this there must be political, social,
administrative and economic measures acceptable to them.
On my recent visit to South-East Asia, it was of
special interest to me to discover how earnestly the positive
constructive tasks directed to a better way of life in the
community were being promoted. Whether in South Vietnam,
Malaysia or Thailand, I found that the Government concerned
had turned its attention to this need for a positive,
constructive programme of civic action and rural development.
It is to be found to a growing extent among the programmes
of the miflitary forces. Our own Australian forces, wherever
situated, gave a high priority to their activities in this
field. No doubt we have a long way to go, but the processes
are under way.
A notable feature of SEATO is that each member
country retains its freedom of action about how best it can
make a contribution. This flexibility is important because
the problems we face are neither simple nor clear-cut. 
Successive Communist challenges in Asia
have failed. They have been met by the military
strength of the government under attack. It has been
supported by the military forces, logistical backing
and economic strength of its partners, and of other
friendly forces also.
The major challenge of Communism in Asia
today is directed to South Vietnam. But it has met
growing and determined strength of resistance.
SEATO is not merely an instrument for military
security. Its purposes include the advancement of
all in the region it serves. It is well constituted
to help by practical assistance and friendly guidance.
SEATO has enabled us to exercise strength
through combination. This has greatly helped the smaller
powers to devote more of their resources to economic
growth. Australia, in common with some other members
of the Organisation, has major problems of development,
as well as those of defence. Left to ourselves, we
would be overburdened and crippled with security costs. The
existence of SEATO and other security arrangements ensures
that members most directly threatened, and who are the
least able to afford large military establishments, will
neither perish nor impoverish themselves.
The wisdom, ability and experience assembled
here should enable this conference to advance most usefully
the purposes of the Organisation.
The ultimate answer to Communism must be found in
the minds of the people. They must feel convinced that
life has meaning, promise and better standards for them.
We who oppose Communism must be more than anti-Communist.
/ 6. 
We must demonstrate the false attractions of Communist
ideology and expose its techniques of human manipulation.
But we must stand together for the satisfaction of decent
human aspirations and the precious enjoyment of individual
liberty. Your SEATO labours of today will do much to shape
the Asia of tomorrow. I wish you fruitful and successful
meetings. I declare the conference open: 



SEATO COUNCIL MEETING
CANBERRA, A. or. T.
Speech by the Prime Minister Mr. Harold Holt.
27th JUNE, 1966.
Mr. Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is an honour foi me to be asked to open the 1966 SEATO
Conference. I extend a wañ ii welcome to you all on behalf of the Australian
Government and puople. This welcome embraces not only the distinguished
Foreign Ministers and delegations of countries with which we enjoy close and
constructive relations both in SEATO and outside of it, but also the
distinguished Secretary -General, General Vargas, and staff of the Organization.
Australia has become more conscious in recent times that,
through geography, trade and circumstance, we are increasingly part of the
Asian scene. Australia has good cause to value the existence of SEATO. It
has been a solid pillar of security for us. We have faithfully honoured our
own commitments to our colleagues of the Organization, and we are
grateful for the support given to SEATO's purposes by those members of the
Organization who have made much more massive contributions than our own.
There has been a good deal of debate and talk about a domino
theory in Asia. This theory propounds the view that if one country of
Southi-East Asia succumbs to Communist aggression, the others will topple
in turn. We can claim, from its achikevements, that SEATO has
successfully applied the domi-o theory in reverse. It has brought us an
assurance of combined support. We, and others of the-area, have lived
much more securely because of its existence. have been able to plan
more confidently for an expanding future. have done so encouraged by
the fact that SEATO provides a shield of protection and a means of
constructive collaboration. The Asian countries of SEATO have been able to build their
defences and to strengthen their economies. The year under review provides
further heartening proof to that supplied in other recent years that those
countries of Asia under Communist threat can, with outside help
supple m enting their own efforts, meet that challe:. nge and proceed to
prosperous economic growth. We can point to countries of the region, some
of them members of this Organization, which have recorded notable gains
of economic and social progress and are now advancing to new levels of
achieveme-int in an environment of stability. To those of us who live in the
area there is inspiration in the visible evidences of improvemnent and
progress. Some countries that I have visited recently seem transformed
against my recollections of them in earlier years.
What is also heartening has been the emergence of positive
and constructive attitudes to international instrumentalities for economic
co-operation. Although national sovereignty has been attained by some only
within the last 20 years, they display a commendable readiness to work with
others and create the institutions for co -operation. The newly constituted
Asian and Pacific Council and the Asian Development Bank are welcome
examples. We have welcomed also the generous undertaking by the President
of the United States to make a billion dollar contribution towards economic
development in South-East Asia. Developments such as these inspire a
spirit of hope more widely felt throughout the whole region. Even in the
heat of military contest in South Vietnam, there are practical programmes
being evolved for better times ahead. 
-2-
Wie are all conscious of a fermcent of change in the fPsia of today.
The-restlessnoss and the turbulence give rise to the mnore dramatic episodes
which arc, widely publicised. But these, arc only aspects of dynamic forces, some
of them much more favourable in their influence, shaping movements in human
affairs which in turn can affect the whole world.
SEATO has i-Ls critics and, of course!, it has its imperfections.
But the fact is that since its formation, it has held Communism at bay. From
South Vietnam, one of the: SEATO protocol states, where the thrust of
aggression has been fiercest, we are now receiving much mcre hopeful reports.
But while we have strengthened the foundations of our security, the need for
SEATO remains as strong as ever. No region today contains greater dangers
for world peace and security than Asia. South-East Asia has been singled out
by the-Communists as a critical area of challenge. They bclieve that if their
technique of so-called wars of national liberatio n can succeed in South Vietnam,
it can be employed with similar success in many other countries.
Why did the SEATO Treaty come into existence? It was designed
to enable its member countries to combine together to counter the Commnunist
threat in Asia. It was built on the reality that, left to themselves the countries
of the area would fall to Communist pressures. It recognises that these pressures
can take many formis. They vary in intensity, and they require a variety of
responses. Thanks to SEATO the Governments of member countries can
expect assistance, not only when declared conventional military attack occurs
across their frontiers, but also they can look for assistance when their
authority and administration are under assault from those familiar Communist
instruriients subversion and guerrilla warfare.
Communist aggression in South-East Asia follows what has become
a clear pattern. It usually begins covertly. There is long underground
preparation. This includes political i* ndoc tri nation, the training of cadres and the
build up of secret sources of supply. The initial threats are indirect. They
are concealed and they mature slowly.
The response made by the SEATO allies must therefore, be
carefully devised. There must be armed strength, of course, but we cannot
win an enduring victory by military means alone. There is the battle to be
won for the people's support, and to win this there must be political, social,
administrative and economic measures acceptable to them.
On my recent visit to South-East Asia, it was of special interest
to me to discover how earnestly the positive constructive tasks directed to a better
way of life in the community were being promoted. Whether in South Vietnam,
Malaysia or Thailand, I found that the Government concerned had turneld it3
attention to this need for a positive, constructive programme of civic action and
rural development. It is to be found to a growing extent among the programmes
of the military forces of all the countries concerned. Our own Australian forces,
wherever situated give a high priority to their activities in this field. No doubt
we have a long way to go, but the processes are under way.
A notable feature of SEATO is that each member country retains
its freedom of action about how best it can make a contribution. This
flexibility is important because the problems that we face are neither simple nor
clear cut. SEATO has shown itself capable of adapting itself speedily and
effectively to handling the different phases of tactics and timing of the Communist
challenge in Asia. We know, for example, that faced with military reverses, the
Communists are likely to step up their well known tactics of subversion,
infiltration, terrorismi and sabotage. 
-3-
SEATO, of course does not stand alone as the sole
instrument for security in Asia and the Pacific region. Several members of
SEATO belong to other arrangements which help to fortify the SEATO
structure and the fabric of security in the region. These arrangements are,
for the most part, formally established and contribute greatly to the
common defence in the region of Asia and the Pacific. The countries of
the free world associated in SEATO have shown their capacity to defend
national sovereignty and integrity.
Successive Communist challenges in . Isia have failed.
They have been met by the militaryT strength of the Government under attack.
It has been supported by the mrilitary forces, logistical backing and economic
strength of its partners, and of other friendly forces also.
The major challenge of Communism in Asia today is directed
to South Vietnam, as I have said . But it has met growing and determined
strength of resistance. SEATO is not merely an instrument for military security.
Its purposes include the advancement of all in the regions it serves-, It is
well constituted to help by practical assistance and friendly guidance.
SEATO has enabled us to exercise strength through combination. This is
of great importance to the smaller powers which are helped in this way to
devote more of their resources to economic growth. Australia in common
with some other members of the Organization, has made your problems of
development as well as those of defence. Left to ourselves, we would be
overburdened and crippled with security costs. The existence of SEATO and
other security arrangements ensures that members who are most directly
threatened and who are the least able to afford large military establishments
will neither perish nor impoverish themselves.
The wisdom, ability and experience assembled here should
enable this conference to advance most usefully the purposes of the
Organization. The ultimate answer to Communism must be found in the minds
of the people. They must feel convinced that life has meaning, promise and
better standards for them. We who oppose Communism must be more than
anti-Communist. We must demonstrate the false attractions of Communist
ideology and expose its techniques of human manipulation. But we must
stand together for the satisfaction of decent human aspirations and the
precious enjoyment of individual liberty.
Your SEATO labours of today will do much to shape the Asia
of tomorrow. I wish you fruitful and successful meetings.
I formally declare the conference open. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 6Q1966
VIETNAMESE MEDAL
Joint Statement by the Prime Ministers of New Zealand
( Mr. holvoake), and Australia ( Mr. Hoit)
Arrangements have been made for Australian
and New Zealand Forces engaged in Viet Nam to receive and wear
the Medal awarded by the South Vietnamese Govermnent to all free
world forces serving in South Viet Nam.
The Queen has been pleased to extend her
approval to the acceptance and wearing of the Medal.
CANBERRA, 27th June, 1966 



PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND U. K.
on arrival at San Francisco Airport. 28th June, 1966-.
MR. HOLT: 1 el1, gentlemen, perhaps you will indicate to me first
what you have in mind as an operation you want to hear
something 0
Q. Anything you would like to say first?
AMR. HOLT: WVell I don't have any major policy statement. If you like,
I could say why I am here and what I intend to do and matters of
that sort. I am, of course, a fairly frequent visitor to the
United States. This is my seventeenth consecutive yearc of
government on the liberal side and so over those years I have been
a very frequent visitor to you. As Minister for Finance, for
example, I have been coming to Washington most Septembersfor the
meetings of the International Bank and Monetary Fund. But this is
the first visit I make as the Head of the Australian Government,
having succeeded Sir Robert IMenzies in that position in January
of this year. It's been a very crowded year including a visit to
South Viet Nam and other South East Asian countries and I think
that aspect provides some interest in the talks that I'll be
having with the President and with the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom. I think I'm the only non-Asian Head of Government to have
visited South Viet Nam since the hostilities began and I have soine
impressions and I'm sure I'll be very in-1erested to hear what their
views are on events there also. You will probably be aware that
I've been meeting several of the leading figures from the area
in recent days because yesterday morning I formally opened the
Conference in Canberra and in the weekend leading up
to that Opening, I've been talking to the Foreign Ministers as
they've arrived The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr. Holyoake,
the Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, and Mrii. Michael Stewart, the
foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom, and of course others from
the Asian or South . hast Asian area who are represented at the
S. E. A. T. O. Conference. We feel that SEATO got away to a very good
start. This has been a good year from the point of view of SEATO.
I think there have been some very hopeful developments emerging
through the year and I Shall be discussing those and in particular
the view as we see it from down under. But this will be done in
mofe detail in the speeches I shall be making to the National Press
Club in V'I'ashington on Thursday and to a meeting of the Arderican-
Australian Association and in other places where I shall be
speaking. Principally, I've come on this particular journey which
won't last much more than a fortnight, in order to have dire. Ct
contact with the President and with the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom. They've both been kind enough to invite me to have these
talks with them and indeed from the time I took office each of them
invited me to maintain with them the intimate consultation which
they had been in the practice of co iducting with Sir Robert Menzies
while he was Prime Minister, and these communications ha ve proceeded.
between us. 
MR. HOLT: ( Cont'd)
But of course there is no effective substitute for the personal
contacts which can come between man and man and I gather that
your President in particular is a National Leader who likes,
to be able to size up the people wzith whom he is dealing. W ell
in the words of that charming song from " The King A nd P"
'" Getting to Know You, Uetting to Know All About You':' This
is what I hope we shall be doing together. I shall only have a
couple of days in W ashington but arrangements have been made for
me to see Mr. McNamara, Mir. George Ball, Mr. Averell Harriman.
I'll be meeting old friends again in 1Mr. Connor and DMr. Fowler.
I used to see both of those in my earlier capacity as Finance
Minister and then I shall move on to New York where I have some
engagements as well some talks with M1r. David Rockefeller,
thc. talk to the American-Australian Association, Mayor Lindsay
is giving a dinner for me I understand in New York, and so it
will be quite a crowded programme before I go on th~ en to London.
And much the same order of compression, concentration will obtain
in London. I shall be passing back across the west coast homeward
bound to Australia in about a fortnight's time.
We have, of course, very many things in common. My own
talks on this occasion while Australia doesn't lack general
interest in what is going on around the rest of the world, my
own talks on this occasion will be concentrated on the area east
of Suez and in particular South East Asia and notably of course
Viet Nam, Indonesia, and the most recent developments in relation
to that. But I came looking hopefully to the period ahead. I
think that evu: nts are going much more hopefully for us in Viet Nam.
I think that over recent years there have been remarkable advances
in the other countries of South East Asia which have been able to
progress and bui~ d their defences under the shield of SEATO and
under the general protection which the United States in particular
has maintained in that area of the -xorld. Indeed I think,
gentlemen, you~ would be doing a service to your own country as well
as to those who read about these things elsewhere if the positive
side of what we are actually achieving in that area of the world
couild be more prominently displayed. There are grim episodes, of
course, and these are reported regularly, but the more positive
constrUCtiva. achievements, less spectacular perhaps and spread
over a much longer period of time, don't seem to get the same
attention. But out of it all is building a stronger and more
secure, more stable area capabl6 of resisting aggression and
capable also of going on with the more positive and constructive
economic, social and pollt* , changes necessary in ordei: to
produce the better world! in sia that is the aspiration of all
the countries in the SEATO Organisation.
Perhaps having said that you might like to put a question
or two to me.
Q. I'll start the ball rolling, Mr. Prime Minister. With
further weakening of Britain's position with the dragging out
of the shipping strike, is she not likely sooner rather than
later to have to reduce her commitments east of Suez. Will you
discuss this and the possibility of new U. S. bases? 
MR. HOLT: .,-; hile I'm not able to say with any authority what the
economic effects to Britain will be from this shipping strike
and of course it depends of the length of the strike to some
degree, but the British people are a resilient and strong people#
Icion't regard the shipping strike as a fact which would
materially affect future British policy. I think what is likely
to affect British policy is much more importantly in the minds
of the British Government and its lawmakers on the question of
armed forces east of Suez. Mr. Wilson has been quite specific
on this. As to the future of British forces following some
abatement of confrontation requirements is a mattei, which is
less certain in our minds and this is a matter on whi. cihe may
be able to illuminate my own awareness rather more usefully than
is the situation at the moment.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you mentioned you were going to give
the down under views on Viet Nam to President Johnson. Could
you be a little more specific?
MV HOLT: I don't think I should be conducting my conversation with
President Johnson in Public before I've met him. I don't think
he'd appreciate that. It might be more appropriate if I were
to have sol-ae discussion on that afterwards and I will be seeing
the Press Club the following day so to the extent that I feel
I can talk I shall. But I would like to be able to bring to
him, this hopeful picture and brighter picture of the area as seen
by those of us who live in it. And I would certainly be
wishing to convey to him the appreciation of the Australian
people for the greater security that we have felt, the ability
to get on with our own job of developing a vast continent
approximately the size of the United States of Amaerica
well if you leave Alaska out of it, but if you do that then the
territorial dimension of the United States is roughly comparable
with that of Australia. But you've got somiething over 29) 0
million people I think, haven't you almost or you're
getting along that way, and we have less than 12 so that we have
great problems of development and at the sane time we are
trying to make an increasing contribution to defence in the area.
Will Australia contribute more troops to Viet Nan?
R. HOLT: There is no present intention nor on the statements which
Dean Rusk has made since he arrived in Australia is it implied
that that would be necessary. It was known at the time when ' we
increased our last contribution, ( we trebled the military force
there to a task force) and this over a period in which we were
trying to use regular troops at home for the training of
National Servicemen and others, this with our commitments in
Borneo, with a need to give some protection to Papua and New
Guinea and matters of that sort, and with another restless,
turbulent neighbour to our north, this was the contribution
which they felt or at least we suggested this contribution,
and it was welcomed it was not suggested that it was in any
way inadequate.
Q. vgill your Government make any changes in the policy toward
Viet Nan as compared to that of Mr. Menzies? 
24.
HOLT: No, we aLre resolutely behind the support for the United
States and the people of South Viet Na~ m and this policy of course
developed in the period that Sir Robert Mllnzies was Prime Minister.
One of the interesting points about our situation there is that
we have a coalition government and in two houses of Parliamevmt and
in the two parties we have a unanimous support for the Governilent is
policy in Viet Nam and in relation to the programme of National
Service by which we are supplementing our regular forces. Now I
think that's a better batting average than can be claimed even
in this country.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, there has been some pressure to let
foreign banks operate in Australia. Could this meet the need
for investment capital? Is this likely to come about any time
soon?
MR. HOLT: ,~ ell I don't kn~ ow that it would meet the need because the
need is very great and I don't think the banks themselves would be
looking to channel money of the dimension that will be required
for Australian development. It has been put to me fr~ m various
countries that we should enable them to establish a branch of their
bank in Australia. We have a problem there because we feel it is
necessary for the Government and our RP serve Bank to maintain a
general control over credit and we don't have that same control
when the ownership is the hands of foreign bankers. Their
nlational interest or their company interest doesn't always proceed
along the same lines as our own but we have in several instan~ ces
permitted themn to esta~ lish a sort of representative office and
some have done this the Bank of Tokyo has done it, I think the
first\ National City, the Chase Manhattan, but it's not a simple
problem. ' We certainly need the development capital and there are
other financial institutions on which this limitation does not
apply insurance offices and that kind of thing, investment
groups, this is open to the American investor quite freely and
indeed a good deal of investment is still flowing in to Australia
from the United States.
Q. Is thei-e any kind of a peace movement in Australia?
MR. HOLT: Oh, yes, we have the same sort of people that hold up banners
and that kind of thing, but I would say that over recent months
there has baen , I thinkfa more general realisation of the need
for the policies we are ' pursuing in Viet Namn. The greater
sensitivity in Australia developed not so much on the issue of
Viet Nam. I think our people are more sensitive and conscious
to the Viet Nam issue even than the people in the United States
because after all we are very much closer to it, indeed it's
nearer from Darwin to Saigon than it is from, say, Brisbane to
Perth, two capital cities inside our own continent. So this is
something which we see as quite close to us and indeed sin~ ce it
constitutes an element in the total communist threat in that area
of the world then we are even more sensitive I believe than the
American people to its dangers. But where we did have quite*
a stir in Australia for some time was on the question of National
Service for overseas military service. This has not happened in
Australian history before other than in respect of a very limited
area during the second world war and for a time there was qu~ ite
a strong emotional rextion to this, but it has abated considerably 
in recent times largely as a result of the reaction of the
young men in the army themselves the young national servicemen
who didn't particularly want to be called up in the first instance
but having gone in with the regular units and having proceeded to
South Viet Nam, have conveyed back a recognition of the importance
of what they're doing and the need to be there.
Q. Have you got dissent in the universities or not?
MR. HOLT: . iell, in the universities you will get debate about it but
you will get opposing groups in the debate. It is by no means
an issue in which there is a majority view hostile to the policy
in the universities. I would say that as of the moment there has
been if not an acceptance, a willingness to accept the undertakirg
which the Government has given that this will be regarded as one
of the vital issues at the forthcoming election. The Opposition
has made it clear that it is opposed to this policy and I think
most members of the public are now prepared to wait and see the
issue fought out at that time.
Mr. Holt: Weli, I think that's just about enough from mie for the
time being
Q. How would a military withdrawal from Viet Nam affect
Australia?
11R. HOLT: I think it would not only affect Australia very seriously,
it would certainly affect every non-communist country in South
East Asia. I mean let's face the matter quite realistically
so,: e people talk about the Domino Theory in reverse, that we
have been building up the strength of countries which earlier
had been comparatively weak both in their defences and in their
economics, and if that process can be sustained then those
countries in turn will be making their own increasing contribution.
You have a hopeful illustration of that in the meeting in Seoul
the so-called ASPAC Meeting just a week cr so ago. This is a
hopeful sign. The Asian Di-velopment Bank is a hopeful sign of
co-operation in the area. So we have got a long way to go but
don't let's take too gloomy an overall picture of what is going
on because in a lot of places we feel that much has been aohieved.
of
Q. What do you think would be the effect/ a negotiated peace
in that area?
MR. HOLT: ' Well, it would depend on the outcome of the negotiations.
If it merely applied a plaster for the time being and the wound
was to open again shortly afterwards, then our last state would
be-' worse than our first. But we support the efforts which the
United States is making for a negotiated peace, quite genuinely
and quite earnestly.
Thank you, gentlemcn
Thank you,. llr. Prime Minister. 



' PRI. IINTSThR'S VISIT TO U. S. AIM U. K.
Press Conference given by the Primae Minister, Mvr. Harold I
on arrival at Dulles Air: oort,, ashington.
28th June, 1966.
DM. HOLT: I am glad to be in WVashington, looking forward very much
to my first meeting with President Johnson. I believe that
he and I have this in cormmon,. that we prefer talking to
people to talking to paper. And, although we have been in
communication from the outset of my own Prime Mlinistership,
I have been looking forward, and I gather that he has been
looking forward,. to making personal contact.
The visit, I think, is timely in that quite recently I
have been Th-South Viet Nam myself and I have comie from the
formal opening of the SEATO Conference where I have been
able to talk to the Foreign Ministers of the countries
directly involved in the area.
And so, having talked with his own Secretary of State,
I shall be able to pass on to the President the views of
other ForeignlMinisters from South East Asia.
61e, of Australia, have very good cause to be appreciative
of what AmRerica has done in that part of the world. liie
recall with gratitude the American action which saved our
own country from invasion at the time of the second world
war. And we have so many interests in cormmon which have
brought us together again as comrades in arms in Viet Nam.
vie believe that thanks to American resolution, communist
aggression will be successfully resisted there. And it is
from the more hopeful reports that have been brought to us
by the delegates to the SEATO Conference and from the
evidence we can give of the valuable gains made in other
parts of South East Asia that I shall be able to strike a
brighter note for the President than some of the reports
I have been reading lately. ( Applause).
Q. 11r. Prime Minister what is the most significant thing you
expect to come out of the SEATO Conference?
M. HOLT: '. ell, this brings together in the SEATO Conference not
only the countries of the area but the major powers which
have brought strength and given a basis of aid and security
to those countries that are situated in the area. And
coming out of the present conference will be, I think, a
deeper understanding of each other' s viewpoints. They will
be able to point not only to the gains which have been made
over the last year, but some of the emerging problems,
particularly the increasing pressure from communism in
Thailand, the developments which will arise out of the
abatement of confrontation by Indonesia. There will be
plenty for them to talk about, but by their combination
they are able to act with strength and in each country there
is recognition now tM t victory is not to be gained by
military maeans alQne, that we must combine also on constructive 
positive Q.
MR. HOLT:
MR. HOLT: measures of economic co-operation if vwe are to persuade the
peoples of the area that there is a better world order for
them and that liberty can have a significance which they have
never known before.
Who else do you expect to see while you are here?
In the United States I expect to see in addition to the
President,. Mr. McNardara, PMr. George Ball, 11r. Averell
Harriman and to have sae talk with my old friends from my
days as the Finance Minister, 11r. Connor and Mr. Fowler. So
it will be quite a comprehensive cover in Washington itself.
I go then to New York where I am meeting another old friend
in David Rockefeller., talking to the Australian-American
Association on the day after your July fourth celebration. And
Mayor Lindsay has been kind enough to extend me a dinner on
Tuesday night before I take off for London.
In London I shall be talking irith the Prime Minister,
with the Chancellor of the Exchequer, with the 14inister for
Commonwealth Relations and other senior members of the British
Adminis tration.
MLr. Prime 1, iinister you spoke of the brightening picture in
that part of Asia. Do you think the prospects for peace have
improved, and, if so, in what direction?
46ell0 I think you have to direct that question to Hanoi
rather than to the government I represent. We have welcomed
the United States initiative in pursuing every conceivable
avenue for a peace negotiation. So far every such attempt
has been rebuffed from Hanoi. And this is true not only of
efforts made by the United States but by other representatives
of countries that, too, are seeking a peaceful end to the
struggle there.
The good-will towards negotiations is present with us all.
But in order to negotiate there must be two parties to the
discussion. And so far Hanoi has turned a deaf ear to every
effort made in this direction.
DIR. EGGLETON: Thank you gentlemen. I think that is about all we
have tii.-e for today.
Q. I wo id like to ask.. this brightening picture, does it also
include the political situation in South Viet Nam?
MR. HOLT: I understand that it does. ' ve had a talk with the
Foreign Minister of South Viet Nam who fecls that there has
been a signigicant strengthening of the governmIents position
with the people. And he spoke optimistically himself, not
merely of the military progress, but of the political
stability which could be anticipated in the months ahead. I
merely give you his judgment on that matter but it was the
judgment of a very responsible-minded mar. whose faithful
account of events in his own country I have learned to
respect. 4ell, thank you all.
The Press Thank you, sir. 



STATEMENT BY TI T. HON, 1. J. MCEWEN,
ACTING PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR TRADE A. ND INDUYh
ON HIS RETURN TO AUSTRALIA FROM OVERSEAS, 28th JUNLE 1966
The Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade
and Industry, Mr. John McEwen, returned to Australia today,
following trade discussions and negotiations in the United Kingdom
and Europe. Mr. McEwen said that the primary purpose of his visit
was to attend the Commonwealth Trade Ministers' Meeting in London,
from 13th to 16th June.
" The range of items raised at this meeting," said
Mr. McEwen, " included several that were of major importance to
Australia. The Meeting also afforded the opportunity for
bilateral talks before and during the Conference with Ministers
from other Commonwealth countries on matters of significant
interest to Australia and these individual members of the Commonwealth."
U~ iITED KINGDOM AND EUROPE.
Mr. McEwen said the Meeting of Commonwealth Trade
Ministers was given added emphasis and importance by the recent
statement of the United Kingdom Government that they would be
ready to enter the European Economic Community, provided essential
British and Commonwealth interests were safeguarded.
The Meeting received the assurance of the British
Government that there would be made available to Commonwealth
Governments the maximum information possible on the progress of
exploratory discussions with the and that at all stages
of any negotiations there would be close consultation with other
Commonwealth Governments. The Minister said the attitude of the Australian
Government towards British entry to the E. E. C. was the same as it
had always been since the possibility of British entry had arisen;
namely, that the decision as to whether or not Britain should enter
Europe was one for the British Govtrinient alone. 
" But if sach entry viere being actively canvassed,"
said Mr. McEwen, " then the time for consultations with Australia
cn matters which vitally affected our trading interests was
' earlier rather than later'. As had been the case during Britain's
negotiations with the Community in 1961 and 1962, we wanted to be
sure that both Britain and the Six clearly understood the extent
of the dependence of certain Australian industries on their right
to sell on the British market. Following the London discussions,
I have no doubt that opportunities for the necessary consultations
will be afforded Australia."
COMMODITIES. Mr. McEwen said that one of the major items discussed
at the Commonwealth Trade Ministers' Meeting was the disturbing
trend of prices for a number of primary commodities which were of
crucial importance to many Commonwealth countries.
The ruinously low price of sugar on the so-called
" free" market is the most serious and immediate commodity price
problem facing Australia and the many other Commonwealth countries
which are important sugar exporters.
Mr. McEwen said that, of the total world consumption
of sugar of around 60 million tons, about three-quarters was
consumed in the countries in which it was produced. Producers
obtained the benefits of protected local markets for this share of
the total markct. The remaining one-quarter of total consumption
represented sugar traded internationally. About half of this amount
was bought and sold in accordance with inter-Governmental agreements
or special arrangements, under which sugar exporters obtained fair
and reasonable prices. Th. re. a: ini. ng seven or eight million tons,
however, was sold on the ' free'" mark-t, and the prices received
for " free" market sales the so-called " world price" of sugar
drastically affected the position of sugar producers in countries
which sold large quantities of sugar on the " free" market. 
3.
In the case of Australia, almost three-quarters of
our exports from the 1966 crop will be sold at prices based on
the " free" market quotations. A variation of œ E5 stg. per ton in
the " free" market price could mean about 016 million to the
Australian sugar industry and, of course, also to the Australian
balance of payments. At the time of the London meeting, the so-called
world price of sugar had fallen to less than œ-17 stg. per ton for
raw sugar, the lowest level since the 1930' s. It had since
fallen to œ-16 stg. per ton, less than half the price required to
provide a remunerative return to even the most efficient sugar
industries in the world.
Mr. McEwen said this was an intolerable situation.
" The present ' world' price," he said, " means a return of less
than 2 cents a lb. to exporters of sugar, whereas the average
price paid by consumers is about 8 cents per lb. in terms of raw
sugar. International action to raise substantially the twrd
price of sugar is an urgent necessity."
Mr. McEwen said that, unfortunately, negotiations
aimed at securing a new and satisfactory International Sugar
Agreement were not making the progress which had been hoped for.
The unanimous declaration by Commonwealth countries at the London
meeting of Trade Ministers that they would join in supporting
effective arrangements to get a better sugar price was a most
helpful step forward. In his opinion, the Meeting of Commonwealth Trade
Ministers had been most worthwhile if for no other reason than
that Ministers from all countries had declared themselves,
unanimously and unambiguously, as being determined to achieve an
improvement in the sugar price situation.
Mr. MoEwen said that he had referred particularly
to zugar because this is a commodity of paramount importance to
Australia and to the development of the North, and to many other
Commonwealth countries. Dit tlip Mpeting hadl also ounsidered the 
problems of other bulk cormmodities and the action needed to
improve the conditions of trade in regard to them. Wheat, meat
and dairy products are examples of bulk commodities of particular
interest to Australia, while tin, rubber, cocoa and coffee are
among commodities of great concern to a number of other Commonwealth
countries and to Papua and New Guinea.
The Meeting had agreed on the objectives to be
sought in present and future international commodity negotiations
on these commodities. Mr. McEwen said he was sure this would
result in Commonwealth countries better concerting their efforts
in working for improved trading arrangements for the major
commodities.
KENNEDY ROUND. Another major item was discussion of the GATT
Kennedy Round of trade negotiations. This, too, was a matter of'
urgency, since progress in the negotiations had been very slow.
The authority given by the United States Congress for United
States participation lasts for barely another year.
Commonealth Trade Ministers were all agreed that
the potential benefits of the Kennedy Round were such that the
Commonwealth should, as a group, do everything possible to bring
a sense of urgency to the negotiations.
Mr. McEwen said that, if the Kennedy Round failed
to produce worthwhile results, there could well be a widespread
sense of disillusionment against the ideals of multilateralism
in world trade. This might then lead to a tendency towards groups
of countries combining to form highly protective trading blocs.
The European Economic Co:-eunit;' possibly enlarged could be
one such bloc; the countries of the North and South American
continents another; and the Communist countries a third.
Australia, and gthGr countries not easily falling within such
groupings, could find themselves isolated and confronted with new
restrictions on their trade opportunities. 
At a time when the growth and prosperity of Australia, and indeed
of every country, depends so much on maintaining a continued
expansion of exports, such a development would be deplorable.
It is, indeed, a major reason why a successful outcome of the
Kennedy Round is of fundamental importance.
Mr. McEwen added that, if the Kennedy Round failed,
and there followed the emergence of a series of powerful trading
blocs, the many new and developing nations of the world would,
no doubt, be forced to seek attachment to one or another of the
blocs. This, he said, could provide a fertile field for political
competition in which he could see nothing but danger and tension
the very reverse of the objective of maximum freedom in trade and
other matters which we believe in, and towards which the United
States Government, in launching the Kennedy Round, had taken a
leadership initiative.
OTHER SUBJECTS. Mr. McEwen said that a numiber of other subjects were
discussed at the Trade MinistersT Meeting, ranging from trade in
manufactured exports from the lesser developed members, to the
trade promotion efforts of developing countries and means of
stimulating tourism. " In all cases," said Mr. McEwen, " Commonwealth
Ministers were able to reach agreement on the most useful
means of co-ordinating Commonwealth efforts in these fields."
The Minister said he was particularly heartened by
the support expressed by developing Commonwealth countries for
the Australian initiative in legislating for a system of
preferences to apply to a range of products of interest to
developing countries. " These new nations," said Mr. McEwen,
" 1need more than grand declarations if they are to grapple
successfully with the vast economic difficulties facing them, and
avoid the political trouble that so often accompanies such
difficulties. The Australian initiative was widely acknowledged
to be one of the few positive steps that have yet been taken by
any country specifically to help the trade problems of the
developing cou ntries.'' 6/.. 
TRADE PUBLICITY. Whilst in London, Mr. McEwen said, he had also taken
the opportunity to assess the progress being made in the campaign
to promote Australian meat, dairy products, fresh, canned and
dried fruits, eggs, other processed foodstuffs and wine.
Total expenditure in Britain on the promotion of
Australian products amounts to several million dollars a year.
The Commonwealth Govcrnment and Australian primary producers and
exporters, through the Marketing Boards, subscribe directly
01.1 million. This co-operative effort attracts associated
expenditure by cxporters and British importers of Australian
products of very substantial additional funds.
" I am sure," Mr. McEwen commented, " that this trade
publicity programme has done much to create and encourage the
demand for these Australian products in the United Kingdom
market. Without it, the returns to a wide range of Australian
producers would have been considerably lower."
Mr. McEwen added that, in recent years, a much
greater emphasis had been given to the promotion of Australian
products in markets other than Britain. He said: " We are
producing more~ our development needs require ever-increasing
earnings of foreign exchange; and there are uncertainties abo-. c
Britain's ultimate action in regard to the Common Market. All
these considerations make it necessary that we exploit every
possible marketing opportunity."
TRADE AGREEME.' TS -A BULTRIA APD POLARD.
Mr. McEwen sa: i tt 5follow. ing the London meeting,
he had visited Poland a and had concluded trade
agreements with these counri. s.
Mr. McEwon said that Australia had given most-favourednation
tariff treatment to Poland and Bulgaria for many years.
However, exporting to countries which controlled their imports by
measures other th?. tariffs had no predictable basis. 
As a general rule, such countries prefer to buy from countries
with whom they have trade agreements. In recent years, many
Western countries have negotiated trade agreements with nations
of Eastern Europe. The Minister said that, last year, Australia
concluded a reciprocal, most-favoured-nation Trade Agreem-ent with
the Soviet Union. Following this, Poland and Bulgaria had sought
trade talks with the object of concluding similar agreements.
His visit and the Trade Agreements which had been signed were
the outcome of these requests.
Mr. McEwen said the now Agreements accorded to
Poland and Bulgaria, as of right, the most-favoured-nation tariff
treatment they had hitherto enjoyed. From the point of view of
Australia's interests, we now also have assured entry to these
markets on the equivalent most-favoured-nation basis.
Mr. McEwen added that Australia enjoyed a favourable
trade balance with both Poland and Bulgaria a substantial
balanco in the case of Poland, which was a valuable buyer of
Australian wool. R'oth countries were undertaking industrialisation
programmes, with heavy investment in a wide range of manufacturing
industries. This offered the prospect of increasing opportunities
for the sale of Australian raw materials and possibly also beef,
mutton and other foodstuffs. At the same time, it could be
expected that the products of the new manufacturing industries
in Poland and Bulgaria, which are already significant exporters
of certain specialised types of machinery, would be of increasing
interest to Australian industries. The new Trade Agreements would
provide a very useful framework for the development and expansion
of Australian trade with Poland and Bulgaria.
Sydney, 166
28hJune, 196 



PRrLvIE MINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S ITD U. K.
Exchange of' remarks between President Johnson of the
U. S. and Prime Minister Harold Holt of' Australia at
arrival ceremonies for the Prime Minister on the
South Lawn of the * White House. 29th June. 1966.
ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT JOHSNSON:
Mr. Prime Minister and Mrs. Holt:
. ie greet you this morning as friend and partner.
It is a very genuine pleasure to welcoirie you and M. rs. Hclt,
and the distinguished members of your party, to our country.
j\: jy personal ties to your country are as deep as a man' s
can be. During the war I found among you openhearted
friendship when I was far from,, home. Now, once again, our two
nations are fighting side by side in the defence of freedom.
The first thing that I read every morning are the
battle reports from Viet Nam. I want you to know that I follow
the exploits of 4~, 500 Australians fighting there with the
same interest and concern as those of our ow. n men. Mr. Prime
Minister, I take great pride in their courage and their
dedication. I derive great strength from the sacrifices they
are making. You in Australia know that in Viet Nam we are meeting
a challea. ge which just must be met. It imst be met because
it is always dangerous to let aggression succeed. It must be
met becauge our SEATO commitments require us to defend the
people of South Viet Nam from external attack.
It must be met because the security of Australia and the
United Status of 1America is directly at stake in preserving
the independence and the freedom of the nations of South East
Asia. Jie also know that behind the struggle against
aggression in Viet Nam a vital, free Asia is rapidly emerging.
Shielded by the courage of the Vietnamese and their allies,
many Asian countries are driving forward with real success in
their economic and social development.
Vte all know of the remnarkable growth of Australia and
Japan in recent years. But last year the growth rate in South
Korea was 8 per cent., in Taiwan it was 7 per cent., in
Malaysia it was 512 per cent., in Thiland it was 6 per cent.
Growth in Iran has been averaging better than 6 per cent a year. 
Pakistan is rapidly recovering from the setback
caused by the conflict last year.
Last week I received word from India which moved
me greatly. The monsoons have begun. It looks as though
the rainfall this year will be ample and the harvt will be
good. With adequate rainfall, the courageous measures of the
Indian government, and the support of the world cormunity, I
hope and I expect that India will surge forward in the year
ahead. Indonesia is turning the corner into the most
promising phase of its postwar history.
M1eanwhile, there is rising in Asia a new spirit of
regional association and regional self-confidencu. It was
that spirit to which I responded and which I tried to encourage
in the talk I gave in Baltimore in April, 1965.
Now the dream of an Asian development bank is a reality,
binding up the peoples from Teheran to Seoul in a great common
enterprise. . ork goes forward to develop the M4ekong Valley,
despite the conflict close by.
I know that Australia has, for many years, assuned a
majcr responsibility for the security and the development of
its region, through the Colombo Plan, the ,1ekong Committee,
SEATO, and bilateral contributions to developing regions of
the area. Our ovn security is heightened because we are
joined with you in hNZUS.
vie feel a new sense of fellowship and conmon destiny
emerging in Asia. followed with great interest the recent
meeting in Seoul of the Asian and Pacific Council, in which
your government participated.
Nations that were long isolated from each other are
now beginning to know each other and to find new cormon ground.
Old antagonisms are giving way to a new awareness that there
are great possibilities in working togethcr, great challenges
to be met and great jobs to be done.
Above all, Asia is proving once agai-that stability
and power are not to be found in tyranny and aggressive wars
against a neighbour.
Stability and power come frca free men and free nations
working together on behalf of the people. de both know that
should we fail in Viet Nan these new possibilities in free Asia
would be endangered or destroyed. 
M1r. Prime Minister, as you co,. e this morning to this
house on your long-awaited visit, I wish to tell you and,
through you, to tell your wonderful people, that we shall not
fail. W~ e shall persist. 14e shall succeed.
The good, brave people of South Viet Namn shall be given
their chance to forge their own destiny in peace.
The free peoples of Asia shall be given their chance
to shape the destiny of their own region.
These are your goals in Asia, M'r. Prime Minister, and
they are ' also the goals of the United States of America.
delcome.
llro President and Mlrs. Johnson..
Thank you for your warm welcomne, Mr. President. You
have said warin and generous things about Australia andits
people. Wk-hat a memorable morning for the Australian people and
f or an Australian Prime Minister. I thank you for the honour
which, by this ceremonial, you have accorded to my country and
you have accorded to me. vhat has been done will be appreciated
deeply by my people as it is by myself as head of my government.
4e meet, Mr. President, as heads of government while
our two nations are again-comrades in arms. This is at least
the fourth time in this century that Americans and Australians
have combined together vvith other friendly forces to resist
aggression. We fought alongside each other in two world wars, and
then Australia was the first country, I believe, to announce
itself beside you when America iiade the historic decision to
bring its strength to the aid of South Korea.
I say historic decision advisedly, because I believe
that to have been, Mr. President, one of the turning points
in human history. I believe at that critical point of time
was decided the issue of whether we handed Asia over to
penetrating, aggressive communism, or whether we kept intact
a large part of Asia as member countries of the coimñ pany of
free people throughout the world.
Australia was with you when you decided on the
decision, critical also to you and to us, in South Viet Nam,
another battleground against communist aggression.
You have spoken of the task force of Australians which
is now assembled in Saigon. You will be aware, M~ r. President,
that in other parts of South Last Asia Australia is making
a military contribution, small by the standards of your own
great country, but useful in the company in w.-hich we find
ourselves there. 
I know that this task force in South Viet Nam will
acquit itself with disti-ction. The men that are serving
there are men of quality. They are well trained. The
first battalion was accorded the highest commendation by your
own leaders and by the leaders of South Viet Nam. The task
force which follows them will acquit them selves With no
less courage and distinction.
The outcome of this struggle is critical for the
hopes that you and we share for a better and more secure way
of life for the free people of Asia.
You have spoken of the vital free Asia that is
emerging. I can speak of this from some personal experience,
because not merely do we have a view from dom under which is
pelhaps a different perspective from that of others in
different parts of the world, but it has been my own good
fortune in recent times to have travelled over several of these
coLntries of South East Asia.
W, hat has occurred over recent years is a transformation.
To go through Thailand, 1,1alaysia, and even South Viet Nam,
itself, and see the massive support being rendered there, see
the security, the progress which has beon found possible by
these other countries where com,: unism has successfully been
held in check to see these things is to give heartening
encouragement to go on with the job of resisting aggression
where we find it.
But it does not take a war to bring Americans and
Australians close together. vq'e like each other. Friendships
form quickly between us. le have many mutually beneficial
links., our trade with each other., the investment that you
make with us with your capital. ge co-operate in many
constructive international interests and oauses.
You mentioned, 1ir. President, your time in Australia
years ago. A new Australia has arisen since then. When
can we ste you there again? And this time we hope with Mrs.
Johnson, and perhaps the whole family.
You will be encouraged to see the National growth in
which many American skills and resources have assisted.
lIr. President, we recognize all too clearly in my ovn
country that on yoa, personally, falls the heavy and at times
lonely responsibility of free world leadership on your country
these burdens have been assumed in comparatively recent times
in terms of modern history. But America has shouldered those
burdens firmly, and you have inspired and encouraged us all by
the strength of your own resolution. 
You know that in Australia you have an understanding
friend. I am here, Sir, not asking for anything an
erperience which I am sure you value at times when it is not
sofrequent as it might be.
You have in us not merely an understanding friend, but
one staunch in the belief of the need for our presence with
you in Viet Nam. vie are not there because it is right to be
there, and, like you, vie shalh stay there as long as seems
necessary in order to achieve the purposes of the South
Vietnamese government and the purposes that we join in
formulating and progressing together.
And so, sir, in the lonelier and perhaps even more
disheartening moments which comre to any national leader, I hope
there will be a corner of your mind and heart which takes cheer
froii the fact that you have an adiiring friend, a staunch
friend, that will be all the way with LBJ. 



PRIEIE MINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND U. K.
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB. *. ASHINGTON. June, 1966.
Presideat ( Mr. Booth):
Gentlemen, it may interest you to know that at this
very hour in Canberra the Secretary of State, Mr. Dean Rusk,
is addressing the Press Club of Canberra.
I would like to introduce the distinguished guests at
this table. On my left, His Excellency, iMr. John Keith iraller,
the Australian Ambassador.
On my right, our very own, the Honourable Edward Clark,
United States Ambassador to Australia.
On my left, Sir John Bunting, Permanent Head of the
Prime Minister's Department.
On my right, Sir Lawrence icIntyre, the Deputy Secretary
of the Department of External Affairs of Australia.
On my left, the Honourable Robert Furlonger, the Minister
of Australia. On my'right, the Honourable John I. c Naughton, Assistant
Secretary of Defence for International Security Affairs.
On my left, a most iL: portant man, f. r. Tony Eggleton, the
Prime Minister's Press Secretary.
On my right, the Honourable Ray Farrell, Co; uIissioner of
Immaigration and Naturalization.
His job is the one that our distinguished guest used to
hold in Australia. On my left, an old friend, the Honourable Claude Pepper
of Florida. On my right, the Honourable William Battle, former
American Ambassador to Australia now with the State Department.
On my left, a distinguished member of this club, Press
Attache to the Australian Embassy, Mr. John Malone.
Gentlemen, the nation, the city, and especially the
National Press Club we are proud to have as our guest of honour
a distinguished statesman from down under. His country is a most
remarkable one. It is almost the exact size as ours. It has
everything going for it that ours has great cities, vast
stretches of farm land, mountains, prairies, and it is all tended
and brought to bloom and fruition by fewer than twenty million
people. HOLT Twelve.
Twelve, I'm told. I was giving them a few. ( laughter).
Australia is a land where an A1. erican at least this one
feels more at home than in any other country but his own. Our
guest became Prime " inister of Australia last January. He
succeeded a veritable legend, Sir Robert 1ienzies, who was Prime
Minister for a generation. And, incidentally, who also spoke
from this platform. 
2.
Our guest is the leader of the majority Liberal Party
in Australia. That is the party to belong to just now. But
he knows this country and city well, having participated in
many , orld Bank and other financial meetings here.
But he is not all business by any means. He is a
skilful skinciver and spearfisherman, who enjoys water ski-ing
and power boating. He is a familiar figure at the Melbourne
race track and he goes the right way with top hat and tails.
How good he is at picking the horses his biographers don't say.
He is here today representing his coilntry, the faithful
ally of the United States, through thick and thin, good times
and bad. Gentlemen, the distinguished Prime Mlinister of Australia,
the Right Honourable Harold Holt.
MR. HOLT: ir. President Booth, Your Excellencies, Distinguished
Guests, Gentlemen of the National Press Club, and other types
not otherwise included;
This all makes me feel very good. In the first place it
is, as most of you have discovered, regarded by most of the
politicians of the world as something of a status symbol to have
the National Press Club. These things are taking a well defined
pattern at these times. If you can get your photo in'Timd' or
" Newsweek" or matters of that sort, well, you arc well on your
way to recognition. I have only had my photo, I think, twice in
" Time On one occasion I was sitting along side David
Rockefeller, who is rather better knovm here than I am. And on
the other occasion I appeared with three of ry delightful
daughters-in-law in their bikinis. A nd I got more international
recognition from that than in my thirty years in public life.
( laughter). Indeed, as I came across the United States, I was a
little chastened because, although I was shown every courtesy
and attention at the splendid hotel in San
Francisco, they kept addressing me as M1r. Ambassador. When I
went up to my room some generous friend had sent along a couple
of bottles of hooch but it was addressed correctly to me by
name so there was no argument as to the possessor, but it
described me as the Prime Miniister of Canada. ( laughter). Then
we got on the aircraft to co! te across to w'ashington auiwe
hadn't been off the ground very long when a somewhat worried
looking captain of the aircraft came along and he saw me
lounging in the front seat with a sweater on, by this stage, and
my collar loosened and my tie a bit askew and he said, " I am
looking for the Prime Minister of Australia. But unfortunately,"
he said, " I don't know his name." ( laughter). So, gentlemen,
my eg3 needed a bit of building by the time I got to ashington.
And thank you very much for asking me here. I see around me a
lot of friends. Some I have made at earlier times, some whc
apparently have just come along for the very nice lunch. 
On my right you will see a man who can usually be
distinguished by the " Yellow Roses of Texas" in his buttonhole,
your distinguished Amibassador to mW country, iir. Edward Clark.
Now, I am not without hope that by the time he ends his term of
duty with us we will have persuaded him to remain permanently.
I think he finds rather larger areas of land to be cultivated
there than in Texas. It's a little cheaper and the oil has yet
to be found. And, of course, we have around the room others whose
friendship I have valued over the years in which I was engaged
in the rather esoteric mysteries of' the Secretaryship of Finance.
But today I want to speak principally to you about the
sort of view that we have developed from the part of the world
in which I live about what has beco,.-e the major external issue
in this country and indeed in other parts of the world the
issue of Viet Nam. And I think it would assist a clearer
understanding for us all if v could turn our eyes away for a
week or two from, the daily episodic reportings to consider the
environment, the general situation, the total picture which
relates to Viet Nan and its place in Asia generally. Benause
from much of the criticism that I have been reading, the woods
seem to have been lost sight of as people inspect the trees. And
if we want to assess the value of our participation in South
Viet Nam, then I believe those who criticize must broaden their
horizons and sue wvhat has been achieved by resistance to
communism in South Last Asia and study in turn what this will mean
to the Asia of tomorrow. The military operations would then
fall into place as marking the continuing challenge of communisia
in Asia. The stakes, gentlemen, are very large, and that is why
three successive presidents of this great country, m-den who
should have at their fingertips information, informed advice to
an extent and of a , juality which very few other people could
hope to match, even the best informed of us. And in the exercise
of their country's heavy resoonsibility of free . orld leadership,
they have firmly decided, one succeeding the other, that the
i-ilitary po,. er and economic strength of the mightiest nation in
human history must be brought into the scale to preserveafœ eedom
and hope and progress in the countries of Asia. There/ a illion
people a billion and half people, rather east of Suez, and
their number grows appreciably each year. In India alone the
population increases to an extent equivalent to the total
population of my country -rhich, IVr. President, despite our best
efforts and a very active Immigration programme, has only
advanced to about eleven and a half million. 1, whleya rt lifted
for a momcnt when you said twenty million. ( laughter). That is
-where we hope to get. and get with other goals in sight.
But, gentle-men, they are people of quality. Je are very proud
of our Australian people.
But the one and a half billion people east of Suez may
have doubled their number by the end of this century. And Asia
has become a dynamic theatre of social ferment and revolutionary
economic change. In this region and I contrast it, as I say
this, with the continent of Africa there are countries rich
in resources with ancient civilizations, but some have been slow
to adapt themselves to the possibilities of -doiern techniques. 
Most of these countries are going through dramatic processes
of change, varying greatly in kind. You get, for example, the
modern industrialization which has occurred in Japan and, on
the other hand, the regimentation of the coru,, unist administration
in China of the 700 million people of that country. The only
major military power on the mainland of Asia is communist China.
No country Li Asia bould feel itself secure from the threat of
communist aggression but for the power and resolution of the
United States of America. And so we might fairly ask the critics
who don't like what is going on in South Viet Nam, do they want
a world in which a communist dominated Asia forms a major part?
That is a fair question. They may feel that the issue can end
in South Viet Nam. None of us who live in that area of the world,
and I speak as one who has in the course of this year not only
been to South Viet Nam but through several of the countries of
Asia. I come to you as one who opened on 1Monday morning in
Canberra the conference of SEATO powers. And on the preceding
weekend I was able to have talks there with Michael Stewart, Dean
Rusk, and the Foreign Mi: isters of all these SEATO countries
attending that conference.
And they are under no doubt as to the fact that a
continuing threat exists. They welco e what have been quite
favourable developments in the course of the past twelve years.
And there are very hopeful developments em-erging in A'sia. But
without American strength in ! sia then we might as well hand it
over to cormmunism of the Chinese brand.
ve in , ustralia share the views of your lead,. rs, and I
would hope and believe of millions of your fellow Americans, that
a critical battle is being fought in South Viet Nam for the
future of mankind. This conflict symbolizes the challenge of
communism in Asia and is the current , major expression of it. ,. e
have tried to see alL this in the perspective of history. -7e are
inclined in Australia to see things perhaps in direct simple
terms. But you are not necessarily i-Aore likely to be wrong on
that account. I think you can over-complicate the situation
to a point where, as I say, you lose sight of the woods because
your are concentrating too much on the detail. And there is
plenty of detail, of course, to be seen in South Viet Nam, in
the complex, dificult situation. And that is why the communists
are there, because it is difficult, it is complex. It is not
easy to produce national unity which would make the task of
defending the country and building it up again so much easier.
But we work with the conditions as we find them. And the issue
is still clear enough in our eyes. In these simple direct terms
we saw our role in world war I and world II. de were a cocintry
of only seven million people in those times, and i'ustralia
sustained nearly half a million casualties in those two world
wars. I think I speak correctly when I say that in the first
world war we lost more men killed than the United States itself.
And tha is how we saw the communist challenge in Berlin and in
Cuba. We fought it with you in Korea and we joiridwith British
and other Corinonwealth forces in fighting it in Malaya. He see
South Viet Nam in the same context, a crucial struggle for human
liberty. 
Never forget that the United States has not only put troops
into Asia, it has also put heart. And I speak for one of the
countries in the region which has felt heart, encouragement,
and strength froin the knowledge that the resistance that could
be made would oe backed in strength by the United States.
Reienber, that as far back as 1954, President hisenhower
decided to exteid both economic and military aid tc South Viet
Nam, to enable the development of a strong, viable state. And
during the next five years So-th Viet Nam made economic and
social progress which some observers described as miraculous.
And that progress was not halted by the South Vietnamese themselves.
It was halted by a campaign of subversion, of terror,
of infiltration, and finally of organized military aggression.
Remeiiber also what your country has done to help the
economic and social growth of countries such as Korea, Taiwan,
and Thail* nd. It stands ready to assist and suppo't co-operative
programxes for economic development in Asia. Your goal and ours
is for peace and a better life for all who are willing to live
at peace with th-ir neighbours.
The United States is working and building for these
objectives. ' e have heard a lot of discussion and debate about
the so-called Domino Theory. ; ell, those of us who take the
view from down under believe that, thanks to the assistance of
this country, the Domino Theory is working in reverse.
' ve believe that because the United States is in Asia,
other people arc encouraged to stay there and help the emerging
young Asian countries to work out their own future without fear
and without the persisting monaoe of a philosophy which Mlao
Tse-Tung says grows out of the barrel of a gun.
It is in our judgment shortsighted for' the industrialized
nations of the Lest to believe that they can contract out of the
problems, the troubles and agonies of Asia. The challenge thrown
down by communism in Viet Nam is a challenge not only to So. tth
Viet Nan, it is a challenge to the whole free world.
Lcl-t me say something about peace in Viet Nam. Peace in
A sia. Peace 11 ove the world. I'e have been nauseated by the
propaganda which describes the free world as imperialistic and
the coimunist world is benevolent and humanitarian. The converse
is demonstrably true. No man has worked harder for peace in
Viet Nam than your President, and he is not alone in this. Most
of the world supports him. Only Hanoi and Peking will not have
peace. , Jhat they want is surrender and a victory far
totalitarian communism.
, e believe in the kind of peace that carries with it
the right of small nations to grow and develop in their owm way.
ie believe in a living kind of peace. The comunists offer the
peace of the grave.
The Aerican decisions I see as turning points in history
were the Marshall Aid Programme, which opened a new vista for
human welfare, and the other was the decision to give military
support and aid to South Korea. iIhere would we have been had
America turned its back at that critical time upon support far
South Korea? 
There would have been undoubtedly today a Korea entirely
dominated by the comm-unists. And forces would have been
released at that early stage which would have pressed on the
other weak countries south of China itself.
But thanks to the United States' strength, Asia is
stirring. , e are at the dawning, I believe, of an exciting new
phase in human affairs. And I speak as one who has talked in
these recent years, and more particularly in recent months, with
leaders of countries such as those to be found in Malaysia, in
Thailand, in Taiwan, in Korea, in other parts of South East Asia.
There is a mood for co-operation. With Japan, for example, a
country which has produced the most remarkable industrial
expansion of iroiern times.
Our own trade with Japan today is running at about four
and a half times the dimension of the early 1950' s. And Australia
and Japan are both withholding from consumption more of their
gross national product than any other countries to be found in the
world about 28 per cent in the case of Australia, which compares
with 17 or 18 per cent in this country and the United Kingdom.
And so we are, we believe, at an exciting phase of
development in human history. Here are countries which have never
found either the i ill nor the means to co-operate, except under
the force of oppression, down through the earlier centuries.
India, another country which has gone through a
signifioant re-orientatior.. of thinking and movement. In
Indonesia, one of the richest countries of the world potentially,
a hundred million people which today find themselves in
administrative and economic chaos, but with resources so
potentially strong that a decade of capable administration and
management could make them one of the strong economic powers in
Asia of the future. And here is how this great country, and we
say it with gratitude and appreciation, because where else do
the countries of South East Asia and ultimately of Asia turn,
except to the strength and generosity of this country,
until enlightenment, perhaps, brings greater support from other
countries who would, one would have thought, from the generosity
extended to them, when their reconstruction was a matter of
necessity in the post-war years, one would have thought that they
would have joined gladly in this task of defending liberty and
progress in this troubled area of the world.
Jell, thanks, I repeat, to the United States, Asia is
stirring. And we are ourselves with optimism facing the future
ahead of us. ;, hat the United States has done is, we believe, of
epochal significance. It represents the engagement of the
riches and opportunities of the world with the revolution and
potential of Asia. It is quite impossible, of course, to assess
let alone overestimate the value and the sheer magnitude
that the service rendered by the American Government and people
on behalf of individual liberty, human dignity, and national
self-respect throughout the world since the second world war.
There has been nothing in history to approach the totality of
American generosity and enlightenment as expressed in a unique
combination of economic and financial assistance to the needy,
military protection to the weak, and dedication to the cause
of freedom everywhere. 
oe need to remind ourselves of all this from time to
time. It is all too often forgotten by individuals and
beneficiary nations under the passing stresses and irritations
of international life. I wonder where estern Europe would
stand today had it not been for the Marshall Plan and the American
contribution to NATO. And nowhere, perhaps, has there been a
better example of Aerican reso-lution and patience than in Viet
Nam. We are convinced that it has put fresh hope into those
Asian countries that are at the same time jealous of their
independence and depressed by the harsh realities of living
close to communist China.
So far from inviting a mounting chorus of protest, the
American 6xample has encouraged some of these countries to come
in with military help for the people of South Viet Nam. First
the Republic of Korea and now Thailand and the Philippines. I
am convinced that others of them, while constrained to preserve
a posture of aloofness and even disapproval for public purposes,
are privately thankful for what the United States is doing
The results of all this are to be seen everywhere. The
successful holding operation in Viet Nam has brought time for
a re-appraisal in Indonesia, as I have mentioned, of the prospeet
of the harsh and sterile realities of comnunism, and with it the
promise of an end to Indonesia's confrontation of Malaysia.
There has been the recent meeting of free nations in
Seoul, the first such meeting held by them, out of which has
come a new regional grouping to be knovm as ASPAC. The Foreign
Mfinister of South Viet Nan was present at our SEATO ieeting in
Canberra and this meeting was concerned not primarily with
matters of defence and security, but with opportunities for
political, economic, social, and cultural co-operation, looking
towards the future, free from the shadow of aggression and war.
The military forces of all the countries engaged hpve as
a major part of their task the Civic Action and Rural
Development Prvgrammes, a totally new concept that military
forces have brought to their responsibility in military
operations. !., hat better testimony could there be to the
fruitfulness of American aid and allied policies and actions
in South Viet Nam.
Let me end with a tribute to the steadfastness of the
United States' aims and objectives in that country, and to the
courage and fortitude of all of those military and civilian
alike, who are carrying them through difficult and frustrating
conditions. V'qe are grateful for the resolution, clarity cf
purpose of your President and his Administration.
As I said last night, it is a ggod thing that this
administration has the defence in depth from so many ablenmn,
all firmly and resolutely determined to see this thing through.
Their efforts have the full support of the Australian Government,
of the substantial majority of our people. And I express our
appreciation and our gratitude for them. 
NR. BOOTIH: Mvr. Prime Mi_, ister, you have several hundred sharp
newsmnen here. They have asked some hard questions arnd some
easy ones. Let me say again that I do not write the questions
sir. I merely ask them. And the first question. Sir, we are
not used to having our policies so enthusiastically supported.
( laughter). ( applause).
12ll. HOLT: a7ell, frankly, currently, not is our eyes. And that is
rnot simply a blind acceptance of everything that the United
States cares to produce. It is because the Australian people
and the American people are inheritors together of~ a great
democratic tradition. We think very much alike on the problems
which affect the world. I'We have great principles held in coiaion.
And I believe that we can be appreciative that there is a champion
to defend those principles of the strength which you hold.
As we grow in our own strength and determined we are
to go on with our growth then I hope we shall be making an
increatingly strong contribution to our common causes, whether
it be in the field of military effort, of international aid, or
of co-operation for other useful international purposes. But
currently the only problehis between us are SOI:!-e rather some
trade problems the 25 cents a pound. on -wool and a few other
odds and ends like that. ( laughter). In the international
foreign affairs field we see the situation very closely with
your ox'in outlook. ( applause).
! IR. B'O'OTIH: Sir, what is the nature of the problems iiwhich devolve
upon Australia because of the changing British stance East of
Suez?
11R. HOLT: Well, 11. r. Chairman, as explained to me by the Primie
Minister of the United Kingdom, the situation remains unchanged
froin the understanding ,-; hich was discussed with us by the Min,-ister
for . efence, Mr. Healy, earlier this year in Canberra, and then
subsequently foniiing part of the defence review which he made to
the House of Com-,.. ons.
Mr. Harold " l-ilson has reaffirmed that position quite
recently in public statement and in the text of the speech which
he made to his own party m-, em-bers.
Now. wie are currently concerned, of course, with the end
of confrontation situation. But confrontation has not yet ended
formally. We hope things will work out satisfactorily. But, of
course, there have been in the past times when all that looked
promising in Indonesia didn't work out quite the way that we had
hoped. We are m,, ore optimistic at this time. But we have ahead
of us a consideration of where we all stand once that situation
has satisfactorily ended.
Now the United Kingdom has made it clear that it will
stay on in the military force and presence in Singapore and I
would think with other Commi~ onwealth forces in Malaysia for an
indefinite time ahead. In what strength remains to be made hown,
but we are more concerned to have the British presence there as
a moderating and stabilizing influence than with the question of
just how -, anv people there are. 
W1e pursued, in Australia,. in company with the British,
both in Australia and the United Kingdomn, a study of possible
alternative base situations in-Australia if a situation
developed in which the United Kingdom could not effectively
maintain its force. in the bases where they at present are
stationed. But we would hope and we would believe that this decision
having been made is welcaned by the countries of the area
conc~ erned, that Great Britain will, as far ahead as we can see,
maintain a presence East of Suez in almost certainly the same
areas where they are at present held.
MR. BOOTH: Thank you, sir. In the light of Australia's maembership
of the recently created ASPAC, w., ould you say that Australia is
now going to get closer and more co-operation with its Asian
neighbours than was the case in the past?
vM. HOLT: Mr. President, that I believe is undoubtedly so. This
was a welcome development for as and no less welcome was the
warmth with which Australia Luid New Zealand were accepted into
the cor-pany of A sian countries. have cone to know sevexral
of them of course, closely, either through our SEATO cooperation
or in the case of those outside SEATO, in trade
developments of recent time.
And this is a symptomr, I believe, of the emerging
spirit of co-operation, of hope in Asia. There are potentialities
for trade which become quite exciting as new resources are
opened up and as better technical trade co-operation, machinery
is developed between us. This aspect, emergence, and the earlier
meeting of the Education Ministers at Bankok, the useful meeting
of SEATO which has just been held, the As ian Development Bank as
a new institution servicing the area, the undertaking which
President Johnson has given that there will be a billion-dollar
programme of development in the area if co-operation can be
successfully developed all these things are hopeful symptoms.
Hanging over all is the menacing cloud of colm-unism
which we must dispel. But subject to that I believe that, the
Asia of the next fifty years cannot only make great forward
strides, contributing notably to human welfare and progress, but
that it can appreciably improve the standards of the people of
the world as a consequence of this economic growth.
MKR. BOOITH: Thank you. 11r. Prime Minister,/ 0? e our colleagues asked
for your comment on the prospects for increased Australian
economic co-operation with Japan in, first, the development of
Australian mineral resources and, secondly, the general
development of South East Asia.
KR. HOLT: M1r. President, you are being very kind. There must be
a tough one or two stuck in that pack that you have there.
( laughter). . fof course, as I indicated earlier, have had a
remarkable growth of trade with Japan. It has multiplied by
four and a half timies, as I have said, since the early fifties.
But, even at that, wie believe wie are really just at the early
launching point of the trade between the two countries. 
Let me illustrate this for you b. .': hat is hap. ening with
respect to iron ore. are at the present time developing
great deposits in one part of .: estern Australia. It has been
estimated that there are 15,000 million to 18,000 million or
should I say billion, to make the figures miore intelligible
or 18 billion tons of good quality iron ore. And contracts
are currently held for somewhere in the neighbourhood of dollars
billion for the supply of this ore to Japan. That is just
one item which is only in the early stages. These are the initial
contracts which have been secured.
In some instances we shall require Japanese in association
with our ov. n and of that of other investing countries, most
notably the United States itself, particularly since soime strength
has been ijposed in the United Kingdon on further investment from
there. But we see, as I described it the other day, Mr. President,
the Australia of today is the sort of Pandora's box of mineral
wealth. There is hardly a week or a month which passes without
so,. e new mineral discovery of consequence coming to our notice.
And there are quite responsible people who predict that within a
measurable period of years our export inco... e from minerals will
exceed our export income from our traditional staple export, wool.
Now this should be not only a source of tremendous strength to us
but would assist in avoiding the sort of fluctuations in the
Australian economy which conditions of drought or lower world
prices for our primary product have brought to us.
We face a future in which Japan will figure prominently
and there is a very good basis for co-operation developing in the
trade field between the two countries.
KR. BOOTH: Kr. Prime Miinister, in my introductory remarks I am
afraid I gave my American colleagues more credit than they
deserved for the increase in population in your country. But
there are two questions in that area. To what extent did American
servicemen contribute to your population increase? ( laughter).
And do you favor any changes in your Immigration policy so as to
attract additional population from neighbouring Asian countries?
MR. HOLT: Mr. President, so far as I can gather, the American
forces were notably active but not notably productive. ( laughter).
( applause).
MR. BOOTH: The second, I am not sure you need to answer it after that
answer, sir. ( laughter. But do you favour any changes in your
Immigration policies/ s to attract additional population from
neighbouri . g Asian countries?
MR. HOLT: . iell, . uhrr esident, the sting was in the tail, of
course. have/ stablished Immigration policy but it has been
reviewed frcm time to time. And it is operating, I think, not
unsatisfactorily at the present time. I made a few liberalizations
myself, of not very extensive kinds, but at least they
were :. oves which I ino; gave considrable pleasure in the
countries of Asia. One -was to establish the same period of
naturalization for non-Europeans as well as for buropeans. -, e
do admit for a number of purposes people fro::, Asia and those who
have had a period of residence of five years or more can aply
for naturalization. 
11.
Any non--European who iarries an Australian spouse, a male or a
f~ male, as the case may be, beco;-mes eligible for citiz3nship
of the country and the children of that mArriage, of course,
enjoy full Australian citizenship.
We have at the present time well over 11,000 Asian
students in our vaLous schools and universities. And i know
that the governments of the countries from which these students
come do not favour any change in our iruaigration policy which
would have the effect of enabling a considerable proportion of
these or sone significant number of these to remain in Australia
rather than to go back to the country which needs their skilled
servizes so very much.
But these are matters which can be talked over quite
calmly and sensibly between us. It is well recognized that the
Australian policy is based on the desirability of maintaining
a homogeneu population that can integrate one element with
another. are currently, of course, attracting migrants from
many countries of Europe and we have quite a task at this period
of our history in successfully integrating. And I think we have
been doing it successfully and the people from so many other
countries who have to develop familiarity with the Australian
scene. But as our position in Asia increases from time to timae,
no doubt, there will be a desirability to have skilled people.
Special projects will call for soze presence of executives or
even a labour shortage could produce some need for a modifieation,
temporary or otherwise.
These things, I repeat, are all capable of being
handled within the ambit of the programme. There is some
flexibility given to the department for the permanent admission
of people who have special distinctions and skills. And it may
interest you to know that the permanent condactor of the Sydney
Symphony Orchestra is a very delightful person who an
American negro. And so there it in. ic are able/ t ese ways,
I think, to administer our programiae with humanity and with
good serse.
1R. BOCCM. Pr. Prime Ei ister, there is as much interest in
Indonesia a number of questions. I think I shall ask them all
at once so that you can expostulate generally on your feeling
about Indonesia because tine presses us.
Q. The first is. Please, a word about Indonesian
development from the Prime liinister, of a country once fearful
of Sukarno's expansionism. And the next one. hat is your
view of Indonesia's greatest present need? And third. In what
way can or sho. d oestern countries assist economic rehabilitation
in Indonesia, especially how should Australia? And
fourth, Considering the recent changes in the
Indonesian GovernLat, how would you characterize present
Indonesian-Australian relations? 
-v
12.
MR. HOLT: izj. President, if I tried to answer in general terms
I think it will cover the questions which are raised.
14e in Australia have always attached great importance
to friendly relations, co-operative relations with our
nearest neighbour, Indonesia, which is literally only a matter
of minutes flying time, at least, these days from the
No: othern mainland of our country. And even througi the period
in which Australian troops have been engaging Indonesian troops
on the border of Borneo, we have kept a line of friendly contact
going with them. Now the extent of the communist purge which
has occurred in Indonesia has yet to be either evaluated in
numbers or in consequence. I have here estimates which have
ranged from low field, 300,000, to high field, about a million,
of the figures of those who were liquidated in the communist
purge. And I think one can reasonably assume from that there
has been a re-orientation of policy in Indonesia.
Now while we may not ourselves approve of the methods,
at least if Indonesia is turning towards more co-operative
relationships with those of us who are in the free world camp,
then I think that can greatly improve the general prospect of
stability and progress in South East Asia generally. And the
country, as I said earlier, is tremendously rich in resources.
T know from discussions I have had with some of the entrepreneurs
from your country that provided they could see a period of
stability ahead and faithful dealing froma the government, then
they would be encouraged to make substantial investment of the
developmental kind in that country.
The future of Indonesian international policy is not
so clearly to be seen. Quite certainly, it wouldn't be linking
up with that of cori. unist China. I should think it would
probably seek or pursue a nonaligned role. But there has oeen
over recent times such a display of friendship from Indonesia to
Thailand, for example, and the talks regarding the ending of
confrontation with Malaysia were conducted in such a friendly
atmosphere that ' ie are hopeful that at no distant point of time,
providing we go ahead with developments like ASPAC for cooperative
economiic purposes in the region, that Indonesia would
find itself attracted to membership of such company.
But it is a hopeful sign and I should have put it on the
score earlier of the things which the United States is playing,
that its policy in South East Asia has secured. If there had not
been a resolute, continuing presence of United States strength
in South Viet Nan, we would never, in my judgment, have secured
the outcome which has occurred in recent time in Indonesia.
MR. BOO Mr. Prime Minister, we have had these wide-ranging
questions of viorld import. But there are plenty of us in this
audience who write for newspapers in tovns such as Fargo, North
Dakota, in the great plains of Canada, Topeka, Kansas, . here
wheat is big, sir do you feel that the world price of wheat is
being held down by the operation of the United States export
subsidy?
MI. HOLT: vell, I would like to turn that one over to my
colleague, Deputy Prime 1, lLister John chwen, the Leader of the
Country P; arty in the coalition government which I have the
honour to lead. 
13.
I an sure that John ;. ould say that the price of wheat
is too low. I don't know how many causes he would ascribe to
this, but anything any of you gentlemen can do to assure not
only a better price for wheat but for sugar and a few other of
these basic primary commodities, will be greatly welcomed by
the Holt Government in Australia. ( laughter). ( applause).
MR. BOOTH: There are many other great questions that I wish we
could ask, but we can't because, as you see, time presses us,
Ihen I introduced this table I purposely failed to introduce a
distinguished member of this club : who sits here. , ie have a
little ceremony coming up. Roy Macartney, who is a member of
this club, known to most of you out there, greatly admired and
loved, is the correspondent of the Melbourne Age of Melbourne,
Australia. Not only is he a great reporter, he is a great tennis
player, And he has just won the National Press Club tennis
championship. And I shall ask Mr. Macartney to come to this
place and the Prime Minister of Australia . ill award him the
trophy. Mr. Macartney.
MvR. HOLT: Mr. Roy Macartney, I offer congratulations not only from
myself, which is purely a personal matter, but froim the rmembers
of this club for this notable achievement marking yet another
Australian triumph in the field of tennis. It couldn't have been
more timely, gentlemen, because for the first time in living
memory there is no Australian in the quarter finals at . iimbledon.
And so Roy, you have kept the tennis reputation of Australia
high. I don't know how you've managed it with all these
penetrating dispatches that I have been reading back home from
your pen. But it just shows that the versatility of the
Australian abroadis something which has to be seen to be believed.
I now present to you this trophy. I don't know whether it is
do you have to win it three years too?-
iMR. BOOTH: No, it is his.
HOLT: ® Ie. l l, here you are. And unless he finds out by some
other process the editor of your paper will not discover this
rather this rather uncomfortable secret, as I imagine it to be.
Gentlemen, I am sure we all join . n applauding a great Australian
athlete, I give you Mr. Roy Macartney.
MR. MACARTUEY: Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister. It is quite
a handsome trophy. It would have been more decorative, perhaps,
if it was one of your swimming companions. Thank you very much.
R. BOOTH: It just shows how snart these Australians are. The
Prime Minister anticipated my last question but he may have some
notion after having just presented this trophy. Mr. Prime
Minister, what is your government doing about getting one of
your players into the finals at iiibledon?
KR. HOLT: dell, I think . e will demand a replay or else submit it
to the United Nations, something of that sort, vr. President.
MR. BOOTH: Thank you, sir.
MR. HOLT: Thank you very much. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 60. . o
CANBERRA
BOMBING OF HANOI AND HAIPHONG. 8
STATEMENT BY THE ACTI G PRI', MINISTER. THE RIGHT
HON. J. McEN, 1I. P.
The Acting Prime Minister said this morning that the
Australian Government fully supports American policy on South
Viet Nam. As the Prime Minister has indicated in W. ashington,
the action to bomb oil installations on the outskirts of Hanoi
and Haiphong arose from a military assessment, which the
Australian Government accepted, of the needs of the situation,
since these supplies contributed importantly to the capacity
of the enemy, including their capacity to operate destructively
against Australian and allied forces.
The Australian Government was aware of the decision
to strike the oil installations. The nature of discussions on
such operational matters are, of course, confidential between
the Governments concerned.
CANBERRA, June, 1966. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. Na. 61/ 1966.
GRANT FOR CO1MONiEALTH GAIES
STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER,
THE RIGHT HON. J. McEWEN, M. P.
The Right Honourable J. LicEwen, Acting Prime Minister,
today announced that the Commonwealth Government would make
a grant of $ 16,000 towards sending the Australian Team to the
British Empire and Commonwealth Games to be held in Jamaica
in August. Mr. McEwen stated that this was in line with the
Commonwealth Government's general policy of encouraging
interest in and giving a lead to public support for Australian
participation in Commonwealth and Olympic Games. The
Commonwealth Government has provided assistance of this kind
for the Commonwealth Games since 1934 and for the Olympic
Games since 1920.
CANBERRA, 1st July, 1966. AA 



PRi ii IT ISTER'S VIS. IT TO U. S. . IND U. K.
Press Conference gaivte, n by thToe Primee . inister,
Mr. Harold Holt, B. alta ir THouse,., ashinton. 1st July, 1966.
Q. ' ould you sum up how your feel about this visit?
HR. HOLT: Mr. Cox, as you know, mjy rain pu. rpose in co:: ing to
iashington was to establish a closer working relationship .;: ith
the President and senior mei. bers of his Administration, I think
it can be fairly clai., ed that this objective has been completely
satisfactory and successful viewed from . y standpoint. Certainly
I have been shown a '. ar kindness and generosity of reception,
and in my discussions I have found all those with w-hom I have
talked forthcoming in giving me whatever infori.: ation was sought
from them. i have had some very useful discussions with some of
the leading members of the Administration, and these will be
helpful not only to a better ! nderstanding c United States policy
as it applies henceforth, but I will have a background to
developments as they occur from now on.
I am the more strongly persuaded than ever that the
President is making every conceivable effort to secure a peaceful
outcome to the struggle in South Viet larn, but I an also firi; ly
clearly of the mind that his own resolution remains unwavering,
and in that he has the full support of his colleagues. That is
the strong impression I have gained from my talks with him.
Q. iir, Prime Minister, there is some oriticism in Australia
in one or two newspapers and in one or two political quarters that
you are being too fulsome about American policy. Any cormment?
MR. HOLT: w. ell, if I am fulsome, I believe we have every reason to
be. If Australia cannot be appreciative of what Am. erica has
meant to our country in terms of security and coradeship, then
there is little room for gratitude left in the world. That does
not mean that we have to agree at all tii: es vitheverything that is
done or said, but what it does mean, that there is a basic friendship
and comradeship between us which surmounts any minor
differences which may arise from time to time in sole aspect of
government..
Q. Mr. Prime . inister, may I ask so: ething going to the
point of how, much consultation there is between the two
governments? For instance, on the decision to bomb Hanoi and
Haiphong, were you informed just as the planes :, ere about to
take off or did you have enough advance notice that you could
express your views?
im. HOLT: / e had enough advance notice,
Does that mean, sir, before you left Australia? 
JEHO: ell, I ao not '. znt to go ilto detail about -hat is
obviously highly confidential discussions botween goverm.-ents.
Iaade the poijnt before to you that from-thile tiLe I took oflice,
President Johnson made it knov. n to i; C that he wished the sale
intimate basis of consultation ;' hich has developed between Sir
Robert lenzies and himself to continue, and that has been the
situation bet&gt;-. en us, .; hat this visit has done has been to put
all those intimate consultations into a frame'w. ork of personal
association. oes thAt mean, Lr. Prim. e minister, it is between the
President and the Prime linister, or on the State -epartrient
Lxternal Aifairs level? Just the machinery, I mean?
il. IHOLT: .1ell, there are at timnes coL: L:, unications which remain
on a President to Prime linister basis. . ie both have the
responsibilities of final judgment and leadership in our
respective Adm. inistrations. There are other occasions and other
topics on which clearly discussion inside the Australian
Government is sought and it occurs from, timie to tine.
Q. Are your talks this week, sir, in anything of the nature
of decisions on any points or understandings?
IR. HOLT: Iell, they haven't been talks on mere generalities or
exoressions of good ill, however sincere and desirable, There
have been some good working sessions on matters in which we are
both interested, but I an afraid i cannot develop the themes.
Q. 1r. Prime lii: ister, could you give us your appraisal
of' the situation in ca. munist China, and to -hat degrce it is
now affecting the situation in Viet 11am? Do you think there are
any efforts to, ards peace?
1i2. HOLT: ell, I an not sure that I apprehend the -iuestion
completely. I do not think anyone can have a very authoritative
view at the present time as to just ,. hat is happening inside
cona; unist China, In fact, I doubt whether the couunist leaders
themselves can have a very clear view of all the currents that
apear to be swirling around in that country There appear to be
significant changes occLr. rn g, and this is s-,: mething quite
distinct fro-the ideological conflict or tacticl conflict that
has been going on between China and Soviet icussia. ., ith an
ageingleader in China, it appears th!. t there are forces working
towrds the' day *; hen soxc change in leadership will occur. But
ho.: far there are fundamental policy changes, it -wo! ald take
somileone mnore highly specialized in analy. sis of the China
situation than myself to answer that question.
r. Prime i iter, has yo-r visit to , ashington sho* wn
you any wvay in w; hich lustralia can take initiative to! wards peace
in Viet Nan?
LR. HOUP: I do not think so. It is well kno-', n that we supoort
the efforts for peace. There has been : o indication that any
level the Hanoi Govern.:. ent old be receptive to a peace move.
Australians aLe a friendly people and a conciliatory people. 
( Mr. Holt contd)
I think th: Kt they 1ould be Jlad to join in mny capacity in the
task of securing pieace, if this co-ld be negotiated, but there
is no fresh initiative that seti. is possible aa-si leD, ean Ruskl
puts it, the other fellow keeps hanging up the phone.
Q. He said this in Canberra yesterday?
HOLT: Yes.
Q. sir, does the oosition of 1Australia in firx support of
the United States policy in Viet 1Nani have any overtones for you
when you have you, discussions with Prime inister ilson in
London next week? . ill there be an effort at persuasion wIade
there?
vMR. HOLT: NO. I look fo2rw; ard to hav. i. ng a very frank and full
discussion with Prime ister dilbson. It goes without saying
that it w1ill be a friendly discussion, and it would be a sad day
in the affairs of our two countries :. hen ie could not speak
frankly to each other, exhibiting those in which ve can find full
agreeiment and those in which so. e dizferences nmay exist. I do
notrayself forsee difficulties in discussion, but they , would be not
worth the journey from the distance th t I have ,: iade if they were
not to be in fact frank and searching discussions. I am sure : e
shall have those.
Q. Do your talks give you any
MR. HOLT: I was going to make a com. ent about the introductory
part of your question. I don't know ;. hether I have yet miade it
sufficiently clear in this country that Austrlia's attitude in
relation to same is not merely a process of following in the wake
of American policies. That ' ustralia has seen the struggle in
South Viet NThim as Jrore directly involving it ththe United States
itself. I think it is an act of far-sighted statesmanship for the
United States to join in the resistance to aggression there, but
if there were not champions on the nainland of . isia, then
Australia and i. any other countries would feel far less secure
than they uo at this tim-e. And so vie have quite an independent
judgment which fortunately leads us to the sam. e conclusions as
those which have been reached by the United States.
Have your talks given any indication at all whether a
terination of the war can be measured in terms of years or
nonths?
MR. HOLT: iell, I will put it in a slightly difrerent v. a y. I find
rather more optimismi here, as I did in Canberra, than I have
known at any earlier point of time as to the outcom. e. But I
think it is best that i don't put a tine factor too precisely in
this sort of thing, but undoubtedly there is a feeling hicm -; as
reflected by the Foreign iIinisters and others at the SEATO
Conference coming frc.; the area them , selves, and I find that
reflected also hc; re in .: ashinrgton at all levels where I have held
discussions.
Q. Even amfong the critics of the Johnson Adinistration,
sir? 
Ii7~.~-TO'iP: NO, o, w s) e-k--ng of' tihose inside thed~~ trt n
P:., rhaps there hasn' t bEen tiim-e or perhaps peo_,. le are rather too
polite ,, hcn they encounter
I know1M, sir.
x. R HOLY: But Ihaven't touched off a debate on this iiatcr
Q. I notice SOf&gt; O-. of the Luests at dinner parties have
included strong critics of the Johnson Adxiinistration. I , onder
whether you had any chance " or argurment?
M. HOLT: No, I haven't had and they haven't soughtu to Y.; ake an
argument of it. At the -, h. ite House luncheon I thinik sittin-g
immiediately opposite was . senator Fuibric-ht, but he made his
vie-. w1s kno clearly a;-n d vigorously enough.
Q. Did you get across to him, sir, how m71any troops there
are? Did you -et across to himi imany Au stralian troops are
in action?
M. HOLT: I aim: still fi-nding it a little diflicult to ha--ve people
realize that -' astralia is not represented m-, erely iLn Viet NHa;;, and
1 have been rather surprised to learn the extent of ignor. ance in
relation to the .,, ustralian population. -iiven our good friend the
President yesterday ga,: ve an enlarger., ent to the point that as a
form---er ImiliAgratioi i-nister th-t delighted ebut I found in a
numerofplaces som, e surprise th't A1-, stralia has as yet only
reached eleve n and a half iimillion peo. ple. It is rather
flatte really, because -, wec appepar to make a big--er noise
than that. Did I understand you to say, sir, that you find i~ t a
little difi'icult to ire upon peo. ple that lustralians are
actually fijghting in Viet NaLLI?
1IR. HOLT: Oh, No,, N\ o, that ' usti:-lans are at other points around
S3octh Last Alsia.
Q. Yes.
1M. HOLT: For examj-, ple, w., e have trcoops in .' est . Ilays ia, wehave
theia in Borneo, . e halve them at Ubon, in ThaiL3:. nd. have
responsibilities in respect of Papus and iJew Guine3a, land. u ha-. ve
a requja-ehment to use superior trained regular service i~ icn for the
expansion of our oiwn forces both in the regular ariy units and
the civilian m-i litary force, the CuPT as w., e call it.
No%' w, all of the gocner-, lr of newispapr knws bu
it, that kustralia ha,; s a task l'orce of four and a hal:,; f thousand
in South Vict Niami and th: ot-doesn't seim very but as a
force of regular ; e-ta uLtroops, thcludiiug the Il1ational
~~ ervice re -otpon ngtie t the num,--bers up, nd hay rig
regard to the rotatl-nml aspect of that service, this is not
wit'hout so:: e stress on our failrly 1lmited resources. But w e
have shown ourselves in a sitaation of' need. 71Jis has been
dePmonstrutuAd ccrtailyl in thc. tx, o world wars, ofi supjyi-ng that
neud i-Jhen it is rcequired of us. 
( MR. Holt contd j.
I think that it is wel recognized now by the Ad. miniistration
here that Australia does h . ve a problem of development as . veli
as a need to supply forces in the defence fiuid. There is I
think as a result of the discussions we have held from the
begiining of t'iis year on.,. rc:-s a recognition that these
development tasks do create demands on our rescurces -which place
some li. it on our capacity in other directions.
I don't knovi whether I have : uoted to you before the
figure of savings in consumption in Australia, which amount to
about 28 per cent of our gross national incom: e, and in the
United States and Great Britain there is a with-holding frcm
consumption of about 17 to 18 per cent as against 28 in Australia,
and ours is the highest figure of any country in the world with
the exception of Japan, so that we are using our own resources
and abstaining fr'm consumption of -what ie produce ourselves,
in order to develop and defend.
Q. Could you expand a little on what makes the situation
look a little brighter in South Viet -Nam?
IR. HOLT: ,' ell, a combination of factors. I think the military
operations themselves are proving much more effective. The
defection rate is quiite significant. There is more information
being gathered which is enabling more effective military actions
to follow up. I think that the political situation has
brightened internally, at least to the extent that Prime Minister
Ky is coming through his trouble with the buddhists rather better,
I think, than i: ost observers had expected. shall still watch
with interest the ej. ergence of the Assembly, the constituent
Assembly, following its elections, and no doubt there '.-ill be
political problems associated :. ith the drafting of a constitution.
But there Is am; ongst the diplomatic and ilitary representatives
not only of the United States, but of Viet Nam, of our owm
country and other countries represented there, a feeling that
significant progress is being maie both in the military field,
in the organization of the country, and with sa: Te improvement in
the political atmosphere.
I think, too, there are portents around the area in
other countries '. which have their own significance. I firmily
believe that you would not h:. ve had develop on the scale and the
man!-er that it did the action against co. mmLunis in Indonesia,
if there had been a general feeling in Indonesia that co. ~. munism
was going to win in -sia, and the announcement of military
participation by Thailand, the final discussion/ fe Philippines
to make engineers and security forces available, I think these
things all reflect the assess: ments v. hich governments of both
countries : make of the situation.
Q. Did you get any kind of clues about the kind of
government in South Viet Nanm vhich would be tolerated by
Australia ancd iAerica, in the event of elections or in the
event of a pacification, especially the election' 
6.
fi. HOLT: I do not think it is for ~ s to try to dict.' to a for21
01 i&amp; overi-ment. . hat is dlesired, I think, is a govcrniwint
capablo of' rumni!_ ig the country cffectivuly, protecting
individual liberties, providing for an ii1roved cconlO-. ic
manageTment and 30is.,., 74 standal-ds that ' s the sort of
government thlat 6o, -th Viet 1Llai; a is looking f or. Until the
railitar, operati,_ ns can be broi.--h: t succeLssful_ lfy~ tU 1f
ccai-ly you ar-e going tr) have a strong 1m. ilitary influence in any
governr~ ent hihMay be œ! med.
P-i-e Ivinst r, it is 1O. OC o'clock, so I think it Ls
bes t ~ eshoudid close.
HC. Thank you for the very generous cover that you have
Liven to our' visit here, That ccrtainly helped toy ards ma. I~ kin-g
it i: orc sacccssful. 



6/ 00
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 63/ 1963
APPOINTMENT OF ACTING MINISTER FOR CIVIL
AV IATI UN
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon,
John Mckwen, MP..
As has already been announced, the Minister for
Civil Aviation, the Hon. R. W. C. Swartz, is
to lead the Parliamentary delegation to South Asia. The
delegation leaves on 5th July and will visit Pakistan, India,
Afghanistan, Nepal and Ceylon.
During Mr. Swartz's absence, the Minister for
Customs and Excise, Senator the Hon. Ken Anderson, will act as
Minister for Civil Aviation.
CANBERRA, 4th July) 1966 



66/ 106
PRIM MIINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND U. K.
News Coi-ferencc given by the PrimoL . iister. r.
Harold Holt, at the ' aldorf-Astoria Hotel,
New York. July, 1966.
MR. HOLT2: Ladies and Gentlemen, I am not proposing to make any
special statements of policy. WVhen this gathering was mooted
and we were discussing the arrangements in Canberra it was
thought that it might provide a useful round-up opportunity,
particularly for our own Australian press and for any others
sufficiently interested to come alongi I an largely in your
hands and I think that would be the best way to go about our
business if I could turn it over to you for any queries you
might wish to put to me,
Following are the questions then put to the Prime
Minister and his replies:-
Q. vvhat likelihood is there of any immediate increase in
the number of A ustralian troops to Viet Nam?
MR. HOLT: The Australian situation is that Australia is
represented as you may know at a number of different points
in South East Asia. , ie are in Malaysia. , ie are in Ubon in
Thailand. / iea re in both West Malaysia and Borneo. At the time
when the task force component was worked out that fitted in with
the phasing which had been decided for the buildup of our own
regular forces. 4e need many of the regular arrmy people for use
in training the expansion of our military forces. So far as we
have decided the matter, that is the Australian contribution,
and there is no proposal before me that this should be increased.
Q. , ill Australians be released from Malaysia for service
in Viet Nam
MR. HOLT: Service in Malaysia and South Viet Nam is, of course,
rotational it's not just the one group of fellows they have
to be rotated after their tour of duty.
Q. Might some of those serving be transferred to Viet Nam?
MR. HOLT: You mean those in Australia?
Q. No, sir, those released from Malaysia might they
be transferred to Viet Nam?
MR. HOLT: 4e have yet to see how soon they can be released because
I do not regard the issue there as being settled sufficiently
for us to make any significant transfer of forces, but we are
going ahead with our normal movements there subject to further
discussions which might arise as the position clarifies, itself. 
What is the Australian Government's attitude towards
the bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong?
MR. HOLT 77e mad~ e it quite clear-that V~ c &amp;, ccopted the judZ ment
that this wis a military necessity I immediately spoke to that
effect in Wvashington and since then my colleagues in Canberra
have confirmed that view.
Q. Earlier today you appeared to critise the handling of
news of the w--ar in Viet Nam. WIould you amplify this please?
MR. HOLT: All Administrations get their share of criticism. No,
I was pointing to the unfortunate consequences I saw of inadequate
presentations. No one objects to criticism provided it is
balanced in the complete coverage of news presentation but is has
seemed to me that the emphasis in the daily reporting here is
understandably on the more dramatic, episodic events. There has
been very little presentation of the raore constructive side of
activities in South Viet Nam itself. From my own knowledge of
them and as I was informed while in South Viet Nam, all the
military forces there are including in their progranu--es civic
action, rural development and village policies. All these are
aimed at assisting the villagers. MLeore significant is the growth
of co-operation amrong the various countries of South East Asia
which have felt the cormaunist threat either, as in the case of
South Korea, in resisting actual aggression or, as in the Thailand
of today, responding to the or essaur's which might produce
infiltration or disturbance inside that country. W, e have been
strengthened and given time in which to build our economil. s,, and
build our defences as a result of the American participation in
South Viet Nam. This, I think, has been inadequately recognised
so far. 1V understand you have invited President Johnson to
visit Australia. Can you tell us his reply?
DIR. HOLT: I get the impression he would like to do this but he
has not been able to indicate anything specific to me. The
invitation is Open and he would be welcome at any time.
Q. Do you consider the bombing of installations in Hanoi
and Haiphong dangerous?
121. HOLT: I do not look on it as seriously as you seem to imply
because I think it is a natural consequence if you are involved
in operations of w . ar. Of all installations I would have thought
them one of the most obvious targets if you were to inhibit the
activities of your enemy. This plan of action was very carefully
thought out and very carefully rehearsed in order to cause the
, minimum damage to the civilian community. The consideration
which the United States has shown in these military operations
goes beyond anything we knew in the second world war where titare
were programmes of mass bombing of civilian communitics designed
either to discourage cr destroy substantial elements of the
civilian population. I think your own government has conducted
itself with restraint, having regard to the ext~ nt of its
involvement in the issue there. 
Q. It is re orted that 112 Qonservatives in the British
Parliament have signed a motion officially deploring Prime
Minister Wilson's criticism of the Hanoi-Haiphong bombing
calling it anl abandonment oi the U. S. and I quLote here
11detriental to the safety of American, Australian and New
Zealand troops." Do you wish to comment?
MR. HOLT: No, I do not. I am looking forward to my talks with the
Prime Minister. I am quite certain that that is the most
satisfactory way of getting a clear indication of his own views.
He has his probler,. s and 1 sh ). ll be interested to hear from hin
what he can tell me about the British position.
Q. There are reports that I believe have been published in
Australia that Australian ground troops are going to be sent to
Thailand. Can you tell us anything of this?
MR. HOLT: I am not able to comiment on~ th-is. There are always in
existence military plans directed at contingencies and I am not
iire'n. red to coiment on 9ny ivirticular situatition. Tf we were to
make a statemenLt on a matter of that sort it would be as a
consequence of a Cabinet discussion and I am not here at this
time to make policy statements for the government.
Q. Are you going to discuss with Prime Minister vIilson the
question of sending British troops to Viet Nam?
MR. HOLT: I am not going to speculate on the area of discussion
with Mr. Vdlson. I oto not think he would appreciate it and I
would not appreciate it if somebody did that to me.
Q. Not long ago the press here was subject to a different
criticism of the Viet Nam coverage ' by the National Students
Association. It sent three of its members to Viet Nam on a three
weeks inspection trip. 14hen they returned they were concerned
about the social and other effects of the American presence there.
12. HOL: Well the first thing that struck me when I went to South
Viet Nam was how different the spectacle and the atmosphere VW: rX from
w., hat I would have believed to be the case from the day-to-day
reporting of the episodes. For example in Saigon itself
a city of ,, ore than 2 million people the citizens go about
their occasions seemingly unperturbed or undisturbed by the fact
that this is a theatre close to military operations and subject
itself to some terrorist incidents. Quite obviousli you could
not have something on the scale of American participation with
a country of Viet Nam's limited size without there being some
impact on cornmunity life. J.. ith an army force of this kind you
get pressures on the price level and goods tend to becomescarce
in some directions. There are frictions that build up
between some members of the local community and those of the
military force even if it is only the friction of the fellow who
does not like to see his girl with a GI when he thinks she
should be with him. had a very welcalie presence of Americans
in Australia during the years of the second world war but it
created a few social problems. Thuse things are inevitable but
I did not myself find any atmosphere of resentment to this
although there are political difficulties which have been well
advertised. 
The experience I had was one of appreciation for the American
presence. Although political difficulties existed I did not
encounter any atmosphere of anybody wanting to support the
communists. They were agreed that the commnists had to be
resisted and the major part the Arfericans were playing in
producing this result was welcomed.
Q. You have referred to the inadequate presentation by
the American press of the Viet Nam war news.. uould you say the
same criticism applied to the Australian press?
lir. HOLT: It was not a gsreral refcrence I said that in soLie
directions i found this to be the case. I am not a newspaper
man and I never have been, but I have had enough to do with
them over 30 years of public life to have a fair idea of what
they regard as good copy and what they do not. As I said a
little earlier in the day at lunch good news tends to be no news
in the eyes of people who want to present the news in a way
attractive to the readership. But that should not stand in the
way of thoughtful, intelligent -Members of the comnunity setting
about gettin. g the complete picture. Now I think the Europeans
have not caught on to what is emerging in Asia. I think one of
the great exciting stories of history is what is going to happen
there over the next 30 to 40 years and the basis of friendsnip
which is emerging among the countries which have felt themselves
threatened by conmunist expansion. This is leading to cooperative
efforts, to econolaic arrangements, which, taken
together, are likely to have soae stimulating effect throughout
Asia as a whole. That is why I put the point a little earlier
today that thoughtful and intelligent Chinese seeing these things
happen have got to make up their minds whether they modify their
policy so as to be part of this process of economic growth or
whether they are going to remain isolated from it and indeed even
regard it as hostile, . e may be not far from some critical
judgment from that quarter. They must be thinking hard about it.
Q. Are the restrictions on the outfow of capital
( inaudible)
T. M. HOLT: Jeli, fortunately up till now-the volxe of capital
inflow has been well sustained. On the last figures I saw it
looked as though the fiscal year just concluded would have
embraced a record capital inflow to the country. At the time
I brought in the budget last year as Treasurer we thought there
could be a decline as much as dollars Australian 200 million in
our reserves and some commentators were putting the figure at
dollars Australian 400 million and higher in the end result
we got to about a break-even point. The latest figures might
even show us to be up a little on the year. I think the
figures I saw were for June 6 or 8 but they are the latest
igures I have as of now. It was directly a product of an
improved export return despite a drought affected year and the
strength of capital inflow. I said earlier today that in V.
experience if the bait is sufficiently attractive ( I won't
say the fish coue to the bait, but) investuent capital comes
to the attraction. I would confidentlY expect this capital
inflow to be sustained becaLse wc are finding a growing interest.
As I. mentioned earlier today, even sa-c of your own people are
wanting to coae and settle with us. 
Undoubtedly the interest arising out of some of these major
projects is capturing the imagination of people who have
inherited an American pioneer tradition.
Q. ( Inaudible) About European aid for South-East Asia.
MR. HOLT: I do not think that Western Europe generally is giving
the assistance it should. There are some 324 countries that
was the last count I had, giving material aid of one kind or
another to South Vietnam. Some, of course, are providing
military aid, but it is broadly true to say that I think the
major effort has been left to the United States of America and
if the United States of America were not doing the job, I do not
think Western Europe could afford to neglect it. In other
words, if we were using the blunt language to which Australians
are sometimes alleged to be given it could be said that
Western Europe is in effect " coasting" on the United States of
America in South-East Asia.
Q. Coasting?
MR. HOLT: Coasting, yes. A sort of word that comes from Wild
Colonial Boy.
~~~ wthin Britain is going to reduce its forces East of Suez
witinthe next few years what plans are you making to fill
this gap?
MR. HOLT: I think Mr. Wilson made his Government's position clear
on that. The forces were built up to meet the confrontation
situation in Malaysia. In Mr. Healey's defence paper and in
subsequent statem. ents the British Government has made it clear
that there would be some reduction of forces once the
confrontation issue was disposed of. I am not stating these
matters in any way that has not already been indicated by a
spokesman for the United Kingdom Government.
Q. ( Inaudible) About United Kingdom cotribution in
South-East Asia.
MR. HOLT: The United Kingdom, as is well known to the United
States, has played a large part in maintaining stability in
South-East Asia. Great Britain had substantial forces thereeven
at the pre-confrontation level they were substantial.
It maintains the Naval Base in Singapore and it has
permanent establishments at Butterworth and elsewhere. it
has Naval Units, Air Force Units and so on. The British
decision was to expand, I thint it was ZS2m. a year in that
area, or that formed part of its planning. I think that
figure is right, but I am drawing on my own recollection..
I think this was after all what part of the argument was about
in the recent dcebate in the Labor Party rooms.
Q. Also inaudible on United Kingdom aid.
MR. HOLT: Well, Britain is quite obviously making a substantial
contribution not only in military sense but in international
aid in various forms. There is a United Kingdom contribution,
for example, to the Asian Development Bank. 
I think... of-cottries of Western Europe I an not going to
specify them-that were given the substanital American
assistance that enabled them to get back on their feet
economically after the second world war, and which I believe are
not now carrying their share of the tremendous tasks ahead in
helping to solve the problems facing what amounts to one half
of the human race at the present time... and which will grow into
a bigger proportion in the years ahead.
Q. Are there any avenues for peace in Vietnam which to your
way of thinking have not yet ' been explored?
TMR. HOLT: First of all I believe that the United States Governmient
has pursued every avenue that has come to its thinking. There
have been attem~ pts by a variety of people in a variety of ways and
none of them have so far produced even the slightest encouragement
that a negotiation is likely to occur. As Minister for Labour,
I had many years negotiating with commiunist-led unions and I
have watched since the time of the Berlin Airlift and before, the
way in which co,-imaunists conduct themselves. You sometimes find,
you know, that even when you are in what seems to be a complete
impasse that when they colae to their decision that it is time to
do something about it without regard to logic or to consistency
or what has been said previously, you can get a sudden and quite
dr'amatic switch in the position which had been formerly taken up.
If the communists come to the conclusion that they are backing a
loser by pursuing their present lines of policy thnen I do not
think they wo. lid be too much troubled by whCet had been said
previously in changing their policy.
Q. Are you optimistic for the iimediate future?
1, R. HOLT: I ama always optimistic No, I am not expressing any
early optimism about this. I say it is unpredictable really
but on the way that trends are developing I would say it was
becoming increasingly costly to the future of the corimunist
world to persist with the belligerent and non-co-operative
attitude, that ' Sall. I say that measuring the pluses and
minuses, I think there is an accumulating evidence that the
debits are outweighing whatever credits they feel that they might
be gaining from it. I mean the situation in Africa, the
situation in Asia, the spectacle of the free world going more rapidly
ahead with economic development all these, I think, are factors
which mst be making the cormmunist leadership think hard about
where they are going.
Q. I would like to get back to press coverage... you left
the impression that outside of the European press that there is
no intelligent, thoughtful reporting. Is that what your
impression is?
' MR. HOLT: Not from the press generally. I thought in " ashington
we had a good coverage from the press aidd the points I was
trying to make about the significant developments in South East
Asia were well taken up there. V'le had, I thought, a reasonable
press coverage in San rancisco but it has not been so easy to
get that story across in New York. As I mentioned earlier
today I have seen several stories in which space has been given
to the banner holders without mauch space being given to those
who are trying to point up the encouraging or positive
developments in South East Asia. 
1AR. EGGLETON: Mr. Rayment would you like to put your question
again please. I do not think the Prime Minister quite got
the point you were trying to bring out about the coverage
of the news in Viet Nam.
MR. RAYMENT: ( New York Times) Did I take it that you said you
regarded the European press as having a sounder itpproach to
the Viet Nan war coverage?
MR. HOLT: Oh, No, No, I'm not putting that, I think probably
there is less space given in the European press to what I
call the positive and constructive aspects of what is
happening, not only in Viet Nam one of my criticisms is
that too much concentration is being given to what's
happening in Viet Nam to the exclusion or comparative
exclusion of these quite significant developments. What
happened the other da~ y in Seoul was a very significant
development with nine countries getting together there from
around the area running from South Korea, Taiwan, the
Philippines, Thailand and Australia, New Zealand, Japan,
Malaysia this is all sufficiently novel, I think, to be
newsworthy. The Asian Development Bank itself this is a
product of Asian initiative, not the United States, and the
bulk of the capital is being subscribed from within Asia.
The Japanese providing or undertaking to provide a hundhed
million dollars or credits for South Korea is a significant
development. If these things could be interpreted as being
products whether intentionally or otherwise of United States
help in strengthening South East Asia, then the public,
I think, would begin to realise that out of the complex,
difficult, costly and rather confusing business going on in
South Viet Nam there are dividends accruing in other
directions. If you were not in South Viet Nan we would not
be able to go ahead the way that we are. I feel it should
bring encouragement to the people of this country to know that
they are not just spending their money and the cost of lives
fruitlessly. These things are producing a strengthening of
the wtoLe Asian position. I thinI4 they will have some
considerable impact on the way the world moves ahead. 



PRIAE MINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND U. K.
Speech given by the Prime Minister, ] Er. Harold
Holt, to the American-Australian Association
at the River Club. New York. July, 1966.
Thank you very much, MTr. President He nmanson, and
greetings again Governor Dewey, other distinguished guests and
gentlemen. I don't suppose there are many places around the world
where an Australian public figure can feel more at home than he
does when he comes into this room. You have reminded me that I have
had not only many free meals here Randal, but very pleasant ones
and to come back to you after a number of years in which I have
been Finance Iiiin ister of the Commonwealth and be able to say to
you, despite all, that they elected the old so-and-so unanimously
Prime Minister of Australia is a matter of great satisfaction to
me. Randal, your presence in this chair is a further
reflection of the warm-heartedness and friendship for Australia
of the American people. are out-nmbered, iaagine to the
order of at least seven, if not 10 to one, in this company today
by citizens of the United States. But that did not prevent them
recognising the wonderful work you have done in support of that
great man who laid so much of the basis of the co-operation
which has come to Australia from this organisation Floyd Blair.
They did not hesitate to look to you for the succession
when Floyd passed on and I refeat here publicly the
congratulations which I sent you privately at the time and I say
what a gracious gesture it was on the part of those whose
numbers were justified in maintaining an American in the chair,
that they recognised your own devotion to the purpose vhich this
organisation can so usefully serve.
Now you are all busy men and you don't want to hear a
lot of introductory comment from me but I shall tell you what I
have in mind to do in the time at our disposal. I gather it is
a little more elastic than usual because you are all expected to
be on holiday in any event. It is not only flattering to find
you coming along in such good number but reflective of the
growing sobriety , temperance and tolerance of the peo," le of this
great democracy that so many of you are here in good shape and
apparently having come through the July 4 week-end almost
unscarred. But we couldn't help in the date arrangement because
i was heimed in by the opening of SEATO last Monday ( June 27)
and I have to be back in Australia for Btdget discussions which
we will be having in our Cabinet in lit u.ñ e riore than a week's
time, with London ahead of LIe in between. It is rather
reflective of the shrinking world in which we live. 
Earlier in the year, I relmemaber having answered
questions in the House of Representatives up to 11.15 one
m-rorning and the next morning I was talking to our troops in
Saigon. It is actually a shorter distance fromi Darwin to Saigon
than it is from Brisbane to Perth. Your Dean Rusk was out with
us at the SEATO Conference. The next time I looked him up he
was talking to somae group, I think, in Korea. Anyhow he was
around that area of the world and although on the map there seem
to be great distances between us, we are all these days
remarkably close to each other. But even so, it is useful to
hbave the word from those who have come froma the sp. ot.
I am not going to talk a lot about Australia because you
have had in recent times two people who have, I am sure, spoken
in quite enthusiastic order of my country. Sir Henry Bolte, the
Premiier of Victoria, is always capable of stating with enthusiasm
the prospects for his own State and indeed for the nation as a
whole. Ie have a fellow who has succeeded quite remarkably in
represtnting three countries at oncewith the same devotion. That
is a chap named Clark who speaks with the same enthusiasm for the
United States, for Australia and for Texas, all of whom he
represents very ably indeed. So you don't want too much about
Australia but let me just say these few things quickly in passing.
vve have just had the first Y. ajor drought for just on 210
years, People had al~ iost begun to forget what occurred when you
had a drought. In other areas it is som~ ething of a rarity in
these more recent years but this one was a quite serious drought,
particularly in New South * iales and Victoria. On our latest
assessment the sheep population had fallen from 170 million to
157 million in the whole of Australia a drop of about 8 per
cent which means that New South qales caught it a good deal
harder than that. The cattle population of that State, which is
not one of the great cattle areas of Australia, dropped by just
on 25 per cent.
Now~ that all sounds pretty serious but the matter
worth recording for you is that we have just closed our 1965-66
fiscal year and I think our export receipts are within a
" Coo-eel' on just the wrong side. But they are very close to
being on the right side of the record export receipts that wie
have ever gained. That was in a quite fabulous year, 1963/ 64-,
when everything seemed to go right. If we can just about touch
that figure in a drought-affected year, vith rural income down
very considerably, that demonstrates how the diversification
of the Australian economy has taken a lot of the fluctuation out
of our eco-iomic affai-rs.
e hardly felt these fluctuations, employment remained
high all the time, there was a little dampening of customer
demand, particularly whore, say, farrm equipment wvas to be s. old
and that radiated out to the consumer area generaliy. Right
through it all, erpl%. yment was sustained at what you would
regard, I' m sure, as an over-full employment level, -,,* hich has
become pretty well standard with us in good times something
just over one per cent of registrations of the work force. 
The other thing that was interesting out of it was the
balance of payments. Ve had thought when we brought the Badget
down last year th., at they would show a substantial reduction by
the end. of the fiscal year. Some commentators put the figure as
. high as about dollars Australian 400 million but we thought in
the Treasury it could be up to dollars Australian 200 million.
The result, thanks to a strongly sustained capital inflow, plus
this good export experience and some drop in the level of iriports,
is that we have b. en able to keep our reserves just about where
they were 12 months ago, and that means in a very co-fortable
position for us.
Now the drought has left open the opportunity for a much
larger aereaWfor wheat this year. The land is rested and the
farmer looking for a quick cash crop in order to retrieve some of
his losses is turning to wheat for which there is a very strong
demand around the world, The acrcagunder wheat is expected to
rise from 16.9 to about 20.7 million acres.
Now I don't want to say anything very much more about
the Australian situation other than perhaps a word on capital
inflow. Some of you may have been concerned about this when
restraints were recommended in the United States and more
recently when a programme of monetary restraint was indicated by
the Govermnent of the United Kingdom. I have always held the
view myself that, provided the bait is strong enough or
attractive enough, the capital will come to the bait. There are
so many of you in this room that will know from the activities
of your ovn organisations that the bait is still a very
attractive one.
Capital inflow has, in point of fact, been at a record
level through the 12 months just under review. It is continuing
quite strongly and indeed as some of these project3 have come
into fruition and as the quite exciting story that will be told
of them around the world iakes itself more widely known, I
believe that this capital investment will tend to increase
rather than diminish.
The reflection of that which may interest you is to be
found in the Inigration inquiries we are receiving. ue nevcr
looked to this country because it is a very prosperous country
and opportunities abound here, but we are now receiving thruugh
our New York ofrice and through our San Francisco office,
immigration inquiries at the rate of 1000 a week each in those
two offices. Quite considerably in excess of what we have known
previously. Nsw I don't want anyone to interpret this as an
indictment of the Admbinistration. I assure you it is nothing of
the sort. It is reflective of this growring appreciation t1--at
here, in this vast continent the size of your own if you put
Alaska temporarily to one side, in this vast continent , dith just
under 12 million people and with so much developing and
happening of proiis3 for the future there is an exciting
opportunity for the kind of frontier experience, of getting in
on the ground floor of national development that you have known
through so much of your history. " e welcaTme this development.
Indeed, when I get backI'll be asked what our Administrative
arrangements are. I know it must be straining the present
resources of the two Consulates-(. eneral and, once the inquiries
begin, we certainly don't want to lose the interest of those 
who have been attracted by this possibility. I can't imagine,
other than our ovwn people from the British Isles, any people
that would miore readily and agreeably fit into the Australian
scene than the enterprising migrant from this country.
Now we haven't been relying entirely on your capital
inflow because 90 per cent of fixed capital investment has come
from our ovn resources. We vithold 28 per cent of our gross
national product from current consumption for fixed capital
investment that is only surpassed by Japan. Your ov.' n figaiis,
I think, 17 per cent and the United Kingdom about 15 per cent.
So we are doing something for ourselves but the remaining 10 per
cent is quite critical because it is in that area that you get
the large projects, the new developments, new skills, new
enterprises and we welcome that flow continuing.
However, that is not what I came here principally to
talk about to you today because we share the concern and the
sense of importance that so many thoughtful people in this country
have about the situation in Viet Nam.
This importance and public interest is reflected in the
amount of attention given to it by all the news media and public
discussions. Because of the nature of medern reporting and the
episodic narrative account of day-to-day developments the
resulting picture in South Viet Nam is, I believe, incomplete ard
indeed misleading. I had the first experience of spending soime
time there just a few months ago, and w,, hat I found on arrival was
so different from what I had imagined in my ovwn mind from what I
had been reading day to day, that a misleading impression must
be held in the minds of a great many people and where discussion
is critical of the administration policy.
These days it is very much easier for public figures, and
I don't say this disparagingly, I'm one myself, to get the public
attention by criticism than by commendation. Good news is no
news, in the minds of sa. e of those who are looking to attract
a public interest.
The result is that very few people, even if they know
a good deal about the griamer side of the war in Viet Nam, have
any awareness firstly of the positive, constructive and helpful
things that are going on there affecting the general comrkunity
and far less of the amazing developments which have been
occurring in the surrounding area of South-East Asia under the
shield and security of the American presence in South Viet Nam.
But that is a story chich I've been trying to speak of
since I came here to the United States. It wasn't that I had
in mind to talk about principally when I came, but encountering
this atmosphere this apparent unawareness of what your ijresence
in South East Asia has meant to people like ourselves who live
in that area I felt it was time that somebody had something
to say about it and it is very hard to get something recorded
about it. If I were wanting to get some notice taken of me in sonm
sectins of the press of this country, I'd buy a six-feet pieoe
of canvas or calico and print somethirg abusive about your more
prominent people and go and hold it somewhere. Now that would
almost assure me of front page presentation in the most august
journals of this democracy. 
I saw a picture the other day, a front page picture
of Dean Rusk addressing the National Press Club in Canberra and
behind were a little band, I think of six or eight young
people from the Australian National University. I had seen them
around quite a bit. I think they were there when Hubert Humphcry
came: They were there at the time when Sir Robert 1ivenzies opened
the National Library and I was there to help him along, and there
they were standing in the background with this same little banner.
And if they were to conduct a public hall meeting with
the views they were wanting to express on the banners, they
would ' t fill th1e 0INst couple of rows, but they will got more
notice taken of them by some sections of the press than by a
spokesman for your country or far mine when we choose to discuss
t ese matters quite soberly. So let's get a more balanced view,
not merely of what is happening day by day but of the total
situation there.
I've read the criticism as a public man I'm not
unaccustomed nor resentful of criticism but I find no
alternative prograe presented to that which has coravended itself
to three successive Presidents in your country and to two
successive Prime Ministers in mine and one of those Prime
Ministers a man who had been there for 16 years and knew
something of what the world was about.
I don't know how far in this company, gentlemen, it is
necessary to talk about the situation there. Surely amongst
the intelligent people I see around me, one doesn't have to argue
the case about hether this is a civil war or whether this forms
part of an organised coLmviunist penetration. The story that the
Ky government can't run the place properly, and that South Viet
Nam can't look after itself, completely overlooks the fact that
for six years after Geneva there was very good progress made in
that country, of a positive kind, and it was only when the
national product had increased about 20 per cent while North
Viet Najiis had fallen 10 per cent that you found this switch in
tactics and the present campaign of aggression, subversion and
infiltration developing from the north.
Now these things are surely clearly perceived by people
today. Surely it is equally well perceived that unless there is
a substanital force, whether it be the United States in company
with allies, or a grouping, as I believe it should be, of those
powers that you in unparalleled generosity helped to place on
their feet in Europe after their period of trial had passed
whichever way it is handled, qite clearly, unless there is that
strength in Asia, then you can hand Asia over to the Chinese
communists and proceed to deal with a very much smaller and
narrower world of the future.
But who in his senses would turn his back on half of
mankind 1 billion people East of Suez with their population
growing, not only assisted by their natural fertility but by the
fact that their public health measures are now keeping alive many
people who would have died either from famine or disease at
earlier points of time. Ve can't ignore, no matter how
indifferent we may choose to be, the fact thait there is going
to be a population explosion there. That there is likely
to ue doubling of that 1-2-billion by the end of this century and,
if we are wise, we will try to help the people of the area
through their problems. will try to help them take advantage
of what modern technology can accomplish. 
I can say as one coming fro,] the area that they are
anxious to do more for thermselves. How much do you read about
it? 4-dho knows of the recent developments in relation to the
Asian Development Bank for example a billion dollars becoming
available for assistance through the area with this country
putting up a couple of hundred million dollars, Japan a couple
of hundred million, even my small country 85 million dollars
towards that fund.
Who hears about the meeting of ASPAC? The meeting of
ASPAC at Seoul a few weeks ago was no doubt briefly reported but
the significance of this gathorig of nine Asian countries was
riot brought out. Yet most of the countries represented at Seoul
not so very long ago were engaged, as we were, with Japan in
conflict. This conflict threatened to destroy my own country and
theirs. Our trade with Japan today is four and a half times what
it was in the early 1950' s. Now you may turn to the project of
the .' ekong Valley, the Indus wiaters Projects, the positive
programme which the military forces in each of these countries
and in South Viet Nam in particular include now as part of their
regular progrmi.; es of civic action, of rural development, of
village security and village development these are now accepted
as Dart of the necessary programmes of military forces in every
part of this area.
Would we have had the quite dramatic re-orientation of
Indonesian policy if there had not been the growing realisation
around Asia that the United States was firly resolved to stay
there in Asia, resist comm-unist aggression where it found it,
and assist the countries of the area to live co-operatively and
with growing prosperity and security in the years ahead?
, e have seen oountrics like Thailand emerge and prove
most helpful in the recent negotiations with Indonesia.
I know that you feel very lonely in this country at times,
particularly as criticisms are spread from one area or another,
but there are 34 countries giving aid in one form or another in
South Viet Nan. Some are giving military aid, others material
aid. I would hope that in Europe there would be a more faithful
recognition of what is being done out there.
I read a fine speech by former Premier Spaak the other
day in which he paid his own tribute to A ierican presence there
and chided his fellow Europeans that they were not doing more
to help. Now I just want to add one thought or series of
thoughts before I conclude what I have to cay. This relates
to the search for peace. I believe that there is nobody more
genuinely dedicated to the search for peace than the President
of this country. I have talked with him, I have read his
statements and I have heard what he has to say. There is no
doubt in my mind that he is genuinely dedicated to peace, just
as he is completely firm in his resolution that he is not going
to turn his back on Asia and leave the chaos, the destruction
which would flow from victory for Chinese coi. imunism there. 
a* 7.
Australia, on my own public statements and those of
my colleagues, firmly supports American policy in South Viet
Nam and recognises the contribution America is making to the
stability and security, strength and progress in South East
Asia generally. -e believe with your Administration that the
search for peace must be genuine, persistent and imaginative.
The world cannot go on indefinitely with those in
opposing camps regarding it as made up of goodies and baddies,
the description reversing according to which side you appen to
be looking, All countries contain intelligent :: on and women
capable of a realistic assessment of their own national
situation and, indeed, of an international situation.
The leaders of the communist world must be increasingly
aware tma days that the hope for world wide response to
communist propaganda and methods has failed to materialise.
Indeed the past year has seen much significant movement in the
other direction. Free world corrmunities do not aggressively
impose their ways of life and forms of government upon others
but I tink we need to give more attention to ways and means by
which both the Iron and Bamboo Curt. airscan be made a little more
penetrable and the interiors a little more accommodating.
I am encouraged to come to this view because surely it
is galling to the leadership both in Russia and China, having
made sufficient technological progress to put man and satellites
into space with impressive accuracy and, in the case of China,
to develop a bomb and be able to make MIG aircraft, to find
that the masses both in Russia and in China are still seriously
short of many things, including the foodstuffs that they require.
It .: ould certainly be a boon to them if more of their
industrial cevelopment could be directed to peaceful purposes
and I certainly believe it would be a boon to mankind if this
would also happen in the freedo. u-loving countries of the world.
It always rather saddens . ie that, wvhenever there is a
serious discussion about ;-eace prospects, the stock exchange of
New York seems to take that amiss or in an unkindly fashion.
Down go the stock exchange values. This does not read too well
around the rest of the world. Surel y it is possiJle for
programmes to be available so that and I'm sure a great deal
of planning and thinking has been done on this by your own
Administration as peace prospects emerge ( as we would hope
they would at a not too distant point of time) we do have in all
our democratic countries the programmes for an era of peace that
will carry our people further along the road to the security a. r
wellbeing to , which we all aspire. that
There are personal contacts at various levels/ can help
towards a better understanding of seemingly hostile viewpoints
and aspirations. Trade is, of course, one of the major methods.
I know this is a controversial subject but there is normally a
mutuality of interests and of benefits from trade transactions.
Personal contacts are established on a basis of friendly exchanges
or co-operation. 1e have traded freely with Russia and China
in respect of wheat and wool and we do not see that this is more
inconsistent than the line we took with Indonesia when we had
troops in Borneo meeting the confrontation challenge. 
8.
Ve were looking to the point of time, which we believed to be
not too far removed, when enough sanity would be restored to
Indonesian Counsels to have them wishing to co-operative with the
countries which could mean so nuch to their o n future and in an
area of the world of great consequence to us.
Tourism facilities for visits by journalists,
eicouragement of visits by cultural and scientific groups these
are minor ways to break the ice but there are a variety of other
ways in which tho ice can be thawed unless vie are completely
barren of hopc or imagination. I do not think any of us can
afford to becoAe. so rigidly imbedded in an attitude that there
they are and here we are and never the twain shall meet.
I amL sure it would be tiv-ely for China to review where
its current policies may lead. I say this because at this point
of time we are on the threshold I believe of a new Asia growing
in co-operation as it copes with this population explosion and
China standing at a crossroad between a friendly and mutual
beneficial associj. tion or a lonely path of persistent and
hardening hostility.
When I go to London I shall be expressing something of
the concern I felt in Australia, lest there be a reduction of
British interests in that area of the world. We are not looking
for massive British forces there but we are looking for a
continuing interest in the problei: ms of an area which, I thinl,
not only forms part of one of the major upheavals in human
history but an area, and with a body of people, that is shaping
a new world order the limits of which can only be imagined.
Modern technologies and a growing degree of co-operation can
transform for hundreds of millions of people a future which, at
the moment, is compounded of famine, of illiteracy, of poverty
and of despair. So we have a prospect which your o-wn President sees
quite clearly. e have welcomed his imaginative ap~ roach and
I do not say that only of your own President it is the
attitude of men of goodwill on both sides of politics in this
country. There has been nothing in hiunan history to match the
unparalleled generosity and vision which brought one of the
turning points of history in the Marshall Plan for Amlerica to
the world. I believe that your intervention in South Korea was
another of the turning points in history. You have been
following this up with enlightened policies in Asia or South-
East Asia of which my o-n is one wvhich reoognise this, which
are appreciative of it, which fecl grateful to the United States
for what it has done and are determined to co-operate with it
resolutely in resisting aggression, but helpfully and in a spirit
of comradeship in the great constructive tasks which lie ahead
for us all. 



PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. A. AND U. K.'
Reply to Mayor Lindsay by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt
at Dinner at Metropolitan Museum of' Art. New York
Thank you, Mr. Mayor. Well, Mr. Mayor, before we let you go
away, would you come back so that people can see me gettin rd of
this thing to begin with. This isn't our principal gift, Ladies and
G-. ntlemen, but I thought it had better get out of the way in case
there was any confusion... ( Inaudible exchange with Mayor Lindsay).
This is not a very big cigarette case, but it holds a few cigarettes
and it has got in opals at each point around the me pof Australia
the capital cities. You won't find Alice Springs tht's an extra
opal, which we, in this difficult year, felt we couldn't afford
we've had a drought as you mentioned. But it's got all the regular
capitals and it comes to you as a small but sincere memento of a
warmth of feeling between Australia and your countr and in
particular the special place which New Yy~ rk has in the minds of
people in my own country who recognise it as one of the great
romantic and historic cities of the world. But I'm going to say
something about that so I won't spoil the speech. Here you are..
Well, now, Ladies and Gentlemen, that was really only a
little bit of trackwork. now settle down to the serious running.
Mrs. Holt and I, who have been honoured in so many different ways
in this visit we have had to the United States, and who have
memorable thoug. hts to take away with us of the kindness, the
graciousness of the American people, add another chapter tonight to
that story of our friendship with your country and of the unique
features which have made the United States one of the exciting
countries in the history of the human race. This city, New York, has
its o' ins pecial place of course. We take a magazine called the
New Yorker each week just so that we'll know what is going on around
the place. We never seem to get to a lot of the well-commended
and well advertised establishments I thought I might have got to
one of the livelier places of entertainment, but at least we have
had a topless show. here tonight as I gaze around the room. My wife
brought me here to this vionderful gallery and museum of yours in
order to see a mobile of the sun. I didn't know what she was
talking about. It seemed an unnecessary invasion into the very
limited time wie have had. But we camne to see the mobile of the sun.
I think wie have been back a few times since, and she is threatening
to return before we catch the plane tomorrow morning. But we
couldn't have had a more delightful setting for this dinner which
you have broug5ht to us by way of honour, and we couldn't have had a
nicer group of people, which, by succession of visits, seems to
include a great many of the friends, respectable and otherwise, I
have formed in this city of New York.
But you and I have quite a few things in common. You are in
the first six months of your Mayoralty. I'm in the first six
months of my Prime Ministership. I don't think you have to stand
for re-election as quickly as I do on the other hand I doubt
whether we will have any tugh fiscal measure in my Budget which
would endanger my position. It's a remarkable thing that you seem to
avoid these problems as you get close to your election. The following
year fiscal necessities build up but I don't want any trepidation
to develop in my own country on that account. I had the privilege
of introducing seven Budgets. It says much for the toughness, the
durability, the tolerance of the Australian people, that I was able
to succeed Sir Robert Menzies by unanimous election after a punishment
on my fellow countrymen of that kind and over that duration.
-4A. 
2.
Tonight we have been honoured by an assembly here of people
whose names are household words throughout the world and whose
generosity or whose contribution to industry, science, to knowledge
and in a variety of other directions in which human experience have
come together in this amazing city of New York. I think, Mr.
Mayor, you have a population very close to that of my own country
and we have a country the size of the United States if Alaska can
be left out of it. It's always a difficulty for me about this
Alaska business. I've got nothing against the people of Alaska.
I've no doubt that they are very fine people, but it spoils my
whole comparison iffl have to bring Alaska into the comparison.
But leave them out, and there we are with the same dimension of
country to look after. I understand you have some 27,000 policemenwell
wie have only 18,000 policemen, and I don't know whether
that means that we're just short of policemen, or that you need
more policemen than we need policemen. But it's a fact. But the
thing which really makes me warm to this city is that, through your
gate and with the symbolic Statue of Liberty was built the greatest
democracy in the history of mankind. The strongest power, the
richest civilisation and most affluent society. This all came
largely through the people that flowed into this country through
this city of New York.
I happen to have been Minister of Immigration in my owin
country for nine years and made quite a study of how you did it
because in this day and age it couldn't be repeated. People
w,-ould want, if you brought them here, the schools, the hospitals,
all the other amenities of the community life the stress and
added burden of the community would seem almost insupportable. I
wionder if you would know that if you have the same growth rate in
the United States today in population that wae have in my country you
would have to build another half million homes a year to accommodate
that rate of population growth. Yet, through the 19th century, people
pDoured in the numbers were not accommodated in the organised way
that they are at this time but somehow '. he nation adapted itself
to the growth of population, new industries sprang up, employment
grew as the demands and needs of one supplied the opportunities for
the other. I have speculated more than once in a lifetime that if, in
that period of human history, the critics had succeeded in
discouraging the men in leadership in the United States at that
time if all the things that could be said against the pressures
that arise from building up a population too rapidly had carried
the day, then would w~ e have had brought into the cause of freedom
at a critical stage in two world wars the power, might and resources
of this great American democracy? I leave that thought in your
minds because it is somethaing I have often thought about and when
the doubt has attacked me at times, when the pressures on our
resources seem greater than we could comfortably bear, I was
heartened by the recollection of what had been accomplished in your
great country and I felt if America could be made great through
people of quality, and exploiting the resources of a pioneering
country, then Australia could follow in that example and itself 
contribute a great democracy to the cause of freedom throughout
the world. We have been together in the cause of freedom four
times already in the course of this century and I suspect that
over the long; years ahead of us there will be many times shen
America and Australia will go in comradeship together, whether
in war, but, more hopeftilly, in the conditions of peace, to build
a better world for free people. I have been proud to acknowledge
in this visit the contribution that you have made to the security
for us all. I hap pen to come fromn an area of world where, as I
was just saying to M1iss Douglas, our hopes are highest but our
dangers are greatest. It's an area of the world where, over the
next 10, 20, 50 or 100 years, I believe a great new chapter of
human history will unfold. If it develops in the way in which
we would hope to see it develop, then that will be because of
the resolution, the generosity, of the people which made the
Marshall Plan a turning point of history. And you, Mr. Mayor,
through this city which has given so much in leadership and
inspiration to the American people as a whole, can feel that you
have been a great inheritor of the democratic tradition of a
courageous leadership -and that you, in your high office, are now
launched on the endless adven'ture of the public man who has to
give that leadership and see the issues through.
We have in your President such a leader and his resolution
is rallying the people in the area from which I come. Through
him and through you we give thanks to the American people for
vxhat they mean and tonight you have added a colourful, gracious,
and attrative memory to that feeling we have of comradeship
together in the great responsibilities, the great enjoyments which
the modern world has opened to us. Thank you very muich. 



ADDRLES BY THE ACTING . PRIME-MINISTER,
MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY,
AND LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNTRY PARTY,
MR.. JOHN McEWEN,
AT' THE FIRST ANNUAL MEETING OF THE
CANBERRA-QUEANBEYAN BRANCH OF THE. COUNTRY PARTY,
CANBERRA, 6TH JULY, 1966
The Country Party took shap. as a political entity
separately in all the States at about the time of the First War.
It had different names in the different States. It was. sAme little
time. before the State organisations composed a Federation.
Organisationally the Party is still a federation of State
entities. Federal policy is..-composed by a Federal Council with a
membership from all the State : organisations and the Federal
Parliamentary Party.
In due course a common name was adopted: " Tho Australian
Country Party"; and the branch formed. here to-night will be a unit
of the N. S. W. Branch of the Australian Country Party.
Unduubtedly the Party in its formative years was composed
primarily cf farmers concerned with policies cnn. erning the interests
of farmers and their export industries,
If anyone said that the Country Party was founded on a
narrow sectinnal basis 50 years ago, I would not dispute that, but
wauld quickly point out that the economic health of this country
then, as nnw, is inseparable from the existence of healthy expanding
export industries tr earn the foreign , xchange to scrvice our national
growth. It was founded as a Specialist party. It has grown to
broad national stature without losing its 6apacity for specialist
attention to the wll--being nf the rural industries..
All that was 50 years ago.
Australia itself is not recognisablo as a nation to-day
Qomparcd with the Dominion of Australia of 50 years. ago. And as
Australia has grown and broadened, so the Country Party has grown
and broadened over the same perind.
I believe that many who are attracted to the Country Party
here to-night, and widely around Australia, are attracted because
the policies of the Party are so singularly for the growth and
strength of the Australian . economy, and peoplo.
Fifty years ago the terms " farm-products'' t-and -" export
industries" were synonymous. 
We have grown with a consciousness that the self-interest
of the person engaged in the export industry coincided completely
with the self-interest of the nation, always avid to earn the maximum
foreign exchange. Constantly increasing prodiution of new wealth is
tho most essential foundation from which to apply other political
policies. The dlearly growing coales6ence between the farm Gxport
industries and non-farm export industries has been a most natural
development. The basic political philosophy of the Country Party has
always been attached to the concept of free 4nterprise and against
Socialist doctrines. This is the Gommon ground which places the
Country Party so constantly in alliance with the Liberal Party.
On the other hand, the Country Party has always wanted
the fruits of productive labour to go to the maximum extent to the
producer, and this explains the almost identity of interest between
the Country Party and the great Co-operative Groups which now handle
so much of production.
The concept of retaining strength in the hand of the
beller by combination is expressed in many different forms, but the
objective is constant: dairyfarmers or fruitgrowers combined to
establish a dairy factory or a fruit cannery to handle their own
produce a purely private arrangement. The sugar growers and the
wheatgrowers found it necessary for Governments and Legislation to
aid in their co-operative activities. The motive of retaining the
maximum value of production to the producer is the same.
This leads through to the whole complex of statutory
marketing boards or regulatory boards.
That is a glimpse of the Country Party's historic part in
attending to the well-being of primary producers. The Country Party
still slaims the specialist knowledge in this field. But, standing
further back from the picture, one discovers the extent to which
the Country Party has broadened its objertives as Australia has grown
and as our circumstances have (, hanged.
We have always been strong for adequate defence provisions;
f) r close co-operation with Britain, and natural allies. Our growth,
the diminution of British strength, the shift from Europe. alone as
the possible source nf war to include Asia in this threat, the
emergence of Communist. strength on the one hand and American might
cn the other hand have all Gontributed -to progressive broadening
of Coutntry Party policies. 
-I
( f a 
To-day, the Country Party abandons nothing of its
specialist field in relation to the rural sector, but plays an
increasingly broad and leading part in propounding policies for
the growth and strength of the Australian nation.
We support policies of alliances for military strength;
of better educatign and health services; better . ommunity services
generally; of full emplbyment and adequate so6ial services. But,
being fundamentalists at heart, we are firm in the belief that all
these poli&amp; ies are only attainable in strength if two ossential
ingredients exist: first, a growing population, and secondly, a
smfficient foreign exchange earning to servic-e our requirements and
our ambitions. I place it as broadly as that: growing population,
migration, are mere words without job creation. Job creati-n is
synonymous with developing industrialisation, which leads in turn
to growing tertiary activity.
No ambitions in this direction can live without sufficient
foreign exehange earning, and here the farm industries are still the
backbone. Primary industry still earns more than 80% ) f our total
foreign exchange and is key to a healthy growing national economy.
Name any single aspect of policy and the Country Party
will relate it to its position in respect of strong industrial growth,
strong capacity to earn foreign exchange.
I have pointed out again and again that superficially there
could appear to be a contradiction between fast industrial growth,
which undoubtedly impscs a pressure on costs, and strong growth for
export, which, to be competitive, requires costs to be kept within
bounds. This is a problem, not a contradiction.
No one can contemplate an Australia prodominantly composed
of farmers, even if operating from a low-cost base, nor &amp; an anyono
contemplate an Australia highly industrialised with the foreign
exchange-earning farmers squeezed out of existence. We have to
reconcile this problem.
We have to grow without stultifying the farm community,
and the Country Party believes that supporting fast economic growth
as it does it is entitled in equity to policies which will
compensate for the cost pressures imposed on the export industries.
And, quite apart from the argument of equity, I point out that there
is no future for the country if it fails to earn sufficient foreign
exchange. In 1919 we might have resisted, and probably did, industrial
development which would impese cost pressurps. To-day the Country
Party sees clearly that industrial development must go on, and 
prc'poses constructive policies designed to compens-ate the export
industries for the added costs and to enable them to survive and
expand. The greatest single point of Country Party policy here is
that of support for the scientist and technologist and extension
worker; to help the wheatgrower, or dairyfarmer, or wool producer,
to bear heavier cash costs and yet experience lower unit costs by
doubling the number of sheep carried on an acre or the amount of beef
produced; doubling the amount of sugar produced per acre; getting
the wheat yield up, and the fruit yield up, and so on. Success in
this direction is the predominant explanation of rural industries'
ability to survive in a phase of growing cash costs: a 60% increase
in total agricultural production during the period of this Government
with a diminution of the rural workforce of 10% in the same period.
This efficiency has been the major offset to cash cost increasos.
There is, of course, a total complex of other policy itemshome
prices, a lower bank overdraft rate for the export industries;
a greater access to credit; a preferred access to credit; a number
of taxation concessions; a fertilizer subsidy; concessions in
freight rates; a search for markets overseas, trade treaties, trade
publicity; international commodity arrangements, special bulk sales.
Increasingly, policies of the same character are now being
devised to aid the export of manufactured products: payroll tax
rebate; the underwriting of overseas investment made in the course
of securing market opportunities; the highly specialised insurance
provision of the Export Payments Insurance Corporation. These steps
supporting manufacture at export are comparable in Country Party
thinking with the objectives in mind when a fertilizer bounty is
provided, or a trade promotional campaign mounted.
From the fast-growing economic strength of the country,
which has been supported by these policies, we are now able to
afford what w,, ould hitherto have appeared prodigious expenditures
rn defence, enormous allocations for social services, and for
education, and to help the State Governments; and for special
activities for Northern Development, such as funds provided for
the Ord, for brigalow clearing, beef roads, and very substantial
expenditure in Papua-New Guinea of taxation raised in Australia.
I am quite sure that the Australian Country Party is
broadly respected for the breadth of its policies; respected not
only here in Australia, but respected internationally, where, on
many occasions, ideas that have had their origin in this kind of
thinking are now part of Iinternattlonal -di-scussions and planning. 
But, with all the strength that we can muster in our day,
we still need strrnng friends. Our close bonds with the British
people and Commonwealth countries need no documentation. The ANZJS
Treaty with the United States and New Zealand establishes a mutual
alliance between Australia and the world's most powerful military
country to-day.
We expect others to accept it that this enviable oountry
is entitled to be free from aggression, and this must result in us
lending our support to preserving the freedom of other nations against
aggression. This principle and our unbreakable bond with the United
States have combined to lead us to join with the United States in
resisting Communist aggression in South Vietnam. In human and in
international political terms, we are right in joining to protect
this free country fr 2m, Communist aggression. In practical termn, we
are right to keep the frontiers of expansive Communism as far fr'MM
our shores as possible.
In terms of our owm long-term security, the recent
deolaration by Mr. Dean Rusk that any attack upon Australia would
produce a massive American retaliation is the greatest guarantete
mf our safety in a dangerous anorld.
In the.-D policies we and our Liberal coalition partners
hold idcontinal views.
I am confident that the policies cf the Australian Gmntr* y
Party are good both in the specialist sense and, moreAimp~ r-antly,
fomr the over-all well-being f-Autralia. 



Press Statement by The Rt. Hon J. McEwen, Acting Prime Minister
and Minister for Trade and Industry
Mr. McEwen today commended the decision of Lines in the
U. K./ Continent Conference to further rationalize their service in
this trade. " Any reduction in transit time for goods, with a consequent
holding back of shipping costs, could only benefit the competitive
position of Australian exports in Australia's most important market
area", Mr. McEwen said.
The Minister also cited the decision as an example of the
benefits of a closed conference system which worked in close co-operation
with a representative shipper body, assisted by Government resea j
and analysis. In this case, " Mr. McEwen said," negotiations between the
Shipping Lines and the Shippers were greatly assisted by the initiative
of the Department of Trade Industry, which produced its " computer study"
in 1964. This study, designed and implemented by the Department of Trade
Industry and the Bureau of Census and Statistics, not only measured the
possible savings of such an operation, but also established the feasibility
cf scheduling the Conference fleet on a rationalized basis so as to lift
all available cargoes on a regular basis".
He anticipated that the implementation of the scheme would call
for the fullest co-operation from alL bodies engaged in liner cargo
shipping. He said that Australian exporters should welcome these new
efforts to contain the rising costs of overseas shipping, while recognisin,
that some adjustments to their traditional arrangements might be
necessary. Mr. McEwen also expressed his belief that this was the first
occasion that this technique had been used to ensure a co-operative
attack on conference shipping costs under normal commercial conditions.
" Clearly, Australian exporters to other areas and shipping lines
servicing those exporters will be watching this new move to improve
conference efficiency with keen interest," the Minister concluded.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
6. 7.66. 



FOR PRESSR Q16496
RETIREMIENT OF SIR THOMAS PLAYFORD
( Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. J. McEwen)
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. HcEwen, commented to-day
on the retirement of Sir Thomas Playford as Leader of the South
Australian Opposition.
He said Sir Thomas Playford had provided a remarkable
example of a man devoted to the interests and welfare of his State.
" His achievements on be-half of his State have made a
notable contribution to the growth of the nation.
" The 26 years in which he served as Premier will stand on
the record as those in which Squth Australia made great advances in
its economic and industrial development.
" They are years in which he applied to his office the
highest degree 9f integrity, dignity and ability. I am confident
they will be remembered as a record, not only in time, but in
achie'rement. " South Australia's industrial development, in particular,
will be a continuing legacy of Sir Thomas Playford's foresight,
courage and untiring effort.
" I wish him well in his retirement."
Canberra, 6th July, 1966. 



PRIMiE MTINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND U. K.
Press Conference given by the Prime Minister, d
ir. Harold Holt, at Australia House,
London 7th July, 1966.
HOLT: There are several matters which we might cover this
mTorning but 7 thought it might be useful : if I opened up with so;: e
discussion on three topics which are of special interest to us in
Australia and which I know have attracted a good deal of attention
here. First perhaps I should say a word about how I cone to be
here at this time. I have been, thanks to their kind suggestion
to that effect, in fairly frequent direct communication with both
the Prime Minister, Mr. Wilson, and the Presicent, Mr. Johnson.
My predecessor, Sir Robert Menzies, had developed over
the years a basis of intimate consultation with successive United
States Presidents and Prime Ministers of this country and I was
delighted to fiad that both Mir. Wilson and Mr. Johnson proposed
to me when I took office that I continue with them on the same
oasis of direct personal commjunication. But even the most frank
and forthcoming exchanges of correspondence can't be an effective
substitute for personal contact. I had met MLr. A.. ilson ., hen I was
over here last year, as Treasurer, and I had not previously had
the opportunity of meeting President Johnson. So it seemed
important to the three of us that we should get to know each
other better, and this has been the principal purpose of my
journey to Europe this time.
There are several matters in both countries which we
felt we could discuss with advantage to each other. I've already
been to the United States. I m. iust say that the outcome there
exceeded by most hopeful expectations., not only have vwe
developed a closer understanding of each o. her's attitude of mindand
this was not confined to the President but I did have an
opportunity there of close consultation with Mr. McNamara,
Secretary Ball, Mr, Fowler of the Treasury, Mr. Conior of
Commerce and M! r. Averell Harriman, an old friend who has
specialised in the works of South East Asia.
I had the advantage of a very good talk with Dean Rusk,
who was in Canberra for the SEATO Conference and so, having
covered those various leading personalities of the Johnson
Administration, I feel I am not only well informed as to their
thinking but have this right up-to-the-minute. I believe it
will be useful to have soue talk with the Prime Minister based
on what I have gathered to be the views of the Administration of
the United States.
In the case of the United Kingdomi, Mr. Michael Stewart
wa. out in Australia also, of course, for the SEATO Conference
and we had a good talk together there. 
2.
I'm looking forward to renewing discussion and
acquaintance with an old friend in Jim Callaghan, who laboured
as I did vith his Treasury problems -, hen we were together in
those respective capacities.
I regret that Denis Healey, with whom we had such
valuable discussions in Australia earlier in the year, will not
be here but perhaps I can catch up with hiffiaer on in the year
at the Prime Minister's Conference when it is held in this country.
Now there are three matters which call for somo better
understanding between our two governments and betwJeen our people
and the people of this country. I don't need to stress to a
British audience the warmth, friendliness, and indeed affcction
on which our relationships are based.
I've nent'oned the names of two other National Leaders
President Johnson, Mr. Harold Wilson even my ovn four-letter
name is an anglo-sacon derivation, and the three of us have come
quite obviously from Anglo-Saxon stock at so, 1ie point of tim
which should assist us to understand each other the better. And
we're not to be discourageu by plain, frank and direct speech
to each other we would feel we had less friendship for each
other than exists were we not to proceed on the basis that we can
speak freely and frankly and informatively about what is happening
in our own counetries and what is shaping our policies.
I possess, as do the rest of the people of my own
country, a sympathetic awareness and indeed understanding of the
major difficulties which the United Kingdom faces at this time
economic difficulties, problems which have carried on, some of
them, since the major effort of expenditure of wealth and huyan
resources in two great world wars where you carried so much of the
brunt of the burden of the fight for freedom. You will not find
my own country either lacking in understanding or sympathy in
the problems which have to be faced here. I come in no
complaining mood, nor, indeed, to ask for anything in particular.
I was able to say that to President Johnson.
, while there are some matters which w'e hope will be
carefully studied by the United Kingdom Govevnnient I have not come
here expecting to go back with some particular changes of policy,
but there are these matters which are worth mentioning and no
doubt others will occur to you. First South Viet Nam.
I suppose the view we bring to this matter is affected
by our geography and our circumstances, but I bring to a
European audience a view from " Down Under" where perhaps
the perspective looks rather different than the view taken from
this point of distance. We see the struggle going on in South
Viet Nam, not merely as one : n resolving an issue in that
disturbed, co-iplex country, but as one affecting South East Asia
generally and, indeed, ultimately Asia as a whole periapg even
finally the peace and economic progress and stabiliti. of the%
world as a whole.
' ie know the arguments about whether this is a Civil War
or whether the particular Administration presently in charge of'
affairs could be relied upon to maintain stability of goverryent. 
The fact of the matter is that, for all its difficulty
after the Geneva accords of 195),, South Viet Nan did make steady
progress and, indeed, one of the factors influencing the
uggression from, North Viet Nai., wras the contrast betw , een the
steadily progressive South Viet Nam, with its production rising
usefully, and the failure to sustain production in North Viet Nam.
But it's not the story of a particuilar issue involving South
Viet Nam solely that would be justification enough if we were
to stand by the principles which brought my own country into
two world wars alnd saw us fighting in Korea to protect another
country under threat of coi-umist aggression at that timae. Going
beyond that, is in our judgement the future of the kind of Asia
which we have in South East Asia generally, and throughout the
world as a whole. A" nd so don't be surprised if differences of
view develop between us. de feel very strongly about this.
You will f ind those in my ow. n country who take a
different attitude but I can only point to the expressions of
public opinion, such as we ar-c able to ascertain them, which on
the last two showings have revealed. stronger support for my own.
government whose policies on this matter are so clear a degree
of support ,, hich has reached the highest point we have -known in
the history of my own Party, and this has been confirmed over the
last poll takings.
Well, they are not conclusive, as we know, but certainly
the goverinent is firma as was the govern-ment of -ay predecessor,
Sir Robert Menzies, and three successive Presidents of the United
States. It's worth remembering, that. This is not the policy
of any one man. Three successive Presidents have given support
to the policies which are now in effect in Viet Nan..
So don't find it surprising if there was disappointment
in Australia that it was felt necessary to dissociate this
country from the recent military action, taken principally on
military grounds and with the utmost care, as I know, exercised
to confine civilian damage to the barest minimum. And, surely,
if one is involved in operations of war and there is an item of
supply so basic to transportation and efficient conduct of
hostile operations against your own forces as petrol and oil
installations, that these becomae legitimate military targets.
Now we find it difficult to Lnderstand how at the same
time there can be su3port for the general policies which have
brought our own forces I'm speaking now particularly of the
American forces plus those other friendl-forces supporting
the South Vietnamese who are there in such considerable numberswe
find it difficult to reconcile that expression of support
with the criticism which came at a time when the United States
was feeling that it needed international backing for the
causes it is pursuing.
The United Kingdom has carried a considerable burden
itself in South-East Asia in order to preserve stability,
particularly in relation to Mialaysai and in containing
aggressive conduct on the part of Indonesia. 
dvhen I was expressing in America the other day so.-e
critical coni ; ents on the failure of qfestern European countries
to face up to their responsibilities in that area of the world
I did not, of co: rse, have in mind the United Kingdom-which has
contributed in so many ways the military establishment it has
had in the area and the considerable civilian aid that has also
been given through the Colombo Plan and in other ways but I
used the phrase, and I don't run away from it. I used the phrase
in America that in my judgment some of the countries of western
Europe who have most cause to be grateful to the United States
for the reccnstruction of their own economies ' Tde possible by
the Marshall Aid Programme, and who themselves have the interest
that countries have internationally in stability and peace in a
substantial a'rea of the world I said of them that I believed
them to be " coasting" on the United States effort.
If the United States werc not there in its current
strength these other countries, could not afford to have Asia
turned into a coi. ummnist thiefdorm, and I would hope they could
search their minds and their consciences on this issue. It is
entirely unreasonable that this one country should be expected
to carry so much of the burden.
There are altogether, as of the last count that I could
make, some 3-countries in 6outh Viet Nai giving assistance in one
form or another, a few giving military assistance, others giving
some material assistance, and I don't think the United States is
looking for massive assistance, but it is looking for understanding
for recognition that it is carrying out a task that is of benefit
to the free world as a whole, and it would welcome the moral
support, at least, of those who have been grateful for the
strength America has brought to the struggle for freedom in two
European wars. For our own part, I-think this is the first time in the
history of my country that our owrvnorces have been engaged in
military operations in which they have not been fighting in
association with forces of the United Kingdom, and this too is
a matter for regret by us. But we have recognised the substantial
contribution the United Kingdo; m has been required to
make while the confrontation issue persisted.
Now moving from there to the issue which, in shorthand
terms, is referred to as " East of Suez", we have been thinking
not so much in military terns as we have ourselves commentedwith
concern on the growning strength of opinion which seems to
exist on both sides of politics in this country and that the
United Kingdom should reduce its influence, its interest, its
activity in that area of the world.
In the military side the discussions we had with Mr.
Denis Healey, produced a resalt that was satisf: ctory from my
own government s point of view and we had that position
confirmed and clarified, again to our complete satisfaction by
by Harold , ilson quite recently. 
But its the growing body of opinion in a country which
throughout its history has felt part of the world scheme of
things, which has been able to play so often a decisive part and,
of course, sofre quently an influential part, because to us it
seems to be turning ones back on a very large part or life.
After all, there are currently 1-biliion people East of Suez
and that about half the total population of the world. Their
proportion of it is tending to grow rapidly as methods of
better hygiene, of public health, increase a life expectancy, and
this aced tI the natural fertility of the countries in the area
will produce, in all probability a doubling of that population
by the end cf the century.
There is no place, as Mr. Denis Healey said, where there
are more dangers of military operations or hostilities breaking
out, but there is no place in the world also where there is more
dynamism, more stir, more potential for growth in a variety of
useful ways. * Ive in Australia recognise the challenges but we also
see the enormous opportunities, and I woader just how far there is
realisation in this country of what is going on and what it can
mean if good fortune holds, if we are able to take advantage of
opportunities for peaceful economic progress in the future.
Let me just mention by way of illustration Australia's
situation with Japan. Since the 1950' s our trade with Japan has
increased 4. times. It runs second to the United Kingdom as an
importer of Australian goods at the moment, but on present trends
in won't be very much longer before Japan becomes the principal
customer in the world for Australian goods.
Our trade in the countries East of Suez has increased
from about 15 per cent in the early 1950' s to something over
33 per cent today and the trend is strongly upward, and so
involved militarily at a number of points involved in various
aid programmes, involved to an increasing degree in tho
organisations which are now er.,. rging in South East Asia.
SEATO, of course, has been in operation for some
considerable time, the civilian aid programies under the Colombo
plan, they have been continuing for quite some time, but we have
new organisations of which the so-named ASPAC is the most recent
example, which held its conference at Seoul with Japan, South
Korea, South Viet Nan, Taiwan, Philippines, M1alaysia, Thailand,
Australia and New Zealand, all present conducting a very useful
and s', ccessful conference together.
How many people are aware that the Asian Development
Bank looks like being successfully launched shortly with an
initial capital of a billion dollars of which the United States
wili have subscribed a couple of hundred million, Japan committed
itself to 200 million, and my own country for 85 million dollars.
Quite recently Japan concluded an arrangement with South Korea
in which 800 million dollars of credits were to be extended to
So. th Korea. In South Vietnam itself, concurrently with the military
operations, there are positive programmes of civic action, rural
development, village development going on as part of the positive,
constructive side of what is happening in South East Asia today. 
Ie are ourselves engaged in prograrmmes of road
construction in Borneo, in Thailand, and these are merely
illustrations of the growing volurne of co-operation which is
occurring in that part of the world. And the events are moving
so rapidly that I am coming to the conclusion that we are more
likely to got a disj~ osition to peace on the part of the North
Vietnamese particularly if they are as much subject to influence,
as we believe, from commnunist China than the outcome of the
military ope~ rations themselves because there are intelligent
people in all camps whether behind curtaiis on one side or the
other. W4e can't divide the world sensibly into the " goodies"
and the " badu. ies". I'm convinced that there iiust be thoughtful
people in China who are realising that their programmes have been
failing in other parts of the world, they have had their se. Lious
setbacks in Africa, in Indonosia, and they can see a growing body of
co-operation in South East Asia, in particular, right round the
arc from South Korea through Taiwan, the Philippines, Thailcand.
Malaysia, our own country and New Zealand, strengthening all ' the
time, buildig up an economnic strength, and stimulated to do o
because we feel that together the thlreat of what China, unless
halted, could mean to all of us in the future.
And I think they're close to a cross-road were they've
got to make up their minds that they either join in a growing.
economic society in that part of the world or take the other
path at the cross-roads and stand aloof fro-R these developmerns
with a steady hardening of hostility toward them. Now we would
hope that they woLd have the good sense to see that the time
has come to review existing policies and what we say of communist
China goes for the coimmunist world as a whole.
I was delighted to see the initiative being displayed
by Mr. Harold W-ilson. Earlier in New York this week I was
making the point myself that vwe have to search for ways and mleans
of' making the curtains, iron and banboo, less exclusive, and make
them at least penetrable by various processes which would lead
to personal exchanges, to the development of scrie mutuality of
interest. Trade is, of course, the outstanding example of one
of the ways in which this mutuality of benefit arid interest can
be developed. My own country, despite well-known views against
communist aggression, sees nothing inconsistent in trading with
corimunist China, any more than we felt this when we kept open a
channel of friendship to Indonesia, despite the fact that we had
forces meeting theirs in their confrontation tactics.
Through Trade, tourism, more frequent visits by press
representatives, scientific and cultural exchanges, in the
variety of ways that can build up some lessening of tension
and spirit of conflict, we must take advantage of these
opportunities and I wish the Prime Minister well on his forthcoming
journey. Now the other matter which I thought I might mention
just briefly to you, because I know there is great interest
in it, is that of British capital i nvestment. 
7.
British cOapital investment in Australia has been the major element
in our total of overseas investment. ffe don't wait for the
investment to come to us, 90% of fixed capital investment in
Australia derives from Australian sources.
WVe are surpassed, I think, only by Japan in the degree
to which we withhold from consumption a percentage of our gross
national product. Last year this reached 26.7%. the comparable figure
for the United States was 16.7% and for the United Kingdom 16.7%. So
you will gather from that figure that we are doing a great deal to
help ourselves. But it's the remaining 10% that has been of
tremendous importance to us, because it has imainly enabled us to
finance larger projects, new types of enterprise and has contributed
significantly to a more balanced, more highly diversified economy.
Now, over the years since the end of the war, the
United Kingdom has been responsible for nnre than half the rotal
volume of investment the figure would be well in excess of
800,000,000 sterling in that time and although the percentage has
dropped a little relative to dollar investment in recent years, the
United Kingdom is still the largest investor in our country.
One of the questions I will be discussing with the
Prime Minister is the ostimates made here of the length of time which
it is felt that these restraints should operate. I would hope to be
able to show that there is considerable benefit tothe United Kingdom
from the continuance of this investment. Evevlafe 60, C3O, 000
sterling a year contributing to your own balance of payments assets
from outside sources come from profits in Australia, and, as is wellknown,
most of our own earnings overseas, when they end up in the
form of reserves, are held as sterling reserves.
I've never felt it a very useful negotiation myself to
try to ask people just to do som~ ething for you in the absence of a
consideration flowing the other way but I think here, that in this
question of overseas -investment by the United Kingdom in Australia,
there is powerful argument in support of the view that it is in both
the current and long-tern interest of this country to keep that
process going. I want to see it going for a variety of other reasons,
and one of the most important of these is that with the investment
comes the outflow also of executive leadership and personalities
people of quality and character associated with a new enterprise.
ie welcome this as part of our own community life, and I
think of so many outstanding Englishmen who are part of the Australian
community and helping to enrich that community in the quality of
British character and the experience and wisdom that the British
people can bring to others when they associate with them.
' Ve have enjoyed that, we want to go on enjoying it. WNe
think it's important for you as well as for us that the British
influence in our community life be strongly maintained. We've been
welcoming in the post-war years a million migrants from this country
and we would also like to feel that the type oi executive or artisan
who comes to Australia with British enterprise which, in turn,
is in the statistics as an item of capital investment, thatthi. s
would continue and I shall be putting this viewpoint to the
Prime Minister. 
I knaow the difficulties of my colleague, the Chancellor,
he has my sympathy. I used to say to him. " I'd much prefer to
have my own problems as Treasurer frof those of the Chancellor
of the United Kingdom." 1
We fortunately have been having a rathcr miore comfortable
experience on our own balance of payments despite the currency
of a quite serious drought, the worst we've had for just on
years, which reduced our sheep population by just on 85,, from
170,000,000 to 157,000,000 and in New S3outh , iales reduced the cattle
population by just on 255.
But fortunately the economy is diversified these days to
a point where we could take almost in stride what would have
been a disastrous experience 10 or 20 years before. And there's
the very considerable mineral projects now in process of coming
to full production and when they bring their export earning to
the total we feel that our position will become even stronger
in the years ahead.
Now the final cormment I want to leave in your minds is
that we believe that there are stirring, exciting thing,: happening
with alrmost dazzling rapidity in an area of the w orld which
contains, T repeat, just on half of the worlds population.
vie are placed geographically and, as a consequence of friendly
relations with so many countries in the area, strongly able to
take advantage of the opportunities which will develop, Ve think
its in the interests of this country to see Australia take
advantage of' those opportunities and if British capital or British
migration would pronote those purposes anid, in turn, lead to the
strengthening of the sterling area generally and the British
position throughout the world, then I'm sure that if we have the
facts and the case to support British action, we won't be
receiving an unsympathetic ear when we come to the Leaders of the
Government in your country.
Now I've taken up a lot of your time. Over to you in
case there are other subjects you would like to develop.
SQUIRE BARRACLOUGH ( DAILY EXPRESS): One of the grouses of
people over here, Mr. Holt is that Australia herself is riot
spending money on defence. Have you any com. mient to make on that?
NR. HOLT: W~ e do have a combined objective of developing a continent
the si7. e of the United States of Amierica with under 1112 million
people at the moment, but we have recognised the need to put
increasing proportion of our resources to defence.
The Treasurer told me just before I left Australia that
over the next year or two our defence expenditure would be close
to 5% of C. N. P. I think your objective is to get yours down
to ) 45 of G. N. P.
le have doubled our defence expenditure over the last
three years and this is not easy when you have the combined
tasks that-I've mientioned and it's part of the explanation
why we hav. to withhold a much larger percentage of our G. N. P.
from consun . tion than is the case in this country.
Our population growth rate is slightly over 2% o cormpared with
.8 of 1% in this country. I 
I tried to make some estimate of how many more houses
you would need to build each year if you had a 2% growth rate
instead of .8 of 1% but houses, schools, hospitals and the other
amenities of a modern cor-cmunity, when they have to be provided on
double the scale in one country as against anothcr, clearly have
some bearing on what you can do in other directions at the same time.
MAJOR HIITTERHOFF ( TABLET): You painted a very fascinating picture of
the growing co-operation among the nations of a vast area from Japan
tc New Zealand. You also said that 74 countries are assisting the
United States
HOLT ( intcrjecting): 344. s
MAJOR HINTERHOFF:-3. countries assisting the United States in Viet Nam.
My question is why no advantage could be taken from these forces for
Formosa?
DER. HOLT: \ V4ell, I think the reasoning behind that can be deduced
I'm not speaking with authority or knowledge precisely of what went
on in the minds of those who resolve these things but I imagine
that this would be regarded in their ys by Chin as a highly
provocative act. If you are concerned s to whether China would be
drawn into the conflict I don't think anything would be likely to
bring China in quicker than for them to feel that this was not merely
support by Taiwan but could possibly be converted eventually into an
attack on the mainland of China itself. Certainly the Taiwanese have
been entirely willing to give support.
FISHER ( THO11PSON NE'FSPAPERS): \, hat is your feeling about the refusal of
Chancellor Callaghan to allow conipanies to operate in Australia
to let them have their headquarters in Australia, such as N~ w Broken
Hill?
KilR. HOLT: This is a matter of discussion likely to arise between
us. Possibly the main burden of the discussion will have to be borne
by my colleague, the Treasurer, when he is across a little later in
the year, but we feel that with the activities being carried on in
Australia it's a reasonable thing that taxation should be levied at
that source. But I'm not going to try and pre-judge any particular
case. We are dealing with fair-mird ipeople, and if we have a case,
then we should be able to secure satisfaction from it. I notice that
one decisi'n recently affecting one of the gold-mining companies took
a favourable view from Australia's standpoint.
MURRAY ( LIVERPOOL DAILY POST): You described the attitude of the United
States when you elaborated on point 1. Can we assume that this is
what President Johnson told you?
,1R. HOLT: You can assume that th. s is the assessment I have
gathered in my discussions with IMembers of the Administration, but
I'm not going to discuss individual Members or their views.
I don't think I would need to be a James Bond to convey that
intelligence to the United Kingdom. I'm sure they have assessed
that for thezselves. 
LL1E, ( SUN): You seem to have expressed some regret that British
troops aren' t fighting alongside the Australians and Americans
in Viet Nap.. If I read you right, do you think Vhat they should be,
especially as some British troops are go1ig to * be released from their
duties in the Malaysia-Indonesia set-up?
Mt. HOLT: I mentioned as a matter of historical fact that this was
the first occasion tlat there has been a very effective use made of
British troops in the confrontation problem and we have understood
right through the piece that these farces, having been built up
1l: rgely to iieet tlhLc confrontation issue, would be reduced after that
issue had been satisfactorily resolved. It's a little early to say
that it has, as a matter of fact, I think, but developments are moving
in the right direction. I am not aware of any finality of judgenent
to which the United Kingdom has coi~ le as to the disposition of its
forces subsequently. One matter on this which I think might be touched on,
and that is the view which seems to be held in some quarters here,
anyway, about Thailand, that somehow or other Thailand is not
entitled to the same support because the form of government it
possesses doesnt appeal to some people. I've seen a good deal of
the Leaders of the Government of Thailand. This year we had a visit
to Australia from the Prime Minister, Mr. Thanom Kittikachorn, and
Mr. Thanat Khoman his very able Foreign Minister and Pote Sarasin,
who was for some years the Secretary-General of SEATO and then,
having goiie myself to South Viet Nam~, in the course of a journey I
made to adjacent areas, I returned that visit.
It was a symptom of the growing, spirit of cooperation
that I spoke of earlier that I was invited as the first
foreigner in Thai history to sit in the Cabinet with their government,
and from what I have learned personally in my associations with
these men we are fortunate that there is such a capable body of men
at the present time in charge of a Government that is playing such an
increasingly influential role in the area.
You may have noted that the Thais provided the venue
for consultations between Mr. Malik of Indonesia and Tun Razak
of Malaysia, and they were active in this recent conference in
Seoul, in a variety of ways over recent months they've made a very
useful contribution. It may be that they have a form of government
which is a military dictatorship, but if the Prime Minister were to
conduct a general election on the same basis as ourselves I think
he would poll something over 90 per cent of the vote.
He's a-very popular leader in his own country, hi*
owni country is making very good progress, it has greatly
strengthened itself economically, and recently they have decided
upon a degree of military participation in South Viet Nam.
So I wo!_ ld just utter a word of caution against being
critical of the Government or allowing that to become a foundational
aspect of policy determination.
They can make, and will make, I think, a growig
contribution of strength and economic prcgress and stability in
South E~ ast Asia. 
11.
STOKES, ( BBC CUR1ENT AFFAIRS): 14r. Prime Minister, you've referred
to the growing size mnd importance of coummunist China, and to
the need to search for ways and means to make the iron and the
bamboo curtains more penetrable. Does this mean that your
government is re-considering its attitude towards the reco. gnition
of China, and its admission to the United Nations?
MR. HOLT: Well, when you say reconsidering it, that matter had been
considered on a number of occasions. My own view has always been
that this qu.-stion is one which ought to be resolved in a wider
settlement, a more gcnieral arrangement it which wie would have . a
clearer view of the future intention of conaiiunist China. There is
the problem of the Taiwanese, Australia would certainly not be
sympathetic towards a-result which abandoned the Taiwanese, and
th~ re are complications which have to be borne in our thinking
and our accounting, but we haven't got a closed mind on this matter.
But while we have people maintaining philosophy in which they are
talking about power growing out of the barrel of a gun and that
wars of national liberation can be the pattern for expansion of
cormxanist influence generally throughout the world, it seems a
little odd that you are embracing them.
STOKES: Not embracing, recognising.
MvIR. HOLT: Recagising aell, we sell them a lot of wheat and
wool, we recognise them to that extent.
MONKS, ( SYDNEY '. t,-1ORNI\ IG HERALD): MP.' r. Prime Minister, Tun Abdul
Razak has been saying today that he and Mr. Healey have agr'eed on
measures for the withdrawal of British troops from Sabah ard
Sarawak. Has Australia been consulted on this, and have you any
coif.!. ents to make on the scale of possible British withdrawals
from this region?
MR. HOLT: Viell, you can take it that Australia is closely
consulted on whatever happens around that area, not only by the
United Kingdom Government, but we are on very friendly and close
terms with the government of Malaysia so you can safely assume
that whatever is going on there you will ae pretty well informed
about but I'm afraid I've not been directly in contact with
the latest developments myself, so I can't give you a precise
answer to your question.
CORBET ( TIMES): Last year, Prime Minister, you took quite a lead
in asserting the right of the less industrialised nations to
be heard on the question of an international liquidity issue.
Could you give us your reactions to the mneeting of cohmion market
ministers in Rom~ e which decided th: t there should be no increase
in the world's monetary resources until the United States ard.
British deficits had been eliminated a view which was
subsequently endorsed by the group of ten deputies meeting
in Frankfurt, and could you more generally give as your views
on how these discussions have been going?
1-2. HOLT: The general views of the Government have not changed
since I expressed them last year. 
12.
This question of international liquidity concerns us
all because it seems to me to be unnecessarily fouled up by
these attitudes in Europe arnd elsewhere. In other words you
don't get the feeling that it is being faced in a completely
objective way. Now we have always supported the fund as the
principal source for leadership and guidance on this issue and
ior that reason you do tend to get a broader, more objective
view of requirements than would be taken by some special group
which had its own interests principally and almost exclusively
in its thinking.
CORBET: In short, you would like the whole matter taken out
of the hands of the committee of
MfR. HOLT: We have all along asserted that the final responsibility,
or at least the judgement on this matter, should rest with the
fund rather than with any more limited group, and indeed the
substance of my speech last year at the meeting was that the
countries and there are more than 100 of us altogether
against, say, the ten that you are speaking of they hfAve
interests as well in this question, which can be better
protected by the fund than by any other body we can point to.
Q. Would you mind clarifying your remarks when you said
you thought China was very close to the cross-roads where you
felt it must join the economic society of the area. Do you
envisage it as a member of the Asian Dievelopment Bank or Aspac?
MvlR. HiOLT: No, I didn't say that was the thinking of the Chinese
themselves. What I'm saying is that these co-operative
organisations, the spirit of collaboration in friendly trade
and that. sort of thing this is developing so fast, in the area
and the projections of trade trends tend to confirm this that
the Chinese must surely be giving some thought to whether they
can afford this process to continue in such a way that you have
regional associations from which they are excluded, strengthening
the economies of these other countries and the other
countries having a unity of interest which currently is as much
based on 10: ncn bot.!-rcr.' sao as any other factor.
They could find themselves in ten years' time from now the odd
man looking out against the r. st of Asia.
Q. When you spoke about the Western nations " coasting"
along on America, did you include France especially?
1R. HOLT: Well, I don't think it needs much specification by
me to range over a number of countries and certainly France was
one which greatly benefitted from the marshall aid reconstruction
programme and we very much regretted that France has not been
able to give support to American efforts and has indeed been
hostile to them.
Now I don't know by what process of Gallic logic
this has been decided but the United States is justifiably
disappointed that there has been so little thought given when
in principle they find as we find it hard to distinguish
between the issues which arise in South Vietnam and the issues
which arose in West Berlin and if it was justifiable for my
small country to have nearly half a million casualties in two
world warj to defend countries against aggression in Europe,
and the United States paid hea. vily in those world wars also for
a struggle fought thousands of miles from their shores, we
would have expected a rather more sympathetic understanding.
Wec do not go into these matters lightly nor unless we are
convinced that great issues are at stake and must be defended. 



Television interview between
B. B. C. Correspondent. John Osman. and
the Prime I'Linister. 11r. Harold Holt 7th Julv o 1266
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, what significance do you attach to Mr.
W-ilson's forthcoming visit to Moscow?
1M. HOLT: Well, I hope it will do something to improve relations.
I said in America earlier this week that I thought we had to
try every means we could to break the impasse ahich has
developed around the world. As I said there, you can't go on
thinking that the world is divided into " goodies" and " baddies"
and all the goodies are on your side and the baddies are all on
the other, because I am sure the other fellow is thinking just
that way himself. We know there are intelligent people in
both sections.
Q. You would welcome, wiould you, any reconvening of the
Geneva Conference with Britain and Russia as co-chairrnn?
11R. HOLT: In respect of Vietnam?
Q. Yes.
I. HOLT: I would wiant notice of that particular question but we are
all working for a negotiated peace and if this is an effective
way of securing it we would be glad to go along with it.
Q. But you are not altogether convinced about this
IllR. HOLT: Viell, I don't kno,, wt-hat is proposed. It's a long time
since I looked at the details of the Geneva negotiations but
effective negotiations in iihich 6. e secure a result which is
not just a piece of plaster patched over the problem would be
welcomed by us.
Q. Can you tell me how you feel about Mr. Wilson's
disassociation of Britain from the American bombing near Hanoi?
! Lii. HOLT: Mr. Wilson has his problems and the view from here may
be a different view from the view we see down under. But,
from our point of view, 1ve regard what is happening in Vietnam
as a great critical struggle for people throughout the world,
eventually reaching the people throughout the world, not just
confined to South Vietnam itself, and for us it is part of
the future of Asia which is being resolved here and a very
important part of its future progress.
Q. So it would be fair to say that you are disappointed in
Mr. \ ilson's disao3ociatiDn?
12R. HOLT: I recognise the problems that he has, but we would, of
course, have liked this to be recognised as a necessary part
of the policy which I had gathered the United Kingdom
Government had given its general support to. 
Q. Do you think that these obvious divergences in policy
between you and M~ r. Wi~ lson are likely to have any long
term effect on Anglo-Australian relations?
TM. HOLT: No, certainly not. The Anglo-Australian relationship is
not only deep but abiding, and the fact that there will be
differences from time to time history doesn't stand still.
Events are moving fast in our part of the w.-orld. I pointed out
this morning that one in four of young people in Australia are
mnigrcants or people who have come there as the result of parents
being migrants, and so it's not always the same Australia but
always I hope there w~ ill be this warm relationship with the
United Kingdom.
Q. Now you have said that it is a matter for regret that
Australian forces for the first time in history are not
fighting in association with those of the United Kingdom.
Would you like to see greater British support for the United
States in Vietnam, and I mean particularly men as viell as
mterials?
MM. HIOLT: We would like to see a United Kingdom presence there
giving moral support. I don't think anybody ;. 7i11 be looking
for substantial British forces, but the United Kingdomn
Government has made its oosition clear on this and we respect
the fact that they will have given their own full consideration
to all aspects of the matter and they have come to their
decisions as wie have come to ours. I am only mentioning what
we would like to see.
Q. V" Rhat do you mean by a British presence there?
MR2. HOLT: dell, if there were British troops, even in some limited
nu~ mber, present, as there are from other friendly forces around
the area. The Thais for example are contributing a military
establishment of quite limited degree, but at least the
Americans don't feel they are being left to carry this
tremiendous burden for the world as a whole.
Q. You were reported under fire in a section of the Australian
press for being what they call " chillingly naive" in your
endorsement of American policy. What do you have to say about
-this?
IR. HOLT: Well, if I cam remain chillingly naive after 30 years in
public life, it just shows that one can preserve the freshness
of innocence untouched, but really w-hen I think back to the
time when a Labour Prime Minister declared that Australia would
be behind Great Britain in the military challenge of that time
to the last man and the last shilling, I don't think he was
being naive or fulsome in his supoort of what he believe in at
that point of time.
Q. You are also accused, I must say in the same section of
the Australian press, of -an abject surrender of Australian
initiative in foreign policy. Have you anything to say about
that?
M. HOLT: 0ell, I think it's almost too stupid to requr nase
and I'm glad to feel from n'y own quite intimate consultations
and comm~ unications, both with the President of the United States
and the Prime Minister of this country, that the views that
Australia expresses on matters of consequence are noted and are
not v~ ithout effect. 
3.
Q. Apart from Vietnam, the whole w-ider question of British
commitment east of Suez is still the subject of speculation.
Will you be seeking assurances from Mr. Wilson that Britain
won't water down her commnitments too much?
MR,. HOLT: No, because I've already had the assurances which related
to the arrangements we discussed earlier in the year. I'm
much more concerned east of Suez, in the positive developing
economic sense. I don't think the United Kingdom can afford
either to turn its back or remain aloof from the great developments
i. 7Lich are occurring in this area which is stirring into
activity to a very impressive degree.
Q. I understand that discussions are continuing between
British and Australian military teams about the long-term
possibility of establishing bases in Australia as an alternative
to Singapore. How are those talks going?
EM. HOLT: W'e ll, w,-e've carried out our side of the bargain as we
have discussed it w-. ith Mr. Healey earlier in the year. There
have been good talks at the staff level against contingencies
which could occur in the future. We feel it is desirable to
maintain a British presence in the North and with us in
association wuith British troops stationed there. Wle feel that
not only is this defensively preferable, but it does help to
provide this moderating-_, stabilising influence which is a great
contribution which British character and prestige can contribute
to the emergence of a more stable, more prosperous and more
secure South East Asia.
Q. A final question, and on another subject. You are a
former Treasurer and you will be seeing the Chancellor of the
Exchequer. Will you be making any protest about recent British
investment restrictions on developed Commonvrealth countiies?
1' 2. HOLT: No, protest is too strong a word. Whvat I w.. ould hope to be
able to show,-the Chancellor is that it is in the long term
interests of the United Kingdom to encourage the development of
my own country. We hold our reserves principally in sterling
and, as Australia becomos stronger, more densely populated and
more secure, not only do our reserves increase, strengthening
your owin, but we are able to play a larger part in the defence
and international aid in that area of the world.
Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister. 



Speech by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt,
at Commonwealth Correspondents' Association Lunche \ a'f
at Waldorf Hotel. London .1
I have always been a Commonwvealth man as long as I have been
in the Parliament of the Commonwealth, but using the first reference
to Commonwealth in that very much broader sense which embraces the
many Parliaments of our Commonwealth of nations, and indeed I have
seen that number grow very considerably from my first Commonwealth
Parliamentary Conference here in London in 194, w'" hen the only three
new Commonwealth countries admitted to the old club were India,
Pakistan and Ceylon, to the time today when those of us who belonged
to the old Commonralth find ourselves historically at any rate in a
very small minority among the newer countries which have secured their
independence and Cormmonw. ealth status since that time. These are days
in which we ask ourselves what does the Comonwealth stand for at
the present timie. Some of the unifying factors seem either to have
disappeared or faded in strength. We can't claic: as we look around
the Commonvwealth today that the thing that is holding us together is
a common devotion to Parliamentary democracy, because in some of the
countries of the Commonwealth we haven't got Parliamentary democracy
and in some where Parliaments function they do not function along
the lines of the Mother of Parliaments at Westminster. They may have
the standing orders and IMr. Speaker and the rest of it, but sometimes
there is only one Party, or at least only one which is allowed to
operate effectively. In other cases the Parliament is non-existent
for some significant periods of time. Agin there is no longer, and
this was established at the time when India decided to ask for
Commonwealth status while seeking to be a Republic, there isn't the
same common allegiance to the Crown which had marked the Coiomonwealth
of earlier years. There are many countries representing many
different circumstances of life, conditions of people, races, creeds
and habits of life, tending to present us as different people among
the quarterthe population of the globe included in our company.
But, having said all that, there are still things we cherish as
part of the Commonwealth relationship and I felt this as I sat with
you today that one of the things which still remains true about the
Corinonwealth and I hope will persist is that there's a rather
different feeling when we sit down together, even as people who have
never met each other before and I have met only a few of you in this
room today, one sits down feeling immediately relaxed and at home
with members of the family, perhaps remote relatives some of those
here, but there is that feeling of warmth and companionship, cooperation
together which still remain essential features of our
Commonwealth relationship. I have been pleased to see how proudly
new Commonwealth members have adopted their relationship. There is
a disposition these days for groupings, either of a regional kind
and perhaps, even less satisfactorily, of a racial kind.
I've been troubled myself by what have been known as the
Afro-Asian ali gnments which have seemed to rest not so much on
policy associations or attitudes, but rather on. attitudes of race
which tend to create differences and antagonisms with other sections
of the community and one of the most commendable features of the
Commonwealth association has been the way a multi-racial community
of Parliaments and countries have been able to come together for a
friendly, frank and quite forthright exchange of vieos and out of
the many Parliamentary conferences of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
organisation, which I personally attended and some of which I presided
over, there came a better knowledge of viewpoints in the Commonwealth
and a warmer feeling towards its people. I used to make it a practice
myself whenever I travelled of visiting a new part of the Commonwealth
and I think now with interest and a good deal of warmth about the 
2.
countries which one visited in earlier years and am able to follow
with a sympathetic interest the way they have gone about handling
the difficulties of development which faced niany of them. % 7e are
not these days a strong Conrnonwealth financially or militarily.
There is tremendous potential, of course, an aggregation of peoples
occupying so vast an area of the globe, much of that area relatively
underdeveloped at this time but potential, while comforting, is no
substitute for the actualities of need at a given point of time.
I had a former colleague in the Treasurer's job in Canberra
who, when people used to tell him about the long term benefits w,, hich
would come to him from some particular progrm-me, used to reply by
saying that it's a case of " Live horse until you get grass."
Whilo some of our Cormonwvealth countries, while they have the
potential for development, are going through difficult periods as
hey look for foodstuffs, the opportunities for education, housing,
the medical services and all the other factors which go in a civilihL
community towards raising the standards of the people, wo.
can't expect it to lean indefinitely on the United Kingdom in the
way that perhaps at an earlier point of development of the Connonwealth
was found possible. Quite obviously we can't expect the United
Kingdom to provide the tidlitary strength to keep the Comon, ealth as
a whole secure. We each have to do more for ourselves and, in some
cases, for each other. But given time, association and the cooperation
which is within our grasp, this can be a very much stronger
Cormmonw'ealth, and even in the intervening years it can be a very
influential Corinonwealth because there are many of us , Jho are to be
found in most places where policies are discussed. We have our
influence, some in one group, some in another, some with one country,
soEmle with another, and provided that -ien aintain towards each other a
goodwill, a determination to make a multi-racial association work,
then the Commonwealth can still contribute greatly to the welfare of
mankind. Wie should always hold before us, I believe, the goal that
w must first make this association work if there is to be any hope
of that larger association functioning effectively in the United
Nations. If the Commonwealth can't work, then how can the United
Nations. On the other hand can, by the force of our own example,
by the Comnmonwealth functioning co-operatively and leading to the
Xrengthening of its membership, show to the rest of the world that,
iven goodwill and a spirit of co-operation, this can be accomplished.
! hat is the kind of vision we can cherish together and do individually
what we can to keep the Comnonwealth spirit alive and make it in its
practical application a function for the benefit of our conunity of
nations and through those for the rest of the world.
Now, that's enough from me by -, ay of opening the session, and
if I can deal with specific questions you might like to ask me.
Q. What association would you like Britain to have with your own
country and New Zealand in your part of the world and how strong
should Britain's contribution be?
MR. HOLT: Do you mean do we need any formal association? I don't think
we do need any formal association. Wie know each other well
enough, and we have complete faith and confidence in each
other and all I think we need to do is to resolve among ourselves
what courses should be followed. I, as you know, have urged
strongly that the United Kingdom maintain a presence east of
Suez. I have pointed out that here are to be found more than
half of the population of the world and on population projection
that half will tend to grow rather more rapidly than the other
half, that the potential for change, development and economic
growth is greater there in my judgment than in any other part of 
Mr. Holt continued:
the world. To me it seems unthinkable that the United Kingdom
which, over the centuries of history, has had so largo a part
to play in the world and its historical development should not
be associated actively in a number of the projects iwhich will
develop in the area. This does not mean necessarily large
military forces or large expenditure, but I think the people of
this country in these days sometimes tend to underrate their
own influence around the world. The respect that is still held
for British character, skills of government, the British capacity
for organisation and management, and, in areas of the world which
are sorely lacking in these things, guidance and aid from such a
source can be critically valuable at times.
Q. Will the Australian Government set an example in racial
harmony to the rest of the Cormonwealth by abolishing its White
Australia policy?
IMR. HOLT: Well, of course, it hasn't got a vhite Australia Policy so
styled. It has a policy of restricted immigration, as does every
country of Asia in fact some of the countries of Asia are a good
deal more restrictive than is Australia. Ceylon, for example,
would have a restrictive programme, India would, certainly
ialaysia has, and so far as I am aware every country of Asia has
a programne of immigration restriction and that programme is
based on the need to preserve certain national standards, to
protect employment opportunities for its people and to avoid
disharmony developing in the country. For our part we have
maintained a restrictive policy, I hope with humanity and good
sense. It's been liberalised in a number of situations which
seemed to call for that. I remember as a former Minister for
Irmiigration myself having adopted a policy in relation to the
Japanese wives of our servicemen who were then admitted on a
basis of full citizenship . which has nowi become standard policy
in Australia. Any Australian who marries a non-European has
the husband or wife admitted on a basis of full citizenship and
the children of the marriage, of course, are Australian citizens
from the outset. Recently we -uended the previous aidinistrative
arrangements so that those non-Europeans, and there are quite a
body of them in Australia who have come there for the purposes
prescribed under the policy, can apply for naturalisation after
five years of residence with us. It's not generally known that
there are some 13,000 Asian students in Australian schools and
universities at this present time. I am sure those who like
to attribute some racist aspect to our thinking would be rather
surprised to know that the leader of the Sydney Symphony
Orchestra is an American negro, Dean Dixon. You will find in
various ways we have tried to apply the policy in a practical
way, but we would not be serving Asia or the rest of the world
effectively if the country were to be torn by racial division.
It would not be a case of admitting one nationality or another,
there are scores of countries outside Australia in Asia, Africa
and elsewhere, if we were trying to admit a certain number from
each of these countries and at the same time go throuh a
satisfactory process of integration into the community life at
this stage of our national development, I think it would tend
to reduce our effectiveness to help others, to build our
defences and to build our national aid rather than help that.
The best answer for those who have doubts and some scepticism
or criticism in respect of the Australian attitude is to come to
Australia for themselves. They will find great friendliness,
no discrimination, and most of them in my experience have come
to the conclusion that the way things are working out this is
just about the soundest policy Australia can adopt at this point
of its history. 
Q. Can you say at what stage are your discussions with the
British Government on a base in Australia, and will it be a
base and how much will it cost?
MR. HOLT: I can't answer those questions specifically at all because
they-have not yet been resolved. I can say that following our
talks with Mr. Denis Healey earlier this year, when he put in
train at the Service level for discussion between representatives
of our two countries a number of proposals in relation to the
three Services. Those talks have gone some considerable
distance. There may be actual estimates of cost, but so far
the talks have been at the Service level. I have known as
Prime Minister that they have been going on, I have known
particular locations which it is thought could be suitable for
such a purpose, but our own view has been, for the reasons I
mentioned a little earlier, the desirability of the Asian
people themselves feeling that Great Britain is making a
contribution by its presence and its assistance to the strengthening
and development of the area, it is preferable to maintain
the establishments wie have. They are good establishments the
Singapore za-val base and the barracks at Terendak and Butterwiorth
in V. aysia. These have been developed at considerable expense.
They are very habitable as I saw for myrself when I visited them
recently, and it seems unnecessary to duplicate them hen the
governments of the countries concerned seem very contented to
have our forces rema~ in on there.
Q. A figure of 30,000,000 has been mentioned.
accurate? Could this be
MR. HOLT: It could only be speculative at this point, but it wiould
obviously be more costly to set up now bases Yihich would be
providing anything like the same scale of accommnodation that we
already have. They w--ere costly enough.
Q. Is there any possibility of growing difficulties with the
British Government? ' Jas it in relation to the question of
Britain's position east of Suez or Vietnama, and, if so, could
you throw any light on your talks with Mr. Wilson on Vietnam?
' MR. HOLT: There are several points when one considers the whole range
of policies as between the t, 7o governments when you will tend to
Set a rather different view from a small population in a large
eveloping country from that of a country with a small size and
large population, very conscious of its proximity to Europe and
the problems of Europe. It's understandable that Great Britain
should tend to concentrate its attention rather more on Europe
and its problems. On the other hand, our gaze tends to wander
more frequently these days around the countries in the general
area in which wie live But if you ask about Vietnam in
particular, Australia formed a very strong view and I ermphasise
this because otherwise there might be a disposition to think
that we are in Vietnam because the Americans happen to be there.
We are in South Vietnam because to us it seeras no less important
than it does to the United States that the %, Sgression there
should be resisted and I believe Australia to be more directly
involved in the dangers of fa1ilure to resist this agression
than would be the United States itself, but if the attitude of
the Peking Government, which has declared that wars of national
liberation oh that was the North Vietnamese Government, but it
flowed from the philosophy of the Peking Government. It was
Peking said that power grows out of the barrel of -a gun, and if
this philosophy that so called wars of national liberation
successfully tried in one country can then be employed in the 
Mr. Holt continued:
next were to be successfully adopted, then nobody in South-
East Asia, or for that matter in Asia, could feel secure and I am
sure that our friends in the room today from India are very
conscious of the shock which came from the evidence that China
was disposing its troops in a menacing ay in relation to a
country which had been so friendly to it as India had proved
itself to be. ue are, therefore, strongly in support of the
American intervention. We feel that if aggression can be
halted, that on the pattern of what has happened in South Korea
and Taiwan, Thailand, in Malaysia, where we fought a long
emergency campaign to beat the Communist activities there, that
on these patterns there can be restored to South Vietnam a
situation in which it can go ahead with its own economic and
social progress. I used the word restored advisedly because
from 1954 onwards, after the Geneva accord, South Vietnamn did
make this kind of progress. In was not until 1960, when it
had become apparent to North Vietnam that while there were
slipping back in their production, South Vietnam was moving
steadily ahead that the campaign of aggression against Sbutli
Viet Nam became actively pressed.
Q. Does it appear to you, ad it does to riny here, that the
British Govenment believes that Australia's frontline should
be at Danrwin and not 1,000 miles to the North?
MR. HOLT: I don't know that this represents the viewpoint of the
British Government accurately. The fact that you stage your
forces in a particular area as a base doesn't necessarily mean
that you regard that point as the front line. It would be a
base from which you would operate. I think the British Government
would still regard a point further to the North of Australia
as the more favourable point from which to conduct military
operations. But of course one can't answer a question of that
sort with any authority or precision unless ou know the
situation you are coping with. Is it some trouble that has
arisen in ndonesia? Is it a march down the Malaysian Peninsula
by Communist or other hostile forces? The military action and
stretegy necessary to cope with this will be affected by what it
is you are dealing with.
Q. Do you think Britain should be in the Anzus Pact? Has there
been any move to brinA Britain into ANZUS and, if so, what has
been the reaction fromi both Britain and America?
HOLT: I wouldn't like to cormment on that. We have other arrangements
with the United Kingdo,, but I'm not pressing for anything
to be done in that direction. My own belief is that if
Australia were seriously under threat that regardless of treaty
commitments the people of this country would want to come to our
assistance. After all, nearly half a million Australian
casualties were sustained in two world vwars, fought a long way
from home when this island wis threatened. I have no reason
to believe that British people wouldn't feel that they had not
an obligation but a call on then if we were vitally threatened.
Wo. can all take comfort in the fact that the United States, which
remins the migtiest rilitary power in the history of . mankind,
has stated quite emphatically as recently as the ast few days,
through its spokesman Dean Rusk, that there is no question so
far as America is concerned that if Australia is under attack
they move in to cover that attack. 
Q. You said that unless the Comronvrealth can agree then there
is no hope for the United Nations agreeing. Perhaps I read
too much into that, but would you explain please. It seemed
to imply that unless the Commonwealth acts together as one
unit the United Nations can hardly succeed.
MR. HOLT: I think you did read a little more into it, and this might
have been my own fault of inadequate explanation. What I was
saying . as that we do at least have the advantage within the
Comorronealth of warmer co-operative feeling towards one another
and, therefore, to the extent that some multi-racial organisation
can be made to function effectively it ought to be
possible to do this rather more readily inside the Cor-monw ealth
than in a more amorpheous and more diverse, and at times more
po.-erfully hostile, body such as you find in the United
ations. Furtunately ve have nothing in the way of an
ideological conflict within the Cornonwealth of the magnitude
which exists inside the United Nations.
Q. Many people are a little puzzled by that fact that, although
Australia supports the United States policy in Vietnam, ie do
continue to trade in increasing amounts in wheat and -ool with
Red China. Did you find in America sympathy and understanding
for the Australian policy?
MR. HOLT: I didn't feel the disposition to discuss it frankly. I feel,
and I think Harold Wilson would share this view, that these
are means whereby we can hope to build a better relationship
between countries which are other.; ise hostile to each other.
Trade norally connotes a mutuality of benefit, a mutuality
of interest, and if trade can build steadily between two
countries and work to their ramtual advantage they are less
likely to take action hostile to each other. e don't see
inconsistency with this, while at the same time sternly
resisting pplicies of aggression. We are trying to tell the
aggressor that this is not acceptable to us and will be
combatted, but at the saie time we don't want to put that
aggressor, in the circumstances of the modern world anyhow,
out of business, destroy the economy or destroy the lives of
the people. I think that in trade, tourism, even in the
visits of reporters on a more frequent basis, the cultural
and social exchanges which can be an increasing feature of
the life between those behind the curtains and those on this
sido of it, these and other ways have to be tested to see if
we can make some improvement in relations. We can't allow
ourselves to become bogged down indefinitely in rigidities
of hostilities one to the other, and I joined in welcoming
the initiative of the Prime Minister in making another
attempt in Moscow to help to get some progress towards
negotiations for peace. These initiatives may fail, but a
time comes and this in my experience has been a feature
of negotiations with Communists when their determination
or stubborness at some point of time is converted into a
disposition to go on with a negotiation. Therefore we
just keep trying as best w-e can, but in the meantime taking
whatever action seems to be necessary to ensure the
aggression does not succeed.
Q. You were reported in ashington as saying that Australia
was prepared to go all the way with L. B. J. in Vietnam, and
yet I gather you have your " ban the bomb" groups in
ustralia with distinctly anti-American sympathies. Can
you estimate the degree of support in Australia for American
policy in Vietnam and can you visualise at what point you
yourself would wish to draw the line as the British Government
has done in that support? 
IMR. HOLT: I don't want to deal with suppositious cases. The support
of the Australian Government for the United States is based on
a mutuality of interest in the policy being pursued. We
consider ourselves even more directly involved than the Unied
States and we are very conscious of the fact that the brunta 0
the effort there is being borne by the United States. V&amp; 6 are
very appreciative of what the South Vietnamese are doing too,
and they paid a heavy price themselves in their determination
to keep their country from this aggression. I find in the
coment I made in relation to the United States an expression
of our own detormination, a recognition that the policy being
followed there is in the Australian national interest. We,
of course, have people in our country who are opposed to the
policy, the official Opposition is opposed to our policy, it
is opposed to national servicemen being used and has said it
will bring them out of action as soon as it can after it takes
office. But my Government is a coalition of two Parties and
two Houses of Parliament. Up to the time I left Australia
I was able to say that I had 100 per cent support from all
Members in both Houses in both Parties on the Government side.
One Government Senator has since notified some reservations
he has about it well in that case I have 100 per cent less
one, or one out of 73, something to that order. On the
public opinion pollig of recent times there has been not only
good support for a policy of participation in Vietnam, but the
polling indications for the Government have been at the highest
level known in our history.
Q. If the present talks between Rhodesia and Great Britain broke
down, would your Government be prepared to support the tightening
of the screw policy, imposition of more sanctions on Rhodesia,
and if those failed would your Government be prepared to support
the use of military force against Rhodesia?
MR. HOLT: I wouldn't speculate publicly on official policy. I'm not
stating new policies here today. I'm merely trying to interpret
policies which are already current. We have a policy current
in respect of Bhodesia and I am not able to add to that at the
present time.
Q. Do you feel any need for a closer relationship between Australia
and New Zealand in view of their geographical proximity and joint
policy agreement?
MR. HOLT: You mean some sort of organic relationship? Having just
said I'm not stating new policy, I had better not violate that
rule and certainly I would not want to indicate a new policy
because frankly we don't have a new policy. I can say the
current relations between the two countries are very good. I had
personal talks with Mr. Holyoake before I left Canberra. He
came over for the S. E. A. T. O. Conference. We've recently
negotiated a Free Trade Agreement with New Zealand, which will
increase the volume of trade between our two countries. We are
together with our forces in South Viet Nam. I say together
advisedly because when I saw the troops up there the New
Zealand battery was actually in physical contact or proximity
to our own Australian forces in military camp there. On most
of the problems of the day, as they affect our part of the world,
we think very much alike. As to what the future holds, there is a
good deal of interesting speculation going on about that.
T think this is happening ncreasingly so in New Zealand because
there is a realisation there, I believe, that the domestic
market cannot become large enough except in relation to
particular items of manufacture to warrant a very extensive
development of manufactures, and that, therefore, the Australian
economy, with its much greater diversification, could integrate 
tY
r * 94*~ 99
ii' it) 2( 99 9 999 6 i.
" I.
4' 9 9
I. I 9 9. 9,)
9 9 9 4 49
.9;
5~ 9 A
9 9..
A 9 .9.
9999. 9999' 99 9* 94 ,999
9
.7
9. 9~ 9 9 r.
9 9~ 99 . 99
4 6~ 9 9 9 4..
9 .9
9 9. 9
4,9~ 99 9
9.
9 9 99 9
9 9 9 9 99 9 9
9 99.
' 99 99 .9,949
9 .9
9 CdAI.
4 9 99
9 4 ,~ 1 99
9 4 ci 9
a. 9 9 9.
noon
.7
9 .97
~~ 99 9. 99 * 99
1. j 9
9,9, 4. 9 .9 49 " dv 9 99
' 4-
L. A
.4 94
9( 9 9 .9
LI: N 9
9 9 999 1'
99
.9 *~ 4
99~ 9
.9 .9 9 99
9' 9~ t~ 9 99 9 949 9
9 .4
9 9 9 9 9 9 999 .4
c 
8.
Mr. Holt continued:
more closely with that of New Zealand. I don't mean by
integration a mergot of the two countries, but I moan that We
believe in the future we could be deawn even closer in matters
of trade and shall remain closely sympathetic to each other
in matters of international policy.
Q. The British Government, through Mr. Healey, has indicated
that it is imposing some restrictions on arms sales, and
specially in relation to their use in Vietnam. Is this a
matter of any embarrassment to the Australian Government?
MR. HOLT: This is opposition by the British Government to the sale
of arms for Vietnam? It's not a matter which iould be
inclined to be in my mind. I wyould have thought the equipment
already there was both large and adequate, but I'm not in a
position to make a policy statement about that. 



PRIME I4INISTE1W'S VISIT JTO U. S.--AND U. K.
Sveech ariven by-the Prime Minister. ME, Haroldf Holt at
the -AV2! k iipttl Oa ile ocAc asion twñ Austraxla C lub
Dinner in L~ 01C9Df 12thL July 1) 66
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Prime Minister and gentlemen, I have
always looked upon Lord Baillieu as a friend and, indeed, many
of his family are good friends of mine in Australia, and my
heart lifted when he sent his invitation to me to come to dinner
at the Australia Club in London. I'd been to one once before
when my distinguished predecessor was being honoured, as you are
honouring me tonight, and this became a forum in which Sir Robert
Menzies, one of the masters of exposition of our century, stated
so clearly for his country our views and our aspirations. it
is tough enough to have to follow after Bob Menzies but then
tonight our Chairman host brings along one of the most articulate
of Englishmen, who proposes the toast of Australia, and I feel
that this is a difficult path to follow, but fortunately the
salesman doesn't have always to rely upon the line of talk he's
developed. If the product is good enough he can succeed in
getting the product purchased. And tonight you do me the honour
of speaking of Australia, and what finer product can I refer to
in any part of the world? When I was coming across to this
country there were various newspapers which were handed to me to
lighten the burden of travelling across such a large distance of
the Atlantic and here were all sorts of speculations. I expected
to find myself lined up in a sort of confrontation with the Prime
Minister of Great Britain, I almost expected to meet him eyeball
to eyeball I think that's the phrase, but here we are, he
quoted some Australian poetry to me. I hope this practice
doesn't spread. I landed in Washington from Australia the
other day. I'd been given an advance copy of the notes thc
President was likely to employ, they ran over a page and a half.
But a few minutes before we were to speak together I was handed
another set of notes which ran over seven pages and these included
a poem about Australia, " I Love a Sunburnt Country" well I
couldn't draw on my very vast knowledge of poetry to any useful
extent other than to say by way of reply " Say not the struggle
naught avail us". Now perhaps that could apply with equal force
to my embattled colleague, and who carries more responsibilities
on their shoulders in the world today than the Prime Minister of
Great Britain and the President of the United States of America.
For an Australian to come to London in whatever capacity
is a stirring experience; no matter how many times we perform the
visit we find ourselves increasingly drawn and, moved by so many
eviclences of our commuon heritage of history, of democratic
tradition. Our own country, of course, is overwhelmingly a
British country. You've spoken, Prime Minister, of the migration
which has been such a feature of the post-war years. I must
say that while we are out to obtain as many suitable British
migrants as we can, I can't help feeling a sneaking gladness that
your own visit ended with a return to your own country. I say
that because another Prime Minister from Australia might be here
standing in my place this evening. But I can assure you, had
he remained in Australia, and secured the Prime Ministership of
my own country, you would be addressing this audience as a
member oi my own Party. .2 
A very great Englishman who served Australia with great
distinction as a Governor-General and remains a memorable
soldier of your own past, Lord Slim, wrote to me about some
matter recently and the concluding sentence of his letter
ran " what a fascinating time to be Prime Minister of Australia"
and it is a fascinating time because a country to draw out the
finest qualities of its people needs a cause, a stirring cause,
and Australia is fortunate in that we don't have one cause which
stirs the pulse, we have several causes, and I propose to
mention just three oi them here tonight.
You referred to immigration, and that itself has been
for the Australian people a great challenge and a remarkable
accomplishment. It is and history will, I think, establish
this the most remarkable peacetime achievement in the history
of our nation because we have, since the end of the war, welcomed
two million migrants from various parts of the world. They've
become successfully integrated, most of them, in the community
life of our country.
They have contributed notably to its development, they
have improved the food and drink quite significantly ( laughtpr),
and just on half this total have been migrants from these islands,
and I'm glad to say that we continue to attract rather more than
per cent of the total of our migration from here, and this
helps us to sustain the British quality and character of our,
community life. It may interest you to know that of the youing
people in Australia today one in every four is either a migrant
or a child of a migrant, and so the influences which play on us
today are not merely the geographical matters to which you
referred, but the impact of so many different nationalities,.
people seeking to establish a new homeland for themselves, to
build a new life in their adopted country. And the result has
been the greatest era o. f progress in the history of our nation,
a progress which I'm glad to say continues quite briskly and,
on all the evidence, will continue and, indeed, accelerate, in
the years immediately ahead of us.
We have, it may interest you to know, a population
growth rate of just over 2 per cent per annum. The comparable
United Kingdom figure, I hope I quote this one accurately, is
.8 of 1 per cent. if you were required to build houses, say,
in this country, to say nothing of the hospitals, the schools,
and all the other amenities of a civilised community, for a
growth rate of that sort I think you would need to add about
180,000 homes a year to whatever total you are currently
constructing. And this does, of course, place great burdens
on a community of something under 12,000,000 people, particularly
when you bring into your accounting the fact that great
distances have to be traversed, the transportation costs
represent a very high proportion of production costs generally,
but we are absorbing the people and we are succeeding in making
the economic progress.
You mentioned, Prime minister, the position of sterling.
Australia doesn't have to talk about sterling, we act about
sterling, and what greater confidence could be shown in sterling
arnd the future of sterling than by retaining the overwhelming
proportion of our reserves in your own currency. I would
only hope that with so many possibilities opening up for us
which could build an export income capable of adding to those
reserves that, having been assisted so notably over the years
since the war by a substantial inflow of British capital we 3 
shall be able to continue to strengthen your reserves by the
capital necessary to develop our projects. The other matter
which I'd like to mention in this connection is that the economy
as a result of these processes, new employment given to the
migrants, arnd this largely has to be done not on the farmlands,
because they absorb a much smaller proportion of our work force
today than they did a decade ago. They're down, I think now,
to about 9 per cent of work force. But in our manufacturing
industries and in our services the bulk of the addition to the
work force has to be absorbed. But overall we have developed a
highly diversified economy and this was revealed very strikingly
in the last year when we experienced the worst drought our
country has known for just on twenty years. The figures reveal
the extent of it. Over the total sheep population of Australia
we lost just on 8 per cent of our flocks. in New South wales
we lost 25 per cent of our cattle. So that a few years ago,
had this occurred, we would have had a disastrous economic
recession, but, as you've mentioned, we came through the year
with a balanced budget, wie added something to our external
reserves, and the experience demonstrated that Australia today
has so diversified and strengthened the base of its economy
that we can stand up to these hazards which formerly would have
meant major economic setbacks for us. Now we're going to
greatly improve that position in the years which are coming up
because the mineral projects are expected by 1975 to be producing
an export income for us in excess of that which we would secure
from our staple export item, wool.
There are just on 50 major mineral projects either
under way, proposed, or in course of expansion, and we have here
tonight, I notice, Sir George Fisher, who, if he were being
very helpful to you, would tell you what his company proposes
to do with the enormous deposits of lead and zinc that they've
discovered in the MaCarthur River in Queensland. But all
around Australia these days we seem to have opened up a sort
of Pandora's box of mineral wealth, almost every month that
passes by some great now discovery is found and we So ahead
with the process of trying to add an export income from this.
You made reference to our iron ore deposits. Its a few years
ago that we maintained an embargo on the sale of iron ore from
Australia because the disclosed reserves seemed hardly adequate
for our own domestic steel industry, and then they began discovering
iron ore of a grade of 60 or over by the mountainful, and in
Western Australia alone there are now known to be reserves
estimated to be 15,000 and 18,000 million tons of high grade
iron ore. Wa have vast contracts with the Japanese for the
sale of this which will greatly improve our export earnings and,
as you've said, we might even reach to the markets of Europe
arid, indeed, of Great Britain in the course of the next few
years. As to bauxite, our situation is even more impressive
when it comes to resources. We have the world's largest
bauxite deposit at Weipa in North Queensland. You've only
got to XUick the ground with your foot and there it is, and we
do hold, I understand, about half the free world's reserves of
this commodity which is basic, of course, to the ali~. inium
industry. Manganese Broken Hill has got a great deposit
at Groote Island in the North of Australia, nickel has just
been found in Western Australia, apparently in very good
quantity, and that great deficiency that we have had for so
many years, oil, is now being discovered in increasing quantities 4 
and, with this encouragement, we would certainly hope that the
explorers will go on until we become self-sufficient. AS
Barrow Island is added to the existing fields it is estimated
that 9 per cent of our consumption will be home-produced and
we would hope to add to that particular figure quite quickly.
Natural gas, the first attempt made to find natural gas off
the coast of Victoria produced a commercial field, and it should
not be long before the people of my home city are literally
co~ ting with gas but at a very much lower price than the rather
deficient substitute, or at least so-called commodity which
reaches us at this time. That is not libellous, I hope, of
the Melbourne Gas Supply, or slanderous.
The other thing which gives us cause for the stirring
of the pulse is that over recent years for the first time,
significantly I think in our history, we have become very
conscious of the place we occupy in Asia. In my own boyhood,
countries to our north produced a rather picturesque set of
pos~ tage stamps, but we know very little about them other than
that. But in these days we are directly involved in a variety
of ways. We are involved for ffence purposes, we see a rapidly
growing trade with them. We ourselves contribute to aid
programmes in the area, indeed, we can claim to have pioneered
the Colombo Plan which has been expanded so greatly since the
massive contributions made by the United States and the large
contributions which your own country has made. But to us the
future of Australia is going to be very considerably affected
by what goes on in Asia, and because of this we have naturally
given very close study to the developments there.
You have mentioned, Prime Minister, these hopeful
developments in which a greater measure of teamwork is now
being evidenced by the countries around the periphery of Asia,
perhaps brought together by a Common concern, lest they, at one
point, become the target for commiunist aggression, but arising
from this building up of teamwork and a collaboration for
purposes of trade and of mutual interest which I believe
produce some of the most hopeful signs to be found in Asia today.
Now remember when we speak of countries east of Suez we are
talking about half of ma. nkind a billion and a half people,
whose population is increasing rapidly, both from their natural
fecundity and improved public health measures keeping many
more of them alive for a much longer space of time. This
creates, of course, problems for them and for us, but it also
creates opportunities for us all, and whereas in Africa, to
which so much attention is given from Europe, and from the
United Kingdom in particular, there you have, I think, about
270 million people. Well, in Asia, we have about a billion
and a half and they may have doubled by the end of this
century, and many of the countries, countries of long and
ancient civiliation, some of their people, many of them have
quite a high degree of education, their take-off point is much
closer to us than is to be found in many of' the countries of
Africa, and we're finding that there are meetings such as we
had recently at Aspac in Seoul, where nine countries including
N~ ew Zealand and Australia as tho-only two non-Asian countries
were able to come together in friendship and start building
together for a brighter future in that area of: the world. 0 
We know that the United States is determined to help
build a stronger and more prosperous Asia, there has already
been brought into being an Asian Development Bank with a capital
of a billion dollars, much of it subscribed in the area, with
Japan contributing 200 million and Australia 85 million, the
United States 200 million and so on, and in these ways, with the
development of the Mekong Valley, the Indus Waters, a whole
variety of projects which, if time permitted, I could mention,
we are seeing the emergence of an Asia which we had never expected
to find within our own visible distance, and so when we find that
major areas of opinion in this country seem to be turning inward,
away from that area of the world, naturally we have a degree of
concern. You have greatly encouraged us by what you've told us
of the intentions of your own Government. The arrangements which
were made earlier in the year with your Defence Minister seem
to us adequate and satisfactory. Wie appreciated the response
you gave to the views we put in respect of your continued maintenance
of a presence in the area to our north and for our part we have
been working closely with your own service people on proposals
which would meet the sort of contingencies which might arise should
you find yourself unable to continue to maintain a presence in
that area. But it is not so much a military presence that we
are thinking of. I don't know whether there is a full
appreciation in this country of what British influence, British
character, British leadership still mean to the rest of the world,
and for Australia it would be quite a damaging setback to our own
hopes and, we believe, to the aspirations of the people in this
area of the world if, for some reason or other, these qualities
of British character and leadership were somehow to depart from
the area. I know you don't view it that way and I sincerely
hope that while there seems to be an increasing disposition to
look inwards to Europe, the great possibilities, the great
opportunities, would seem to us to be opening up in this part
of the world, will not be overlooked.
Now as a concluding note, may I just emphasise something
which I think is expected by everybody in this room, and that
is that fundamental to the world's hopes for a peaceful and
better order is the continuing collaboration between those two
great English-speaking countries, Great Britain and the United
States of America. My own country has the satisfaction of
enjoying a close friendship with both, my own journey to this
part of the world was a direct consequence of invitations given
to me quite separately by yourself and by the President of the
United States. You both quite independently of each other
when I succeeded my predecessor asked me to continue the same
close and intimate communiction which had developed between you.
This has been greatly valued by me and has been valued by the
colleagues in my own Government, and I feel that Australia would
be responsivo and touched by the confidence and friendship shown
to us in these practical ways. I want to assure you, Prime
Minister, that the objective of keeping warm and close the
friendship between your two great countries is one of the great
objectives of policy of my own Government. There may be
practical ways in which we can help to a better understanding
one of the other, or at times in our own area of the world which
seems so remote to the rest ofL you, prove ourselves capable of
carrying out purposes Which further the joint objective which
our three countries hold together. 6 
6.
Well, it is for Australia a bright, interesting,
exciting, quite dangerous but at the same time challenging
world which faces us down under, and it is perhaps regrettable
that more of the possibilities, more detail of these
developments, cannot be clearly seen by those of the Western
hemisphere. The reporting day by day of what is going on in
Viet H~ am, as I discovered by my own visit, is quite misleading.
We get very little indication that great, constructive
projects of a developmental kind, are going on there, but
its not just a grim war of death and disaster, that each of
th~ e military forces of all the countries represented there
have their own constructive programmes to carry out, and they
are carrying them out. Now its through the stability which
can be brought to that area by whatever process of peaceful
negotiation and by constructive andcavars hereafter that we
feel an Asian society can be built which will be a strength
to the world and not a point of danger and weakness.
Well, Prime minister and Mr. Chairman, I don't wish
to abuse the great privilege which has been given to me tonight
of addressing you all. This is one cfthe great forums for
anybody in London. I compliment our Chairman who through so
many years has by force of his own leadership and the regard
held for him in this city helped to create for Australia a
gathering, perhaps as representative as any that will ever be
asjsembled in the city of London. And so we say thank you,
Clive. I close by saying that I'll be prepared to sing, if
he insists on it, with Harold Wilson, " Along the Road to
Gundagai" but perhaps we could take as our slogan for the night
" Hark the Harold Angels Sing" t 



PRIME ITSTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND U. K.
XCHANGE OF TOASTS . fE-N T. E DENT OF TE UNITED
LUN\ XTLON I Tfi' WHITE H3TJE 14th July, 1966.
Kr. Prime M inister and my friends:
A house twice visited by a good friend is a house twice
blessed. So, Lr. Prime rainister, we welcome you back here to the
White house and we are very grateful that you were able to arrange'
your very busy schedule so as to return and pay us a visit.
While you were away, I spoke to my countrymen, and I hope to
yours also, about the Pacific area that we share with many of our
! sian friends. I said the other night, and i should like to reemphasize
it now, that I believe that the Pacific is the great
testing ground of man's yearning for independence, order, and for a
peaceful and productive life. Prime hinister, if we can win
that test in the Pacific we may very well have won the fruits of
oeace for all of our fellow men in the world we would hope, perhaps,
for all time. But if we lose it in the Pacific, we will have lost
achievement and hope, perhaps, for all time too. -3ut we shall not
lose the test, because A--iericans and Australians and Vietnamese,
Mew Zealanders and Koreans, and our other allies shall prove in the
Pacific that agression cannot succeed on an continent, in any
country, against any people in the world in the 20th century. The
Pacific is not an ocean. It is not a region. It is a crucible
in which the free, proud, and peaceful world of tomorrow is today
moulding and taking its shape. 6o, as we meet here this aftbrnoon,
the winds of hope arc blowing fresh and strong off the Pacific and
they are blowing throughout free Asia. Wo are partners in stirring
that excitement. Yes, Lir. Prime ipinister, the partners in
creating the b1iThn dollar Asian Development Aank. Wo are partners
in developing the ekong iver Delta, in denying those who would
destroy the promise of stability and growth, aiid in encoureging
those who would make that promise a reality. And that is the
reat and urgent work that, after your extremely important meetings
in London and here, you will return to Australia to advance, ir.
Prime inister. So today you leave us, not only as our trusted
partner and our cherished friend, but as a man who has left much
behind while the bravery and the nobility of the Australian people,
a new generation of Americans, are living the lessons that their
fathers learned.
I see in front of me Captain Stevens, a teacher at West
Point. It was 25 years ago, that I got out of bed in Townsville
one morning about 3 o'clock with Colonel Stevens, with whom I had
roomed. He died that day over Lae and Salamaua. He left a
little five year old boy, who is now this teacher at West Point,
to carry on for him. But we learned that quarter of a century
ago, Mr. Prime Minister, that one can never ask for finer comrades
on the battlefield, or more willing colleagues in the works of
peace than our Pacific brothers, our Australian allies. And so
it is our prayer today that God grant that your young men and ours
will soon return from conflict to enjoy the peace that we seek so
fervently together. And, until they do return, we will stand
shoulder to shoulder supporting them all the way.
So, gentlemen, I should like to ask you to toast that
bright hope and its living symbol, the very able, courageous, and
distinguished Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia,
Mr. Holt. 
2.
M1r. President and gentlemen:
Any man who had been honoured by a luncheon given to him by
the President of this great democracy would treasure that as a
memory for a lifetime. To be so honoured twice in so short a
space of time is not merely a great honour to me and my country,
but it has been tremendously gratifying to my colleagues as they
notified me by cable from Australia. What you have done by your
warm gesture, Mr. President, is a further strand strengthening
these close bonds which have developed between us.
Since I was last with you I have been acroos the Atlantic
to London. As you know, my main purposes in coming abroad were
to see you and to develop a warmer and closer, more intimate
relationship with you. You had kindly suggested that, and so, in
his place, had the Prime M~ inister of Great Britain. I have gone
through this process with Harold W-ilson in London. Last Sunday'
night at Chequers, that historic establishment of Britisn Prime
Ministers, after his wife and mine had left us for the evening,
he kicked his shoes off and lay down on a counch and for three
hours we settled the problems of the world. I told him, Mr.
President, that you had been so generous to me that I felt that if
I had asked you for the Statue of Liberty you would have gladly
g iven it to He said " Wdhy didn't you ask hirm for Fort Knox?"
Wll, he may have felt that it would have been handy. But
earlier in that evening he had taken me on a conducted tour
which you w. zere kind enough to do this for me last night at the
w-ijhite House of Chequers. At one point of the establishment
there is a picture by Rernbrandt illustrating the fable of " The
Lion and the Mouse". It is a wonderful picture, of course,
greatly celebrated and beautifully painted. But when Choquers
was occupied by Winston Churchill, Vlntnused to study this.
He was, as you know, an amateur painter. In fact I think he was
almost a professional painter by the fees he got toward the end.
But he studied the picture. Perhaps it was failing eyesight, or
Rembrandt had left something to the imaination, but he said " I
cannot see the mouse". So he painted in the mouse on the picture,
and there it is. And so you have Rembrandt and Churchill on
this particular picturo. But there was a moral in it, of course,
for me. My countrymen won't like me describing them, as mice.
Indood we produce the largest rat in the world. It stumps itself
along and calls itself a kangaroo. But I remember the moral of
the fable was that little friends may prove great friends. In a
sense, my country is a little friend, because there are less than
12 million of us. But I think of the men that this country
produced when there were 2i million of you and you signed the
Declaration of Independence. I have often rnrvelled at the
greatness of the men you produced from that small conmunity at
that time. I think it was Smuts who said that the great countries
are the countries which produce great men, and you produced great
men as early as the period in w-hich you had something less than
2-2 million. Washington, him'self, Jefferson, Franklin, Alexander
Hamiulton. You know the list of them so much better than I. But
these are Lien whose names stand in the cor1non heritage of
democracy and freedom around tho world.
I talked about myself. Perhaps I could return to that for
a moment, because wie have so mny d~ istinguished press representatives
and columnists -and people of that sort here. I had a recent
example in London of how. important correct reporting can be. Ir!
wife was interviewed by the press while she was there and was asked
what she had been doing. Naturally, being the wife of a politician,
she was quite cautious about this. So they asked her if she had
been doing any shopping. You know nothing can embarrass a politician 
3.
any more than to have it reported that his wife had been doing a
lot of expensive shopping. So she said that she had bought a
couple of white rice. This was solemnly reported back in
Australia. Then the cables started to flow in the most intriguing
jargon of the Public Service of the Commonwealth, pointing out
that the import of white mice into Australia was prohibited under
our quarantine arrangements; that these white iuce would have to
be exterminated if they arrived. It would be very embarrassing
for all concerned if the wife of the Primie Minister had to be
subjected to this treatment. Now if the press had only added what
was the fact, that these white mice were made of china and were
designed for our grandchildren, then everybody would have been
happy. But I have had, Mr. President, on this journey, memorable
unforgettable, and very stirring experiences. And you, Sir, have
contributed notably to these in ways which my country will not
forget and certainly I shall not. And then in England, of course,
Ihave these memories also.
But one would expect to find some disap pointments along the
way, and I found one here. I found one when Iwent to England.
Perhaps there wore others, but these are the ones I mention. The
disappointment I found here was to discover how little of the total
story of what is going on in the Pacific area was reaching you
through the columns of the press. There was a vivid, dramatic,
day-to-day reporting of the military operations in South Vietnam
and this, I suppose, is the first war which has been fought on a
television screen for most people, and, therefore, not necessarily
the most objectively understood by most people. And so I was
disappointed that, while I knew of the feeling and appreciation that
your own Adm~ inistration has for this area and its problems, and you
have , iven elophent tostiin-on to that in the words you have given to
us this lunchtime, it was to me, I repeat, a disappointment that wie
didn't hear more of what was going on in this area of the world
which contains half the human race, which, by the end of the centu. ry,
will contain rather more than half the human race, because the rate
of increase there is significantly greater than in the area of
Western Europe or even in these United States. But you and your
colleagues have shown your ovin awareness of the problems of that
area and your determination to play a significant part in seeing
those of us who live there through the challenges and through the
opportunities which lie ahead for us. In England I found some
disappointment in the fact that Great Britain, and even more so the
other countries of Western Eurcpe, seem to be almost oblivious to
the existence of that area of the world, almost as if they had quite
deliberately turned their backs upon a large part of life, history,
and experience in these modern tinies, because so much that is
stirring and exciting in these modern times is occurring in this
area of the world. To brine out the best in the people of a country
you need a cause that will stir the pulse. We have, I am glad to
say, several such causes moving in my own country at this time.
The problem of developing a large continent, of brigng people in
from so many different countries, the challenge of great projects
which have to be opened up, the comparatively recent discovery
Perha: s I should, in saying this, mollify what one has said in a
critical vein of these other countries, because it is only in
comparatively recent times that in Australia, have become
conscious and sensitive to the fact that we, by force of qeography
and circumstances and the history of the future, have a significant
place in Asia and, in particular, in the Asia of tomorrow--. These
were the disappointments. 
4.
On the other hand, Mr. President, I was to find in the United
Kingdom an expression, by the Prime Minister, of determination to
support your presence in Vict. iun, of recognition of the need for
the two great democracies of the United States and the United
Kingdom to maintain a close ck-oradeship in the affairs of the world.
And you will shortly be vis: t. d by the Prime Minister, again keeping
close and warm the link betm. cn these two democracies whose leadership
means so much to the we. l-being of mankind. But the primary
responsibility of that leadc" hip falls upon you as the head of the
mighty nation which these days loads the free world. It is an
awesome responsibility and it ib fortunate for all of us who value
freedom, the opportunities, c.-d liberties of free men that vie should
have, as the leader of this , reat democracy in turn leading the
free world, a man of your o cco: u rage, character and resolution.
And the lesson that we shall. uarry out to the rest of the world and,
indeed, I know this is the ju'! nent of the Prime Minister of Great
Britain, is that here wve have a man of resolution determined to see
the issues in Vietnam throua to the end, however difficult or long
that task may be. But you ' rid I, as men who have this stirring of
the pulse for the things thati can be done and perhaps because we
come from great open spaces and can draw a big fresh breath from
the country in which we live and breathe, that we tend to take the
long view, perhaps the visionary view. But the visions help to
provide the causes and the causes help to evoke the qualities that
are the best that lie within us. And we share this great cause in
the Asia of the future. This, to me, has been one of the really
heartening experiences of my journey to the Northern Hemisphere
from down under. Here in this country is the resolution to see
the job through where the difficulties lie and eager determination
to take up thEc oopportunities in comradeship and collaboration with
those of us who live in the sroa to make something of Asia which
will mark a new and hopeful phase in the history of mankind.
Mr. President, this is the sort of hope you leave with me
and which I take back to rmy country. And it is a stirring thing.
It is a comforting thing. It is a heartening thing to be ableto
feel that we can go on throu ih the many difficulties which face a
small people in a large continent with hundreds of millions of
people of different race, different history, different tradition,
different religion, different outlook, inmediately about us, but
confidently facing that future, because we believe that in our own
friendship, our own enterprise, our own willingness to join in the
task of Asia, we will build ourselves new friendships that will
see us through the difficulties that we face. And underlying it
all will be the knowledge that we have a friend, a very powerful
friend, whom you sy-bolize on this occasion. Thank you. for meaning
that strength and that inspiration that is heartening to us all.
In that spirit, from Australia, I salute the President of
the United States. 



JOINT CC) M1VlUNIfUE BY PRESIDENT LYNDON B. JCHNS&amp; N AND
THE PIMME MINISTER MR. HAROLD HOLT
AT WH[' ITE HOUSE, WASIING'FCN, D. C.
14th July, 1966.
At the invitation of President Johnson, the Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia, the Right Honourable
Harold E. Holt, has returned to Washington to continue the
discussions which they held on subjects of mutual interest on
June 2 9. The President expressed his sincere appreciation
for the Prime Minister's willingness to arrange travel arrangements
to make their meeting possible.
The President and the Prime Minister reaffirmed the
determination of their two governments to assist the Republic of
Vietnam and its people in their efforts to repel the armed a-; gression
mounted against the Republic of Vietnam by the regime in Hanoi,
and expressed full confidence that those efforts will be successful.
They expressed again the desire of both governments that the
fighting in South Vietnam be brought to an end as soon as possible
through negotiation of an honourable peace, welcomed the
initiative of the Prime Minister of India appealing to the government
of the U. S. S. R. to reconvene a meeting of the Geneva powers anc
reaffirmed their readiness to take part in tihis or other negotiations
whenev-r the Hanoi regime indicate a willingne-$ s to do so.
President Johnson reviewed for the Prime Minister
military developments in Vietnam during the past two weeks. The
Prime Minister expressed appreciation for this review of recent events.
The Prime Minister discussed with the President his
recent visit to London.
The President and the Prime Minister reviewed the
political, economic and social progress and developmert which has
occurred in free Asia in recent years, most particularly in the first
half of 1966, and agreed that these developments are of Ihe greatest
significance for the future of Asia, the Pacific area and the world.
The President and the Prime Minister noted that among these developments
has been the healing of old quarrels between nations of the region, the
recent establishment of the Asian and Pacific Council, the imminent formal
inauguration of the Asian Development Bank in which both the United
States and Australia are participating, and concrete steps towards the
development of the Mekong Basin.
The President and the Prime Minister described these
events and the growing sense of regional identity in Asia and the Pacific
area as most encouraging for the possibility of future peace and
peaceful progress in the region. They expressed their belief that
these developments have in no small measure been made possible by the
shield of security provided to the region by the determination of the
gallant people of Vietnam and those assisting them to repel communist
aggression. 
-2-
The President and the Prime Minister noted with
satisfaction the steady strengthening in the ties linking their two
countries, particularly the flow of trade and investment, co-operation
in exploring the mysteries of space and common efforts in a broad
range of other scientific projects.
The President and the Prime Minister ag: eed that there
exist opportunities for further great undertakings in the peaceful
development of Asia, and these opportunities will be greatly expanded
when peace returns to the region. 



FOR PRESS POLYVINYL CHLORIDE PRODUCTS
( Statement by the Acting Prime Minister,
and Minister for Trade and Industry, Mr. J. MoEwen)
The Acting Prime Minister and Minister for
Trade and Industry, Mr. J. McEwen, announced today that
temporary duties would operate as from Monday morning
on certain polyvinyl chloride products, viz:-sheet,.
film, textile coated or supported fabrics, curtains ' and
tablecloths. The temporary duties would be in addition to
t~ he normal duties, but would not apply to goods in dirg*
transit to Australia on 2nd June, 1966 and entered fov
home consumption wi+ hin twenty-one days after importation.
Mr. McEwen said that the temporary duties were
as recommended by the Special Advisory Authority, Sir'Frank
Meere, who had been requested to conduct an inquiry
into claims by the Australian industry that urgent action
was necessary to protect the industry from import
competition, in the-main from Japan.
The Tariff Board has been asked to inquire and
report on the protective needs of the industry, and ' the
temporary protection now imposed is holding action pending
the Governiment' s decision on receipt of the Tariff Board
report. Mr. McEwen went on to say that, in his report,
Sir Frank Meere had referred to the fact that a suggestion
had been put forward on behalf of the Japan Vinyl Goods
Manufacturers' Association for some restriction of exports 
from Japan to Australia. However, this offer to control
exports to Australia had been made at a late stage of the
inquiry and there had not been sufficient time for Sir
Frank Meere to obtain the views of other interested
parties or to give it adequate consideration.
Since the'I report has been received there has
been further representations about voluntary restraint
of exports from Japan but so far there has not been a
specific proposal put forward for the Government to
consider, Mr. McEwen said.
The Government would, however, be prepared t~ o
give serious consideration to a proposal which would
provide satisfactory holding action until the Government~
has made its decision following the Tariff Board report.
Accordingly, provision is being made now which would allow
the previous duties to operate without the additional
temporary duties if such a proposal is actoepted,
Copies of the Special Advisory Authority's
report, which will be tabled in the Parliament, are
available from the Department of Trade and Industry,
Canberra and Collectors of Customs in all States.
CANBER'RA A. C. T.
July, 1966. 50/ 66T 



FOR PRESS 67/ 1966
NATIONAL RADIATION ADVISORY COMITTEE
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister,
The Right Honourable J. Mc~ E-en. M. P.
The Acting Prime Minister, The Right Honourable J. McEven,
announced today that Professor R. J. ' alsh of the
University of New South Wales had accepted an invitation to
become a member of the National Radiation Advisory Commiittee.
Professor alsh, Professor of Hurma,. Genetics at the
University of New South Wales, is also Director of the Red Cross
Blood Transfusion Service in that State. He , ill fill the
vacancy created by the death last year of Professor E. King of
the Department of Pathology of the University of Melbourne.
Mr. McEven said that Professor Jalsh, with his background
in the biological and medical sciences, was -ell qualified to
assist the National Radiation Advisory Committee, which was
established in 1957, in its function of advising the Government
on the effects of ionizing radiation on the Australian community.
CANBERRA l1th July, 1966: 



66/ 095
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 65/ 1966
DEATH OF THE HONOURABLE SIR WIILLIAM SPOONER, KCMI. M4
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister. Mr. John McEven
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, said today
that Sir William Spooner was an outstanding and dedicated
Australian. From his fine military achievements during
the First World War dovwn through the years to his notable
contributions in more recent times in Federal Parliament,
and as a Cabinet Minister, he had a spendid record of
service to his country and to his fellow Australians.
We mourn the passing of our colleague and friend
and pay tribute to his memory.
On behalf of my Cabinet colleagues and myself I
extend our sincere sympathy to Lady Spooner and her
family. CANBERRA lth July, 1966: 



PRII1 INISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. ATND U. K
__ Prme SSr ta arod olt
at ' fscotA irport on his return from overseas 17th July, 1966.
It is very good to be back in this crips air of Australia
once more and to feel that I can say " mission accomplished" with
a full heart. I think you've had a very good cover of all that's
been happening with me, from what I gather from the papers that
have reached me. Perhaps the only . matterw hich w: ouldn't have
been dealt with in any detail up till no-by the press was my
visit yesterday to the headquarters of the Commander-in-Chief,
Pacific Comimand, Admiral Sharp, in Honolulu, where I had quite
the most comprehensive briefing on the military operations, the
build up of military strength and the conduct of operations that
I've had in the course of the whole tour. And this rounded off
in a most valuable way the discussions I've been having at the
political level.
The main purpose of my journey was, as you know, to try to
establish a warmer and closer personal working relationship with
the Prime Minister of Great Britain and the President of the 4
United States. From the time I took office, both of them had of
their own initiative suggested to me that I continue with them
the same close and intimate cor. munication which had developed
between each of them and Sir Robert ' enzies. So that when
I came to meet them, I met them as one who had got quite close to
them by way of this exchange of correspondence. But there is no
substitute for the personal contact. Each of them had in turn
suggested that I make a visit in order that ve might get to know
each other better, and I was able to do this of course with the
two of them. And I can say without reservation that as a result
of this there has developed between myself, Prime Minister Wilson
and President Johnson a working relationship and an intimacy of
personal knowledge which, I think, will make for a T; r1, uos eful
and advantageous exchange in the future, and which will benefit
our respective countries in the closeness of our co-operation.
I an rather sorry that the concluding reports I saw in
one or two of the papers, covering my remarks in Uashington,
implied a good deal of criticism on my part of the British
Government. That read more into w. hat I said than I certainly
intended. Indeed, I believe that, having regard to his own
political difficulties and the problems he faces in the United
Kingdom, that Prime Minister 1ilson has shown great courage and
purpose in the line he has taken in relation to South Viet Nam.
It's true that he did not see the bombing episode in the same
way that the United States and ourselves did, but he made it
clear that he was still supporting American purposes and presence
in South Viet Nam.
He and I had a very close exchange. I think the night
at Chequers in which we spent three hours alone together and
covered a great deal of ground was foundational to continuing
good relations in the future and we were able to follow that up
with -talks at No. 10 Downing Street the next day. I mention this
because I think rather less has been made of the talks in London,
although they were certainly no less extensive than the talks we
had i. n '-ashington betwcon the President and -yself and his advisers.
In eohch case I was able to talk, not only with the leaders of
the governments concerned, but with their most senior colleagues,
and this has given me a very rounded and quite full picture of
what -each administration is doing in respect of a lot of matters
in which we are interested. 
2.
Now-tomorrow; I meet the National Preos Club in Canberra
and I shall try there to survey the contacts and discussions in
rather more depth. But I hope you won't expect that of me so
early in the morning after so long a journey.
All I w: ould add by v. ay of conclusion is that all the
objectives which I set out to achieve w: ere fully accomplished,
and a groat deal more that went beyond my most sanguine
expectations. Some problems have been revealed. But
it is interesting to note that the concept I advanced at the
outset of an Asia which, under the protection of the might and
power of the United States, had been able to expand and extend
econom: ically and in co-operation.-has boon seized on with
enthusiasm by President Johnson and his colleagues. It doesn't,
of course, state anything new but at least it states publicly
some of the developments and puts them together in a co-ordinated
ay Jwhich, I thirr, had not been done effectively before. So
this ws a valuable contribution which Australia was able to imke
and, certainly, it was appreciated.
I, for my part, was very glad to have the second opportunity
of seeing the President and his colleagues and a good deal of
value was gathered from the second visit, supplementing the first.
I shall long remember and treasure these cxperiences as the
representative of this country, feeling the warmth that radiates
to us in these two great democracies. They value us as a
partner, as friend, as colleague in the purposes we share in
common. And Australia must fee]. proud that our place( in this
area of the world is recognised as an important one by tw: o of the
powerful leaders of the democratic countries of the world.
Thank you. 



ADDRESS TO A2TIONAL P ESS CLUB, CANIHEiH
ON PRIIE : INIS'iER'S ETU. N FiROI VISITS
TO THE UNITED STATES AND BRITAIN 18th July, 1966.
Mr. Chairman, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It doesn't seem so very long ago that I was talking to
another National Press Club, in Washington, and I w-as able to say
to that gathering that an invitation to speak to the National Press
Club in ' ashington had become a sort of status symibol in the life
of the potential statesman. I think the way you are shaping, Ir,
Chairman, the Canberra National Press Club can claim that sort of
prestige for its functions and I wish you success in the development
of an institution which has added, significantly I believe, to the
value of attending Canberra gatherings by those who have come to be
named amongst the world's most notable.
You had very recently one of the great men of contemporary
times in Dean Rusk I happened to be in New York at the time and
you were being noted with so much significance that a fe: w entlemen
holding up a piece of calico by way of protest to hr. Rusk s
presence found themiselves honoured by front-page treatment in the
" New York Times", but I doubt whether anything I say here today
will be similarly publicised there, but at least the National Press
Club here in Canberra has been noted in this way in one of the
most august papers of the United States.
Nci I don't know that I clearly apprehend how I should go
about this business this afternoon because there was such a
comprehensive cover in the Australian press of everything I did
while I was overseas that it would be a waste of your time to go
over the ground in a narrative way again. It is one of the
significant development of modern times that a public figure in a
position of leadership going abroad does have a coverage,
particularly from his native press and the other communications
media of television and radio, surpassing anything that we have
ever known in the past, and in a sense this is a good thing since
the workings of a democracy require an understanding in some
detail of what it is the head of that democracy is putting publicly
at any particular time. But I would like you to know what this
adds up to in demands upon the itinerant statesman. If, at every
airport his plane touches down, even if only to refuel, he finds
himself met with a battery of television, radio, and newspaper
representatives, then by the time he reaches the country of
destination much of what he wanted to say has been dissipated
along the route. There is always the alternative of turning
rather rudely away from the complicated apparatus that people have
brought at considerable inconvenience and expense to greet him,
but that is not a very popular alternative, and so one usually
obliges by making some comment which the doctors have advised is
not well-considered within 24 hours of a jet journey. Perhaps
that is why so many foolish things are said at airport interviews.
The other thing is that accompanying you these days is a
team of pressmen. In my case I had the comforting presence of
radio and television representatives as well, and the result is
that back home my own people got very full treatment. They
have all heard what I have been saying and doing. They have
read so many accounts of the same sort of general proposition
that some must have wondered why I have been talking so much,
but in point of fact it is necessary to thump your way as hard
as you can to make the slightest dint in the press of the country
in which you are appearing, and I think it is as well for our own 
2.
poeple to mkno that. Although . we feel that in some of the
significant areas of policy making and with some of the leaders
of policy around the world, Australia is able to exercise an
influence, the space we occupy in the national press of the
countries concerned is unflattering to our egcs and this must
be accented as one of the facts of contemporary political life.
So don't be surprised if in the course of a journey such as I
have just made you find your spokesman saying apparently over
and over again the sort of thing that you read a week before.
To make his point, to register the argument, w. ith the press and
the public of the country he is visiting these things have to be
done. Well, I think that b' dint of diligence and persistance
on this occasion the points that I desired to make were registeeod
at least in quarters where they will have some impact, and I will
say a wor or two about that as I go along.
. y prime purpose, as you know, w-as to establish closer
working relations with the Prime Lnister of the United Kingdom
and with the President of the United States of America. Both of
them independently of each other had proposed to me that I should
visit then for this purpose. Both of them, independently of
each other, had proposed to me when I took office that I continue
with them the same intimate co; mmunication by way of correspondence
and cable that my predecessor, Sir Robert Inenzies, had conducted,
and this itself is a reflection of the growing place which
Australia occupies in the affairs of the world at this time, or
at least in this area of the w, orld in which we find ourselves.
For my part I w; as very glad to receive these invitations,
believing that it would be nationally advantgeous if I could
develop closer working relationships.
In the result that aspect of the journey turned out far
better than in my most optimistic moments I could have hoped.
Hy visit to President Johnson, as first log of the journey,
proved -: arm, cordial and laid the foundation for the closer
discussions which took place on the second visit, but there were
some valuable discoveries to be made from the first and as these
items have not previously been commented on publicly by me,
I mention them now.
The first was the welcome discovery of how fit and
buoyant the President looks. I had imgined that, having come
through an operation of a serious kind quite recently, and
noting as I had before in the case of President Eisenhower that
the newspaper photographs seemed to take a lot of the blood out
of tho subject, it was encouraging to find in charge of the
affairs of that great democracy this live, vigorous man. Not
only w. as he fit and alert, right on top of his ow-n particular
responsibilities, but that morning he had sat up until 4 o'clock
w'aiting for the reports which had come from the oil installation
bombing operations. I could hardly have tined my visit better
because he lwas anxious to know the results of the bombing and
also to hear the reactions around the world. Je had been
consulted beforehand, we had made known beforehand that in our
view this was a -icgitimate exercise of military tactics, but
it was fortuitous that T happened to be in Washington just on
the morning w-hen the new. s broke, and Wvhat I was able to say
then in support of that decision was welcomed widely by all in
the Administration and by many people throughout the United
States generally. 
But one matter I think I shoul. d put quite finrly on the
record. It is important that this should be Imade w. idely known.
There may be doubts around the world, certainly I believe these
doubts exist in the Cormunist w. orld, aboub the strength of
resolution of the President of the United States and leading
members of his Administration in their detclrination to see the
issue through in South Viet Nam. I have no doubtin my mind,
I say that not merely because he made this clear in emphatic
terms to me, but because of my own assessment of the man and of
the very able team of men he has around him. You saw one of
them in the person of Dean Rusk here quite recently. I repeat
I have no doubt in my own mind of the strenth of the President's
resolution, his determination to see this strugle through.
Now I say it is important that this should be known
because those who lead the Commui-' nist forces are not familiar, or
seem to be unfamiliar with our methods of government. To them
it would be unthinkable in their own country that a government
should find itself faced with the hostile voices that one hears
in a democracy without taking some action to supress those voices.
They find leading figures in American life, academic leaders and
others, critical as we find them in our own country. This
influences their own thinking. It becomes a subject matter for
the propaganda material which they subsequently prepare and
consequently it becomes important for us to stress publicly the
belief, if belief exists, and in my case it is the strong belief,
that the President, backed by the capable men he has around him,
is determined to fight on in South Viet Nam until a peace which
meets our concepts of justice and fair dealing and effectiveness
can be procured in that country.
I saw. in one press editorial this morning a query as to
whether there was any substance in the suggestion that the
Americans were determined to go ahead and secure a military
victory before any negotiations would be entertained. Well, as
recently as the time of the release of the communique by the
President and myself, in Washington, it was made clear that
negotiations would be welcomed at any time, and the sooner the
better. We both commended the efforts, negative though they
have since proved to be, of the Prime tinister of India, in seeking
to promote negotiations as early as practicable.
And so we are fortunate, I believe, those of us who are
held secore by the strength, the military might, the free world
leaderh. ip of the United States, we are fortunate that there
should be in that leadership at this time a man of the resolution,
the clarity of vision, and the will to see this thing through
with a view to producing a better world order in that area, in
the person of the President of the United States. Don't let's
overlook the fact that it is not the decision merely of President
Johnson that has been given effect in South Viet Nan. There is
a disposition to think that this is a product of the will and
judment of this one particular Presidential figure in point
of fact he is the third President in succession .' ho has felt that
free world interests and the proper policies for the United States
require an American participation in strength in this area. For
our part, we in this country have the authority of two successive
Prime iinisters backing the judgrcnts of those three Presidents. 
In the United Kingdom I had talks which were just as close
and just as cordial with Mr. Iarold iilson. It's rather
unfortunate that not so much pro-: inence has been given to these
talks because they formed for no a basis for continuing
collaboration with him in a most cordial fashion, and, no less
than in the case with President Johnson, I was able to build a
personal relationship with him. ' We spent together one night at
Chequers, the historical residence of Prime Ministers of Great
Britain. We had 3 hours alone in which we canvassed all the
problems I had put down on a sheet of notpaper, matters which
I wanted to raise with him. Later that night I ticked off each
item, in case it proved necessary to follow up next day in the
course of further discussion we had arranged some matters which
had been overlooked. I found that we had covered the whole
field, and although there are differences of viewpoint which
I think have become well identified between the United Kingdom,
the United States and ourselves I for one as a parliamentarian
who has had to work both with a majority of one and with a
majority very much larger than that, don't underrate the political
problems . which Mr. Wilson has to contend with.
Knowing those political problems, the President feels, and
I certainly feel that 1r. Wilson has shown great courage and
firmness in holding his government in support of our presence in
South Viet Nam and in support of the objectives we have there.
I mentioned this to the President and at the same time talked
about concern at what seemed to be a lack of substantial interest,
and even more so on the Continent of Europe, in what is going on
in this area of the world. One has only to pick up the papers
and scan through them each morning to see how little space is
given to events in this area of the world, outside of the day to
day military reporting in Viet Nam itself. And the fact of the
matter is and who are we to be critical of it because I suppose
we don't take all that much interest ourselves in what is going on
in some of the countries of Europe that the people of Europe,
and this goes for the mass of people in Great Britain also, regard
these countries as remote and relatively unknown and thus
possessing no great or direct significance in their eyes.
I happened to arrive about the same time, in fact a day or
so after the French Prime Minister, and great prominence was
given to all that he said and did while he was there. From the
more significant papers, such as " The Times" and one or two
others, we had quite a good press cover of what I was putting,
but clearly the mass of people did not have this interest and if
the mass of people don't have the interest then the Parliament
tends to reflect that attitude of mind and these days Great
Britain, the countries of Western Europe, tend to be inward
looking into their own affairs rather than outward looking in a
way which would embrace the problems of areas asremote as ours.
Well this, from our point of view, may be unfortunate, but
if it exists then it is important that we should know about it
and we should adjust ourselves accordingly. And I come back to
this country with a more balanced assessment, I believe, of the
relative strength of feeling about the future of the area and
this must have its effect on policies as they emerge from time
to time. 
In the United States it seemed to me that there was very
vivid reporting and a. groat deal of it of the actual fighting
and events relating to military ocprations in South Viet iNai.
But, again, one found a quite noticeable lack of public reference
to the more positive developments occuring around the South East
Asian area. Now these are not drar. tic in a new. sense, and,
taken, isolated one from the other, perhaps don't seem to amount
to a very great deal. But to those of us who have been dealing
closely with these things over the years, wo feel a great hope
from developments which are now taking firmer shape, which do
evidence a growing co-operation, particularly amongst those
countries of the area -ho have felt thensolves threatened by
Colmunist subversion or attack, or feel the potential danger
which could develop as a result of CoInunist penetration if
country after country were to fall.
And so wo have seen an organisation such as the Asian and
South Pacific Council eecrge with 9 countries, of w: hich Australia
and New Zealand are two not a great power country amongst them
other than that Japan must be considered a great power in an
industrial sense, but in a ilitary sense, not a great pow. er
amongst them. But all of them feeling unity of purpose or danger
from the fact that they are on the periphery of Asia or in
sufficiently close contact to the events in South Viet Na. and in
China, to believe that unless there is a chock to that aggression
then they could be endangered in the future.
We have seen over recent years the way in which countries
formerly threatened, like South Korea, Taiwan and Ialaysia, have
been able to strengthen their economies and to build up their
resources shielded by the strength of the United States and its
establishments throughout this area of the world. And so I made
a point wherever I could of ephasising this and it was heartening
to find that the theme had attracted the interest and enthusiasm
of the President and his Administration. I don't claim that there
was novelty in the matters that I was putting forward, and indeed
Australia has always mi ntained an initiative in this field. You
may remember that Lord Casey, as Iinister for External Affairs, was
one of the very few linisters of Foreign Affairs of any country
outside of Asia directly, who went around those countries and
made our viewpoint known clearly, built up good personal relations.
There was the pioneering work of Sir Percy Spender with the Colobo
Plan. The work then followed up by Sir Garfield Barwick and,
more recently, my colleague Mr. Hasluck.
Therefore, it is not by accident or by geography that
Australia does possess a very warm, friendly and close -: working
relationship with so kmany of these countries. even have a
friendly basis with countries which don't enjoy that same kind of
relationship with very many in the area. For example, we have
very good relations with Cambodia and indeed, represent United
States interest in Cambodia.
Right through the period of confrontation, we nevertheless
managed to maintain a channel of friendship through to Indonesia.
1Vith Thailand, there was the exchange of visits between
the Prime M. inistcr and myself, he visiting Australia first this
year. In the course of my own visit later to South East Asia,
I was able to develop a still closer relationship with him.
These are just syrptoms of the times. The emergence of an
institution like the Asian Development Bank; the arrangements
we are making together for the developnent of the kekong Valley;
the grant by Japan of 800 million dollars of credit to South
Korea as part of the close economic and trade relationships with
that country. These, I repeat, are only sympto but we're 
6
dealing wit more than half the numan race East of Suos and with
a population growth rate higher than almost any other country or
area in the world.
By the end of this century that billion and a half of
people may very well have doubled, and in this area the United
States has expressed its determination to join in developing the
resources of this new Asia, in joining in co-operation with
others in order to make more effective use of their own resources
to provide a ray of hope for a better way of life for the people
of these countries. Evidence of this has been quite dramatically
provided for us in the course of the past foe days by the President
of the United States.
Now this was a theme which was expressed quite vigorously
by me and before I had left America and, indeed, by the time
I wont back again for a second visit, had become well taken up by
the Administration and had formed the material for a lot of
approving editorial comment throughout some of the leading
journals of the United States. And I regard this as being just
at the beginning of our activities in this field. Australia and
Japan have given a notable demonstration of what can be achieved
in our friendly trade one with the other. It has multiplied four
and a half times since the early 1950' s and, we believe, we are
just at the beginning of this process.
Now somebody asked I think you, Mr. Chairman, in
introducing me, how far did " All the Way" mean in relation to
the President. I only hope that those who'vc given currency in
this country to the phrase have studied as closely all the other
things that I said while I was there. They would then have
developed a well balanced appreciation of what it was I was
trying to express. It doesn't mean, certainly, that Australia
has any lack of independence of mind, and anybody who knows the
President would be paying him no compliment if they felt that he
was looking for the kind of friend who was never prepared to
have an argument with him. He has a vigorous mind of his own
and he looks for a vigorous exchange of views from those who
invoke friendship with him.
Quite shortly after seeing him in Washington I put some
views in New York to the American-Australian Association which
certainly didn't coincide with Administration policy of the
momeht. I spoke of the need to penetrate both the iron and the
Bamboo Curtains to build up trade as a means of opening up
personal contacts, personal relationships, to have more
frequent visits by reporters, by scientific and cultural groups
and in these and other ways help to establish a human quotient
which would assist in breaking down these resistances. The
phrase I used then I think is worth repeating, not because of
its excellence, but because it does express a concept that I'm
sure all here would adopt. We can't afford to look on the rest
of the world in terms of the " goodies" and the " baddies",
contending that all the right people, the good people, are on
our side, and all the " baddies on the other in the Communist
camp. There are intelligent people, dedicated people, working
for their own national interest in all communities around the
world. For our part, it is for us to -see where those who are
willing to look for a better world can come together in some
settlement arising out of present differences, and apply the
tremendous resources that men are capable of now attaining, to
the betterment of mankind for the better world to which we all
aspire. In the President, we have a practical rnn who is, at
the same time, a man with vision of a better world whether it is
the society that he works for in his own country, or for an 
application of the fruits of science and technology to the needs
of the rapidly increasing human race.
Now, out of these discussions, I feel that a basis has
been established in which Australia can play a useful part in the
future. Adopting the old Aesop Fable oi the Lion and the ' i~ uso,
I said-that " Little friends can prove great friends' and Australia
is so placed geographically and in terms of the relationships we
have built up with the countries of Asia, that 0e can, I believe,
serve in a useful way both with the United Kingdom and with the
United States in doing more in this area of the world. The
United Kingdom is conscious of the limitations upon its own
capacities. " Overstrtcdh" was the wori which seemed to signify
the situation in that country. It was put to me by members of
the Government itself. They'. re very conscious of their cormitments
at a time w-hen their resources are not adequate to meet the
extent of the commitments they have undertaken. They have to
bring themselves into a better state of balance. But with the
United States, the position is rather different. If only a
situation of peace and stability could be restored in South East
Asia, then the vast resources that are currently going into
military purposes could, with advantage, be turned to the tasks
of reconstruction and development of areas possessing so much
potential in themselves.
Now, I believe that Australia as a result of all those
talks, finds itself in a position where both the United States
and the United Kingc. om look to us as a country of influence, a
country capable of playing a significant part in the future of
the area. I can say, without any reservation, that no
additional commitments have been sought of this country. These
matters did not arise in discussion between us. I think, both
in the United States and in the United Kingdom, it is recognised
that as Australia grows, so will our contribution, in a security
sense and in the provision of aid. There is a more realistic
appreciation that this country is not making a military
contribution merely in one area or the other, that ' we're doing
so at several points. And there is a more realistic appreciation
that the country which has still a vast continent to develop,
with such limited resources of population, has its own limitations
upon what it can accomplish.
Having said that, gentlemen, I dor't imagine I've covered
your queries by any manner of means, but, broadly, that is the
field which was covered at this time and I feel, in my own
heart, greatly encouraged by the reception given to me as the
representative of this country. It illustrated for me better
than anything else perhaps that I could look for, the regard and
the respect which the Australia of these times is held in the
countries which mean so much to us. The vwanr, co-operative and
friendly relations which these great democratic leaders have
developed for Australia and for its own leadership are, I believe,
happy auguries for the future of this country.
I would just, by way of final cor. ent, say Mr. Chainman,
that the reporting of those who acconipanied me on this tour was
I believe in the best tradition of the craft of journalism, and
I would like to express my personal thanks to them for faithful
reporting and for every consideration given to the subject.
Thank you very much. 
QUESTION: L'r, Prime Minister, having soon you in successful
action in Washington, I know the circumstances in which you said
" All the -way with Apparently this has been risconstrued,
not only in Australia but in various parts of Asia. Could you
please reconcile the apparent inconsistency in our desire to be
part of Asia and to participate actively in Asian affairs, and
our equally empha. tic wish that Britain should remain East of
Suez, and that we should be so close to America?
MR. HOLT: Well, gentlemen, in South Viet Nam, and my remarks of
course were directed to that, I had no hesitation in indicating
our full support because, as I've said so often before in this
country, my Government believes that Australia is more directly
involved in South Viet Nam even than the United States of America
itself. We believe that the security of this nation ultimately
is involved in successfully resisting Communist agression in that
country. If it can't be successfully resisted there, then
ultimately, we believe, it will spread through Asia I'm not
saying this is a matter of vears, it may be decades but
ultimately it will spread through South East Asia generally. And
the kind of world in which we will then live will be a very
different world from that which we see today and the even brighter
world which is within our sights tomorrow. And so, when it comes
to American participation, American resolution to see the issue
through in South Viet Nam, Australian undoubtedly is " All the iay".
QUESTION: In view of what you've just said, and in view of the
fact that we know America is in process of a further massive
increase in its forces in Viet Nam, do you foresee at this stage
the possibility of us having to increase our commitment?
HOLT: This was not raised with me, as I have already said,
and I don't regard it as a matter within our early review. Of
course, as time goes on, we will review w. hat the Australian
contribution should be, but there is no escalation in dimension in
contemplation. QUESTION: Was any indication given by Washington of how long the
Viet Nam war could continue?
MR. HOLT: Well, I think a lot of people would like to be able
to forecast this, but r. y political opponent is the only regular
forecaster I know w. ho is prepared to put a precise time on these
matters. I don't think anybody can say with precision, because
it depends on your definition really of military action. I've
always believe that as the Communists were either defeated or
repulsed in major military engagements, they would turn increasingly
to the kind of guerrilla activity which they can conduct at
relatively small, cost to themselves and considerable nuisance and
cost to the forces on our side. We had to contend with that in
Malaya for, what was it, 12 years or thereabouts. But the fact
of the matter is that I had a very thorough briefing on all this
at the headquarters of Admiral Sharp just two days ago as we came
through Honolulu. There is no rmaor engagement these days that
the Viet Cong is winning. Whore the Viet Cong measures up in a
major force, then the forces opposing them are gaining the victory.
the loss ratio is running at about 5 to 1 in respect of the Viet
Cong and North Vietnamese forces against those on our side. Our
people are much better equipped and better organised. There is
improvement in intelligence. There has been a good deal of
success in halting the flow of materials, but even so materials
do get through. We know that the North Vietnameso and the Viet
Cong are having difficulty about food supplies, even more so with
medical supplies. But how long they'll go on taking this kind of 
punishment is in their minds, not in ours. So no one can give
you a precise answer on it. I said when I came back from South
Vit Nam that the Viet Cong could not win, and that ve were
making good progress in the military field. That is confir,. cld
by the latest advices which reach me, and results in the guairod
optimism -which has been expressed in 1Washington in recent tim~ i
QUESTION: You state the need to penetrate the Bamboo Curtain
by way of trade and cultural and scientific exchanges. Did you
put this specifically to President Johnson, and, if so, could you
give us his reaction?
IM. HOLT: I did not put it specifically on my first visit. We
had very lir. ited time on the first visit for close personal
discussion. By the time the various ceremonies were carried
out we had a luncheon at the iJhite House where we both spoke;
the next day he left on a speaking tour himself for a couple of
days. He had said to me that he wished to speak with me further
and as this had not arisen by the time we left, I wasn't altogether
surprised when in London he urged me to come back via Washington
before I camjron to Australia. But, in the meantime, and of my
own initiative, I advanced these views while I was in New York.
I think that a large body of opinion in America would favour some
development along those lines. It's not easy for a politician
facing election to advance some of these ideas. I felt they
should be advanced and did so and I don't think anybody was
unduly disturbed by them. I think more hard thinking is now
being given to what ought to be done in relation to China, just
as I hope that inside the Communist camp more hard thinking is
being devoted to w. here they are getting by their present policies.
They must see that they are driving a lot of the non-Communist
world more closely together and that if they allow another ten
years of this process to go on, then there will have been built
up economic strength and trade relationships which they might
find prejudicial to their own interests later on.
. QUESTION: Now that it is clear that the bombing of Hai Phong and
Hanoi has not compelled Hanoi to negotiate on terms acceptable
to the United States, there seems every possibility of an
escalation of bombing in North Viet Nam. There have been
forecastsby American spIkesmen that the next steps might be to
knock out power lines, dams and canals. If this eventuates,
can we assume that the pledge you gave Mr. Johnson of " All the
Way" means that, in advance, we have endorsed such actions?
MR. HOLT: You're dealing with some quite hypothetical situations.
As far as Australia is concerned, just as we were closely
consulted before the other operation, I . m s~ irc . io .: iuld bL-made
, ahy :; fig nifici. at dchngc in American tactics.
QUESTION: Mr. Holt, as Australia is proving herself such a
firm friend of America, did you seek American aid for national
development in Australia while you were there, such aid that
America has given to countries that have been hostile to her?
LR. HOLT: No. I made it clear when I got there that I hadn't
come ' to ask for anything. We are, it is true, a good friend of
America and I hope that's a general feeling in this country.
I don't know where people would choose to look for the security
of this country were it not for the friendship and strength of
the United States. There is no lack of will on the part of the
United Kingdom Government, for example, no lack of goodwill 
toward this country, but its own capacity to help is limited
these days, and you and I and the rest of us are secure in
Australia today because our security has been guaranteed under
treaty by the United States of America.
QUESTION: If I right take an earlier question a little further.
You have had the opportunity of seeing the situation in Viet Nan
yourself and these talks in the capitals in London and iWashington
how much hope do you put in peace in Viet Nan say, for example,
with Mr. Wilson's forthcoming mission?
MR. HOLT: You don't want me to predict in advance
that it's not going to got anryhcre. I prefer to leave
any cocnt on that until we see the-outcome.-I'mi sure we wish
MIr. . i. lson well in his efforts. He has, of course, made many
visits to Moscow in the past, particularly during the period
when he was President of the Board of Trade, and so he is well
known personally to several of the leading personalities there.
I'm sure that there could be nothing but value from the close
talks that he would have with Mr. Kosygin and other loading
members of the Administration. But, whether the Russians would
act independently of any general Communist attitude, I think is
highly doubtful. But at least as Co-Chairman with the United
Kingdom, there is purpose in them having talks together and from
what I have seen of wilson, if anybody is capable of putting
a view clearly and compellingly, then he possesses those
attributes. QUESTION: Mr. Holt, in place of an extension of the bombing of
North Viet Nam, do you see a greater likelihood of American
ground action from bases in Thailand? Has the President given
you any indication of what the next phase is if the bombing
fails to stop the movement of troops along the Ho Chi Minh Trail,
and if ground action is in his mind, do w. e support it?
MR. HOLT: Well, I dor'lt want to canvass publicly what were
clearly private discussions between us on various possibilities
which may arise. I've already said that we were not asked to
increase our commitment nor have we. But we shall certainly
be closely in touch with the United States regarding future
developments. My own impression is that the Thais have made
it known that they wish to cope with terrorist activity within
their own borders. But I wouldn't claim to be inside their
ninds on that matter, I haven't had any recent discussions with
them. QUESTION: Do you feel that the United States regards Australia
as a more important ally in the South Pacific than Britain?
MR. HOLT: I wouldn't know about that. I'm sure that the
United States values Great Britain's tremendous influence in
world affairs, and there has been for a considerable time a very
close working relationship between the United States President
of the day and the United Kingdom Prime Minister of the day.
In the case of President Johnson and I1r. ' iilson, there have been
frequent exchaiges, visits by iMr. W-ilson to him. Indeed, Mr.
Wilson will be making another one within the next week or so,
on my understanding. The United States would, I think,
believe that Great Britain will tend to decrease its role in
this area of the world. It sees in Australia a country, not
only which already enjoys good relations with others in the
area and which itself by virtue of its geography and circumstance
is placed significantly in the area, but that looking at some
point well ahead from where we are now, we shall be a country
of increasing population, increasing economic strength, able to 
11.
play an incroasing part in the affairs of the area. And it
is understandable therefore that , e should be regarded as a
partner, and cw are undoubtedly now regarded as a w,-arm and close
friend. QUESTION: You said a moment ago, Sir, that you did not discuss
the question of trade with China with the President on your first
visit. Could you say whether you discussed it on your second
visit? IR. HOLT: Notin specific t. nrms
QUESTION: Mr. Holt, have you asked the President to come to
Australia and, if so, has he been able to give a time when he
might be able to visit here?
MR. HOLT: I've made it clear that there would be a warm welcome
for him whenever he can arrange to come, and I know he iwould like
to come indeed after we'd gone for the journey down the Potomac
he took me back to the vihite House and arranged for a screening of
a 20-ninute film which he'd taken out here some 25 years ago or
thereabouts, when he was a servicer. an in this area of the world;
it was like most moving films taken by an amateur photographer,
not the best example of the cinematic art, but I've asked him for
a copy of it for our own national archives.
QUESTION: Sir, you've spoken about our alliance with the United
States. You've said that the British attitude towards this part
of the world is going to have some influence on our policy
thinking. You were also reported as saying while you were away
that it was expected that defence expenditure in this country
would rise to about 5 per cent of our gr: oss national product.
Does not this junct. ure of circumstancos mean that we are. going to
have to expect substantial increases in our national sacrifices to
play our part in this part of the world in the coming years?
MR. HOLT: Well, that depends on productivity, the run of the
seasons and a variety of other matters. ! e have, as you know,
entered into some arrangeonts to spread part of the cost of the
defence equipment that we're scocuring a little more widely. The
figure of 5 per cent is one which was mentioned to me by the
Treasurer as a figure which seemed to be looming on what he
could see of the trend in defence expenditure. An end to
confrontation would have a bearing on what our costs are, but
I would hope that we would be able to manage these things without
eating unduly into our development prospects. One f the factors
here which will have a bearing will be the extent to which
capital inflow is sustained. We've had a remarkable year in
that respect, an all-time record inflow, but there are the
restraints being imposed in Great Britain on a voluntary basis,
and some uncertainty as to the future availability of capital from
the United States now that money has shot up in price so much
all around the w-orld. Quite remarkably in *. estern Germany, the
Government is pa-ing there 8, 9 and 10 per cent for money. And
in Great Britain, of course, a 7 per cent bank rate has just been
introduced. So the cost of money may itself prove one of the
limiting factors on the availability of capital here. Now, these
things could all have a bearing on how far we have to restrain our
own expenditures. There is only one country in the w orld that
currently withholds a higher percentage from consumption of its
gross national product, a fixed capital and investment, and that is
Japan. Australia ranks next. So we're already doing a great deal
to help ourselves. I would hope that, with our own efforts, and
with the sort of inspiration that this growth, this feeling of growing
responsibility, a growing place in the world brings,, will result for
us all a better national tema. work enabling us to meet these cor:. itmont, 



FOR 9RESS 65/ 1966
PRE-BUDGET DISCUSSIONS
Statement by thle -Prime Minaister,
Mr Harold Holt
Members of -the Economic Committee of Cabinet had discussions
today with a group of national organisations representing industry
and commerce, and had separate meetings with representatives of
the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and the Export
Development Council. The national organisations which participated
in the discussions were the Associated Chambers of Commerce of
Australia, Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia,
National Farmers' Union of Australia, Australian Primary Producers'
Union, Australian W( ool Growers' and Graziers' Council, Australian
Wool and Meat Producers' Federation, Australian Bankers'
Association, Master Builders' Federation of Australia, Federal
Chamber of Automotive Industries and the Australian Council of
Retailers. The Prime Minister said that these talks allowed Ministers
to get the up-to-date views of those directly engaged in comaerce
and industry. The present discussions had been particularly
timely as Cabinet would be having discussions during the remainder
of the week on Budget matters, preparatory to the Budget's
presentation in Parliament on August 16th. The Government would
be greatly assisted in its discussions by the viewus and information
presented today.
CANBERRA 18th July, 1966: 



FOR PRESS
66/ 41 DEVELOPiVIENT OF CHRISTiASISLAND PHOSPHATE DEPOSITS
( Statement by the Minister for Territories,
The Hon. C. E. Barnes, 1VIP.)
A development programme designed to raise the output
of phosphate on Christmas Island from its present level of
780,000 tons a year to 1.6-K tons a year by 1968 had been
approved by the Australian and New Zealand Governments, the
Minister for Territories, Mr C. E. Barnes said today.
A study of the possibility of raising annual
production to more than 2.5M tons would continue, he said.
Mr Barnes said that the Bureau of IMineral Resources,
in collaboration with the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission,
was carrying out a survey at Christmas Island to re-assess its
reserves of phosphate. Although the survey was not complete a
preliminary estimate was that the remaining reserves of all
, grades of phosphate were at least 2001d tons. This was substantially
greater than earlier estimates of reserves.
The development works already approved would involve
extraction of lower grade deposits of phosphate in addition to
the present high grade deposits.
The cost of the approved development would be
approximately i
The lower grade deposits had previously been regarded
as unsuitable for superphosphate manufacture but recent technological
and other experiments had shown -that some of these
deposits of low phosphatic content could betreated to make
them suitable for agricultural use.
An increase in the annual production rate of Christmas
Island phosphate would substantially benefit the Australian
fertiliser industry and would make Australia less dependent on
supplies from such overseas sources as Florida, Senegal and
Togo land. Mkr Barnes said that the deposits at Christmas Island,
which was a Commonwealth territory, were worked by the British
Phosphate Commissioners as agents for the Charistmas Island
Phosphate Commission. This Cormaission had been established
: Ln 1949 by agreement between Australia and New Zealand to
work the deposits for the equal benefit of the two countries.
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
19th July, 1966. 



66/ 093
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 68/ 1966
UNITED KINGDOLI ECONOIEC 1EASURES
Comment by the Prime Minister, I1r. Harold Holt
It is obvious that the inrmediate purpose of the United Kingdom
measures is to strengthen their Balance of Payments and thereby
improve the position of sterling.
The measures are designed to do this mainly by achieving what
M r. Harold Wilson called a " shake-out which will release the nation's
manpower, skilled and unskilled, and lead to a more purposive use of
labour for the sake of increasing exports and giving effect to other
national priorities."
We have a fundamental interest in the soundness and progress
of the United Kingdom economy and in the strength of sterling, of
which we are a large holder. We are glad to see this evidence of
British deterrination to keep sterling strong and wish the measures
success in their objectives.
As Mr. Wilson pointed out, British exports had been rising
until the recent seamen's strike. At the same time also imports
had been rising, and this was without doubt a consequence of the
high level of domestic demand. What the measures seek to do is to
impose widespread restraint on domestic demand and through this
secure a re-deployment of labour and other resources.
Taken with the recent rise in bank rate, the measures should
have a fairly strong restraining effect. While it is too early
to make firm forecasts, vie may feel some adverse effect of this
through the impact on cor: Lrodity prices.
The more direct measures to strengthen the United Kingdom
Balance of Payments by reducing Government expenditure overseas
includes action on military expenditure.
This has, of course, been under discussion
for some ti, e. Mr. WAlilson has m. ade it clear that the savings Vuil
be sought without altering the basic lines of external policy,
stated in their defence ' Uhite Paper.
CANBERRA 21st July, 1966: 



FOR PRESS 70/ 1966
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE BY AUSTRALIA TO NEV ZEALAND
Statement by the Prime inistZr. Mr. Harold Holt
Following discussions with the Prime Minister of New Zealand
( Mr. Holyoake) when he was in Australia last month, and discussions
in Cabinet, ithas been arranged that the Reserve Bank of Australia
will extend a credit of up to U20nto the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand. The credit will help New Zealand in its present balance
of payments difficulties.
As additional facility of up to $ Al~ m. will be made available
to the Reserve Bank of New Zealand on a stand-by basis.
Drawings under these credits may be made during the current
financial year 1966/ 67, and will help to finance New Zealand payments
in Australia. Funds drawn by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand will be
repayable by the end of 1971.
The arrangement represents a further tangible expression of
the close bonds between our two countries. For its part, the
Australia Government is pleased to be associated with New Zealand
in this way. We have growing obligations in the Pacific area, and
we recognise the importance of assisting one another in dealing with
our mutual problems.
Background Note
This is the second time Australia has provided direct balance
of payments assistance to New Zealand in recent years. In 1958,
a Central Bank credit of EAlOm. ( A2Om) was made available to New
Zealand. Drawings on the credit will carry interest at 6% per annum. 



FOR PRESS 11CX.
-WORLD COURTI JITDGIhZNT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I deplore and condemn the attacks reportedly made on
Australia by named African spokesmen arising from the recent
World Court judgnent.
The fact that they were made while the United Nations
Trusteeship Council was conmiending Australia for the general
econoic progress it has promoted in New Guinea underlines
their lack of justification.
The criticisms against Sir Percy Spender are also
deplorable and unwarranted. Sir Percy's long and distinguished
career in law, politics and diplomacy has been marked by a
progressive liberalism of mind and a warmth of humanity. He
pioneered the Colombo Plan at one time it was called the
Spender Plan under which billions of dollars have been
provided for aid and technical assistance in Asia. The U. S. A.
alone has contributed more than Kl5 billion.
Whatever view is taken of Sir Percy's decision, his
would have been an honest judgment made in good faith.
IJILBOUM1 23rd July, 1966. 



1
FOR PRESS P. M. 71/ 1966
PRINCE LEAVES FOR HONE
The Prince of Wales will leave Australia next week at the
completion of his two terms at the Geelong Grammar School.
Before returning home he will fly to Jamaica to join the
Duke of Edinburgh, who is opening the Commonwealth Games.
Prince Charles will leave Sydney aboard a Qantas flight
at o'clock next Monday ( 1st August), accompanied by Squadron-
Leader David Checketts. He will fly by way of New Zealand,
Tahiti, Acapulco and Mexico City, and is due in Kingston,
Jamaica, orn Wednesday, 3rd August.
The Governor-General, Lord Casey, will farewvell the
Prince of Wales at Mascot.
CANBERRA July, 1966: 



S) pech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt,
at the Higains Electorate Dinner July, 1966.
Alan and my friends from Higgins:
This is a very memorable night for Zara and myself.
indeed it is made the more mnemorabl e for us because Alan, with
that genius for organisation which you possess, you've selected
for this celebration the room hallowed by the fact that we held
our wedding celebration here nearly twenty years ago. And, as
I have very happ recollections of that occasion, obviously
ha ' ppily consoliffted as you look at the beaming spectacle of my
dear wife here, then this will be another memory to add to that
rich store of the past.
But wherever we held this gathering it would have been a
notable occasion for the stalwarts who have been, as I look around
this room, what I might call my thick-and-thinners; those who
have stuck with me through good times and through bad. You've
mentioned the troubles of the early 1960' s. Well, be it everlastingly
to the credit of Higgins that they wjere with their
Member all the way. ( Laughter and applause). And I'm e~ ad
you feel we succeeded in laying I beleve we did the base of
a sound economy, one of the soundest economies to be found
anywhere in the world today.
Now I thought, Alan, that up to this point you'd proved
yourself a very good and staunch friend. But when you labelled
me to deliver an address I wasn't so sure about that. I thought
that this was one of these pleasant, relaxed, convivial evenings
in which we manifested our friendship with one another by
consuming a quite inordinate amount of delightful food and even
more titillating beverage. But you've throwin on me at this late
hour of the night this responsibility, and where do I begin?
I begin, I suppose, at the 26th of January this year,
because, by a happy combination of circumstances, it was on
Australids Nati onal Day that I assumed the responsibility of
office. So I can't forget my anniversary, next Tuesday I think
I complete my first six months of office. It seems more like
six years frankly, when you look back on what has been compressed
into that period of six months. Surely, putting the personalities
on one side, it must be accounted one of the most remarkable
periods in the history of the Australian nation.
I asked my very able Press Secretary, Tony Eggleton, to
select the highlights for me of the things we'd done in thcse six
months. I thougt I might have been able to give you the
highlights on an occasion such as this. I took one look at the
list and I felt completely exhausted. I couldn't credit that
we'd done so much in so short a space of time. But there have
been some quite remarkable developments in that period. Now,
this perhaps is one of the most conspicuous features of the
changeover which has occurred. We have not merely had a
transition from a very distinguished leadership which carried
Australia through the most notable period of propess in its
history, but from that leadership we have moved into what can be
seen as a new era of Australian historic progress. It's not a
change of personalities that brings this about, it is the result
of historical forces, the circums~ tances of events around the
world which has been producing these changes here in Australia. 
Whether Sir Robert Menzies had been here or not would not
have altered the fact that the British Minister for Defence was
with us in the first months of the year to discuss with Australia
the pattern of British defence in this area of the world in the
1970' s and indeed, into the 1990That itself was a quite
historic development because for understandable reasons with
which we can all sympathise, the United Kingdom had found it
necessary to reduce its commitments around the world and one of
the places in which it had to review its cormitments was in
various military bases established in this theatre of the world
in South East Asia and East of Suez generally. And we discussed
this very earnestly because it clearly had an important bearing
on our own planning. It was made clear to us at that time that
if it was found untenable to hold British forces in Singapore,
for example, then unless they had some other base to go to in
this area of the world and that meant Australia then they
would have to go home.
de urged that Great Britain should maintain a presence in
that part of the world for as long as it found it possible to do
so for the very good reason that British character and British
influence do exert a moderating, stabilising influence in this
area of the world. You have comparatively weak countries, as
to their military strength and, indeed, in the case of some of
them, their economic strength, and the British influence and
presence not a colonial imposition or anything of that sort
has this moderating, stabilising influeuce. This was what we
were wanting to preserve. And they saw the force of that
argument. They felt that we were a little more optimistic
than they were about their capacity to hold on in these places
with regard to a certain amount of restlessness that occurs there.
But we believe from our contacts in the area that the people
there would welcome a continued British participation, and
I believe that still to be so.
I merely mention this as an illustration of the sort of
change in circumstance with which we have had to cope, and we
have had quite dramatic confirnation in the last few hours
literally that Great Britain has felt the pressure of these
burdens and responsibilities and has been forced into drastic
economic action in order to meet them. Now, we for our part,
have given our support to Great Britain and the sterling area
generally in that most of Australia's overseas earnings are
held in the reserves of the United Kingdom, in sterling reserves.
And this is a considerable support to the strength of sterling
and their own economic viability in their external accounts.
*; e've been able to discuss quite realistically together the need
for Australia to go on earning overseas as much as we can;
we've been helped to do this in the years since the war by a
great influx of British capital and a considerable body of
British migrants.
Now we know that the migrants will continue to come,
perhaps they will even increase as a result of the difficulties
in the United Kingdom. But as to the influx of capital, we
would hope that the British Government and people would see
that in the growth of Australia, in the build-up of its own
export income, is a further strengthening of the British
position in the world. We can do more in this area of the
world, we can do more in the way of international aid, we can
provide a larger defence establishment for the security of the
area as our own economy grows, as our national development
progresses. And these are matters of the character that I've
been discussing recently with Mr. Wilson in London. 
You've made some very charming references to Zara, Alan.
She, of course, is my secretweapon and I think it's not so
secret now, it's emerged publicly. Indeed, for some years
when I was Deputy Leader to Sir Robert Menzies I used to say in
all frankness that I was deputy leader also in my own household.
And this fact is gradually seeping around the world to the
knowledge of other people. However, it doesn't seem to do me
any harm. It builds a certain amount of respect and indeed,
warmth with others to know that I must have qualities, perhaps
undiscernible to them, which have attracted this very notable
lady. And my credit enhances accordingly. ( Applause).
She only caused me one serious passage of embarrassment
while we were away, and that, of course was over the regrettable
incident of the white mice. ( Laughter). I don't know how
many of you read about the white mice, but in London, when the
press were asking her what she'd been doing, of course they
pressed her as to whether she'd been doing some shopping. And
my wife, being a very wise woman, knows that there is nothing
in election year more damaging to a politician's standing than
to have his wife doing a lot of expensive shopping abroad. You
remember there was that lady in Africa who bought the gold bed
and got into it ( Laughter). Anyhow, my wife settled for a
couple of white mice and I was able later to point out to the
press how important it is to avoid international misunderstandings;
that there should be full and adeuate reporting of these matters
because the press here merely carried a reference to the white
mice and this set in train some involved deparmental cabling.
i~-hoever acdministers the quarantine arrangements sent a rather
frenzied cable to London to the effect that the importation of
white mice was prohibited. It would be very embarrassing if
the wife of the Prime Minister brought them in, and they had to
be publicly destroyed, or something to that effect. You see the
really critical reference that had been omitted from the report
was that these were china white mice for our grandchildren:.
We seem to have featured with the rice because while I was
spending the night at Chequers it was a wonderful experience
for us to be invited to spend the Sunday night in this historic
residence of the British Prime Ministers we were shown around
by Mr. and li'rs. :' ilson. He pointed out to us the picture of
Rembrandt of the Aesop Fable of the Lion and the MIouse, and it
was a magnificent pice of painting. But he went on to tell us
tht-ren ' inston Churchill was the occupant of Chequers, he used
to study this picture and finally he could stand it no longer
and he said " I cannot see the mouse". So he painted in the
mouse and the Rembrandt at Chequers is now Rembrandt plus
Churchill. ( Laughter).
This was the story I employed at the '; hite House in
Washington because the moral of the Aesop Fable, of course, is
that little friends can prove great friends and, in this sense,
Australia I believe can prove a great friend both to the United
States and to the United Kingdom. It's through the collaboration
of these two great democracies that a great deal of the strength
of the world, its prospect for peace, hopes for progress, still
rest even in these times. Despite the relative weaknesses
today of the British economic position, British character,
British influence, British leadership, still account heavily
around the world, free or communist world, and we don't underestimate
that. Nor, I assure you, is it under-estimated by
the President of the United States. And I was glad to have the
opportunity of my second visit with him. Harold Wilson knew,
of course, that I was going to see him again; we'd discussed 
4.
this together in some detail in three hours--of talks at Cheauers.
Ihope that That I was able to say both in Londan and-in Amdrica
proved, helpful to that association.
There are ways, and particularly out in this area of' the
world, in -which Australia can be of help, quite important help.
Let me just give you an illustration of how the mouse as a great
friend at times can work out. You've all heard of the Colombo
Plan, but it's not so widely known that the Colombo Plan which has
brought aid and technical assistance to the countries of Asia and
South East Asia in particular, was pioneered by Australia and by a
particular Australian prominently associated with the work in its
early days. And its one of the ironies of life's circumnstances
that the man who is being abused in some quarters around the world
at thig time, because in the exercise of an honest jUd~ pent he
gave his decision in a particular way, our own Sir Percy Spender
was the man who gave the drive, the impetus and the inspiration
to what later became the Colombo Plan.
Now Australia has provided under that plan what is for our
size of population a respectable total of 130 million Australian
dollars. The United States has provided 15 thousand million dollars
under the Colombo Plan, And here is an illustration of the way
in which an initiative we were able to take and get something
moving, had the effect of being of benefit on this scale to the
p eople of this area. I mention that because, for me, one of the
highlights perhaps the highlight of my recent journey overseas
was to find that, having put vigorously in the United States the
view that the press cover being given there didn't reveal to the
American public how much was being achieved by the people of South
East Asia, under the protection of the American shield they have
been able to go forward with their own progress and able to cooperate
more closely together for Veaceful purposes, for trade
purposes and for mutual strengthening of each other's security
position, Now this wasn't being told, I felt, fairly and
adequately in the American press, and I kept on saying so until
we did get some notice taken of it. And what is more, we got
from the President himself a quite historic declaration of American
attitude. This has now been recognised in American as a significant
development in their foreign policy, the attitude of the President
to American responsibilities and possibilities in this area of the
world. They were encouraged by the evidence which has been
accumulating of co-operation be tveen those countries vihich have
been protected by an American presence in South Viet Nam from
corrmunist aggression. Those of us who have enjoyed this
Protection have nowr been co-operating more closely together.
There were ten countries which met recently at Seoul in South
Korea, not one of the major powers amongst them, except in the
sense that Japan can be classified as a mjaor power -it certainly
is in an industrial sense but not a military sense -but it was
one of the significant developments of recent times I would. think,
looking back over the six mnths, the point at which I viould say
perhaps the most significant development had occurred for me,
external to the events inside this country, w-as the moment when
I was invited by the Prime 1vinister of Thailand to go and sit
the first foreigner in history in the Cabinet of the Government
of Thailand. This was to me a symptom of the newr spirit that is
emerging around these countries of Asia, a setting aside of the
past Prejudices, past failures in co-operation. And this is one
of the real dividends that has been secured for us by American
resolution and determination in South Viet N~ am, assisted by what
the United Kingdom has been doing with other Commnonwealth forces in
Malaysia and in resisting Indonesian confrontation policies in Borneo.
Now these are just illustrations which I give you of the
sort of thing that has been crop'Ang up through the year. Its
been a year crow-, ded with incidents and developments of this sort
and these are to touch on some of the external matters. 
Internally we've had the changeover quite an historic
changeover to a decinal currency system. And lest anybody
think us freakish in this matter, New Zealand will be moving into
decinls next year, the United Kingdom will be followving in due
course, and most, therefore, of the countries and peoples around
the world will be operating under a decimal system of currency.
Inside Australia, the sort of change we have to contend
with these days is that the electorate no longer respects the
division of power betveen the Comonwealth and the States. I am
sure it would suit John Bloomfield, it would certainly suit us
and our respective colleagues in our governments, if he
electorate would allo, us to go ahead as the constitution
intended us to go. He is, of course, an authority these days
in the field of education. But this doesn't prevent the
electorate from demanding that the Comnonwealth also come into
the field of education and the provision which ve, through our
Budget, and the State Governments, through their Budgets, need
to make in order to meet what has been described as an education
explos ion, is almost capaole of wrecking the stable assembly
of a Budget for all the other purposes of government at this time.
These things are occurring while we're coping in the Federal
sphere with a record provision for defence, and increasing
provision for internctional aid, which the electorate also is
pressing for these days. And, taking them together, the
Comonwealth and State Governments are almost at their wits end
literally to find how, without zo imposing burdens upon the
conaunity that incentive becomes damaged, they can make ends meet
and sustain a stable economic situation in respect of their own
administrations. Ue've just been grappling w., ith thais problem
in Canberra. I came back from overseas over the weekend to run
into a gathering of the representatives of industry on Monday, and
on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday had the full 1vUnistry meeting
on the problems of our own Budget in Canberra.
And so, Alan, you will see that the fruits of office,
while they look alright on the plate, sometimes prove both costly
and difficult of attainment. I've been greatly stimulated by
this six months of office, but I never thought I'd have to work
so hard in my life. I felt that the Tru.' surer of the Conmorriealth
was the hardest working man; I've been miaintaining that theory
not for 8 years, heaven forbid, but for 7 years as the former
encumbont of that high office. I know that Sir Robert Menzies
used to work very hard. I'm quite convinced that he wasn't
wrked as hard in his life as I have been in these last 6 months.
However, he might argue that. But I think I can claim that
because it is a changing world; it is a turbulent, restless
world. How many of us of my generation when we were boys used to
know much about what went on north of this country. Most of us
if we got as far as getting a collection of the postage stamps
of the countries concerned would have become about as well-informed
as the average Australian statesman of those days on what went on
in our north. Our eyes were turned to the British Isles and
Europe. We hardly had an awareness of their existence there
was a funny little country called Indo China we didn't know much
about. The relations between Singapore and Ilaya were also
mysteries to us. But over recent years these have become facts
life for us. 
S6.
Now I don't want to imply and some of the things I've
been saying lately might lead to that impression-that ve don't
have a future in relation to the rest of the world, that our
future is all in Asia. That would be quite silly because, apart
from questions of international policy, two thirds of our trade
is still outside the Asian area. The significant thing is that,
even while we've been in office, and I go back now to the beginning
of Sir Robert's long period of leadership, the percentage of
Australian trade in this area of the world has moved up from
to 33%, and the trend is steadily in that direction. We're
dealing now with a billion and a half people and this is more than
half the human race, and as the years go on their proportion of
the total population of the human race will tend to increase more
than that of the rest of the world because not are they no less
fertile than the rest of the world, but improving public health
measures are keeping more of them alive beyond the point of low
life expectancy which was their lot in earlier years.
Now these are some of the factors which lie ahead for the
policy-maker of this country; they help to contribute to the
judgment which Lord Slim recently expressed to me when he wrote
saying what a fascinating time to be Prime Minister of Australia.
Well, it is a fascinating time, because, not only are there
challenges and opportunities outside Australia but inside we are
embarked on one of the most exciting phases of national development
which measure up in excitement and promise to the rich days of
the gold finds in Australia of earlier years. Here in a year in
which we've had to contend with the most serious drought in the
last 20 years, the economy has moved on steadily for most people
almost without fluctuation. We've got a much broader base to
the whole economy; we have been able to continue in strength
through all these difficulties.
Now, we meet here tonight as supporters of a Liberal
candidate in a Liberal electorate, and, indeed, I have the honour
to be the Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party.
And I think we can claim that Australia's strength inside Australia
and around the world is in no small degree attributable to the
basic principles that we stand by in our Liberal faith and the
brilliant exposition of those principles by the man who was Prime
Minister of this country for 16 consecutive years. It is my
honour to succeed him and I can tell you and I think this
ought to be mentioned seeing that I'm laying emphasis on the
Liberal element inside the policy formation that through those
years we have operated with a coalition; its boen a friendly
coalition and has worked effectively and happily; and what I'm
sure will interest all in this room tonight to know is that the
relations which existed with Sir Robert's leadership of cordial
collaboration have continued with no lessening of wan-th or
effectiveness of co-operation in the coalition which I have the
honour to lead. ( Applause). And this means strength for
Australia. We can present to the world the picture of a strong
government; our opponents are in disarray; its hard to find these
days a serious political discussion as between the Government
Parties and those of the Opposition. You pick up odd items about
Sthe rightwing asking the D. L. P. to give them some sort of
protection or the left wing saying if there is a big enough loss
of seats at the next election then the left wing will be able to
take control. Well, if this is the way they want to argue it,
or discuss it, let them do so. We carry the responsibility of
national leadership and in these days, with the sombre tasks still
ahead of us in South Viet Nam and elsewhere, those are weighty
enough responsibilities indeed. We have no lack of advisers
from a variety of sections of the community. But, finally, here
L 
7.
as in the united States and in the United Kingdom, a responsibility
for leadership has to be taken by the democratically elected
government of the day. And in that weighty task and responsibility
its a great encouragement to me personally to know that my ov'M base
is so strong and that heiearound me I find those who are helping
to keep the fortess of Hig. ins staunch, firm and strong.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, Alan spoke of an address.
It's been a lengthier one perhaps than even he might have bargained
for. But these are just a selection of the matters which have
been actively engaging the attention of the busiest Government in
the history of the Comronwrealth of Australia. I hope that in the
period which lies ahead and the rest of this year, we'll prove it
one of the most effective years in the history of the nation and
that, given the support which we at least feel to be our just due,
we'll go on from strength to strength in the year's ahead. And
may you be with me all that Thank you. 



OPENING OF THE TO01ASVILLE ARMY BARRACKS
TOWSVILLE, QUEENSLAND 29TH JULY, 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Major-General Mr. Premier, my Ministerial Colleague, Chief of
the General Staff, Mr. Mayor, Parliamentarians, Ladies and
Gentlemen and all distinguished guests assembled here today:
This, as I said this morning at the first of the three
functions which are making my day in Townsville such a memorable
one for me, is a very happy occasion. Here we have symbolised
in this morning's ceremony a great new university; the first
university in the tropics of Australia. And now here this
afternoon we have what my colleague the Minister for the Army
has just described to you in some ietail as the outstanding
military establishment tD be set up in Australia, with Townsville
as its home. I think Townsville can claim itself fortunate to have
achieved this quite remarkable double. It is said that the pen
is mightier than the sword and I suppose that argument still
continues. Well Townsville has both, and Australia neeas both.
I don't know whether over the long period of years
ahead, the University of Townsville will estalish itself as
dominant over the military establishment. I suspect there will
be encounters of an enterprising kind occasionally between the
inhabitants of one establishment and the inhabitants of the other.
But I hope nothing occurs which would be contrary to good order
and discipline in either of these major establishments we are
setting up here in this great Townsville area, the show place of
the northern tropic part of Australia.
This in a way symbolises what is going on throughout
the Commwnwealth at this time. You and I can consider ourselves
fortunate, I believe, to be living in our country in a period in
which it is going through an exciting phase of development and
national progress. Included in that progress has been the necessity
to give greater emphasis to potentialities of the northern part of
Ausiralia. Historically, and for various economic reasons, the
development of the south has proceeded to a greater extent, but we
recognise that if this continent is to be held secure, if we are
to 4evelop its potentialities then we must press on vigorously
with northern development. What could more clearly express that
determination than these two major establishments, one in the
academic field and the other in that of military security.
Now, the Queenslander, and in particular the Northern
Queenslander, has always been more conscious of the defence needs
of Australia than people in any other part of the Commonwealth,
and this proceeds, no doubt, from your geographical position. Y3u
are more conscious and sensitive to the fact that you are close to
the danger areas of the north. It is much the same distance from
Saigon lo Darwin, for example as it is from Brisbane to Perth
and those who live in the northern part of Australia realise tAeir
proximity to the danger spots of Asia. And so it is appropriate
that there should be established here in this northern city of
Australia a modern, large, military establishment.
You may be interested to know Mr. Premier, if you
haven't already been told this, that the decision to establish a base
/ 2 
-2
here was not primarily a military decision. In fact, I can perhaps
for once be forgiven if I publicily narrate a military secret,
But the military advice to us when it became necessary as a result
of the expansion to which the Minister for the Army has referrel
to set up nemlitary bases the military advice which reached
us was tat this shoulid be done in the Mornington Peninsula of
Victoria. There were some good technical reasons for that, and
it facilitated co-operation with other services and it wastprobably
a considerably cheaper way of getting the military result tan a
decision to establish a militarybshe. Buwenecaet
consider this in Cabinet, we felt that there were other factors
which outweighed the purely military cnsiderations the development
of the north the security Of he north, the fact that the
people of the north had a right to feel that in their area of the
worl bi 7 things wore moving which were contributing to the growth
of Australia. These were some of the considerations which came
into our minds when we considered the technical problems. And
so the decision was taken, and I am sure it was a decision we in
Australia will never regret. Certainly Townsville will never
regret it because it will bring to your community joining the
other members of the Australian Services already here a
substantial community of people. For the most part, they will be
young, lively and vigorous people with their families, and they
will undoubtedly add to the diversity and richness of the community
life of Townsvil le.
In terms of trade, looking at these thing,, s in an
economic sense, undoubtedly this will add to the population in
a considerable way because there will be those comihg to the
district who service the people who are in a military establishment.
This is a cumulative process whereby the needs of one
have to be satisfied by the services and activities of others.
And so you will find a secondary growth for Townsville from the
establishment of the barracks here.
But today we think beyond that to the contribution
which this barracks and the people w~ ho will be mann ing it make to
the future of Australia. We have, as I stressed this morning,
only a small population in this vast continent. So we must
contrive as best we can that the people of Australia are people
of quality, are people fully trained for the tasks which t hey
are to per{ orm and that they manifest inside Australia and
out of it the ; est characteristics which we believe make up the
Australian temperament. And in what better environment for
these purposes could young men be trained in the service of
Australia than in this sunny, stimulating, invigorating atmosphere
that they have here in Townsville.
Now, it is part of my duty today to gve a name to
these barracks. gave a -reat deal of careful thoughttohi
because this in itself is a 0contribution to morale and enthusiasm
that develops in a partictlar military venue. When we discussed
the problem, we thought what could be more fittin than that we
should select the name of a very distinguished Queenslander, a
great fighting soldier and more than that, a great fighting_
administrator. These barracks will be named after a native-born
Queenslander who reached the highest level open to him in
Australian military service. He became ChiefI of the General Staff
and later Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, the highest
body in the military services of this country. From there, having
g iven distinguished military service, both fightin service in
time of war and this service of leadership and1adm inistration in
a period of peace, he became the first Australian-born Governor a* / 3 
5
of the State of Queensland. And so it is with pride, and great
satisfaction, that I name these barracks Lavarack Barracks, after
Sir John Lavarack, the former Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff
Committee, and the former Governor of your State. I am sure it is
a choice you will all applaud.
And now as I proceed to the formal task of unveiling
the plaque which will name the barracks, may I on behalf of mself
and my colleagues of the hovernment, congratulate all those who
have played a part in promoting this great project, the work of the
Minister and his colleagues in the Army, the co-operation which
we have received, and for which we are suitably appreciative, from
you Mr. Premier and from you Mr. Mayor. This eamwork is
enali ng the wor here to go aead expeitiously and satisfactorily.
I only hope that I will be aoble to come back year by year and see
the progress which will have been made both here and at the
university. It will be a constant attraction to be added to the
many others I feel in the pull that North Queensland makes to me
when I am in the south.
Thanking you for your co-operation, I conclude with
my best wishes to all who serve in this establishment. May
Lavarack Barracks make a permanent contribution to the security
of Australia to the morale of Australian military forces, and may
it earn for itself a reputation of pride which will mark it out
amongst the great military establishments of the world. 



dUTll ; LUkI; ñ ON AT 1EDT-L ILLILY,
TOWPSVILLL, QUEE. NSLAlJ 29TH JULY__ 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister. Mr Harold Holt.
M'r iayor, . Mr Premier, Ministerial and Parliamentary
Colleagues, Chief of the General Staff, Miss De Lacy and Gentlemen,
This is a very happy thought on the part of the
1' ayor, a very generous and hospitable thougft, to have so
representative a gathering of the To. insville strength, plus the
r. any visitors who have coie here for these two functions, at this
pleasant luncheon gathering here today, and I do appreciate your
kindness, Ir Mayor, in arranging this.
It is a notable occasion, as you rightly stress.
For me, a very happy one, because we do sincerely believe in this
cause of northern development, and to see manifestations in these
two practical achievements of a strengthoning on the academic
side with the first university in the northern part of Australia
in a tropical area of Australia, and the launching of a great new
military establishment, itself the outstanding establishment of
its kind in a tropical area, this is a double which many municipalities,
11r Mayor, or the rural areas would certainly welcome if that
good fortune came their way.
I am sorry to learn that it has brought with it
some of the problems of groi. ing pains to which you have rmde
reference. At the thrce layers of government Federal, State and
Municipal government we are all in severe financial straits.
Now this doesn't add up very happily for the taxpayer, but I may
comfort the taxpayer by saying that we have reached a point with
some of our taxes that as we increase the tax we get less money
back by way of revenue, so vie don't get much encouragement to
tax you more heavily when that is the way you respond to our
treatment. But I can assure you, Mr Miyor, that the Premier has
already told me today of the difficulties of his own State and of
one of its most important industries. I have had from the Premier
of Victoria and the Promier of Now, South ales signals of distress.
My colleaguos know of the vonics we went through a week or so back
as we prepared our own Budget details, so I think we will have to
go on praying for rain and the increased revenues that come from
good seasons. Droughts still mean much to us in the loss of
revenue, in the loss of carriage of goods by railways and the
other con: Lercial activities associated with them which affect the
budgets of governments. Althou h we weathered the effects of this
last, or current, drought remarkably ' well, I think in an earlier
period of Australian history it would have meant economic disaster.
It has nevertheless taken its toll on the economy, and we have
felt some discomfiture from it.
But don't let us dwell on that rather gloomier aspect
of our affairs on a day when we are able to point to developments
of a constructive and positive kind in the life of this comraunity.
Townsville is a very remarkable city. I think there can be few
in the Commonwealth and, indeed, few in the world which can claim
greater diversity of a. ctivity and of interest. You have got your
rural wealth and activity, the cattle, the sugar, the mineral wealth
/ 2 
-2-
that proceeds from your lead, zinc, copper and matters of that
sort. You have a tourist potential second to none I don't
know any resort around the world that can so consistently live
up to labels as Tonsville can. I have visited several of them,
and for consistency of sunny vieather and pleasant climate and
this accessibility to reef islands and the fishing ñ n the area
these things help to mark this city out above almost any other
that could be mentioned. I regret to have to report one serious piece of
disillusionment. Arising out of this luncheon here today, I
was relishing, as no doubt several of you were, these deli. ghtful
fish sticks that we have been eating for lunch and I was asking
which particular reef fish this was, only to be told that those
wore imported fish sticksl Now, I think you've got to do
something about that Mr Mayor. We claim that we have fish
beyond number in the waters of the reef and it seems a
contradiction in terrs that that beautiful fish we relish so
much and that I pursue so actively has to be replaced by imported
articles eating into the trade balances of this country.
Well, Mr hyor, you have a bright prospect ahead
for this city. It is in a sense the capital of the north of
Australia. It will go on from strength to strength. It will
have a much more richly diversified com~ unity activity because
the academic society of the university makes its own contribution
to a more richly fulfilled life, and at the same time, the lively,
young; er, vigorous members of the Services the Air Force and the
Army stationed here they, with that little bit of military pomp
and circumstance, will add something to the diversification and
enjoyent of life in a community such as this.
I hope to be able to come back year by year
because I am sure that year by year, Townsville will become an
increasingly attractive place to visit, and an increasingly
enjoyable place in which to live and attend to one's affairs.
You have a prosperous future ahead of you, and quite obviously
you have in the imaking of a great northern city a cause for which
you and your fellow councillors can labour with enthusiasm in
the years ahead. Our best wishes to you. You will be receiving such
co-operation as Comronwealth and State Governments can give to you.
There will be various points, particularly in relation to the
university and the Service establishments at which you will be in
direct contact ' with the Como. onwealth Governmont. I hope we treat
you kindly. If you feel we do not, then I give you direct access
to the person of the Prime iinister.
So, Gentlemen, this happy occasion has been made
possible by the Lhyor and his colleagues. We thank them and hope
that under their leadership, this will be a city of which all
Australia can be truly proud. 



FOUNDATION STONE CEIYDONY AT TO.. JNSVILLE
UNIVERSITY, TOWNSVILLE, Q'LD. 29TH JULY, 1966.
Speech by the Prime Minister. ' Mr. Harold Holt
Mr Chancellor, Mr Premier, Mr Vice-Chancellor,
Members of the Advisory Council, Dr Back, and Members of the
Staff, Mr lMayor, Other Distinguished Guests Mr Prieatly comes
into this at some stage of the address and Ladies and Gentlemen;
I feel very appreciative and indeed moved,
Mr Chancellor and Mr Vice-Chancellor, by the kind things you have
said about me personally and my participation in this very happy
function. It could hardly fall to the lot of a Prime Minister of
Australia to have a happier day for his official tasks than I am
experiencing here in Townsville on this particular day. This
morning I have the opportunity to lay a foundation stone for the
first university in the tropical north of Australia, then I go on
this afternoon and help to launch the establishment of a great
military base here which will add to the security, strength and
the diversity of life in this part of the world. This combination
is for me a very felicitous one and made the more so by the fact
that we meet in typically Australian surroundings on a glorious
sunny day quite tp to the travel brochure which so rarely lives up
to expectations. Here in Townsville you have delivered the goods,
and with M', rs Holt I am delighted to be here for the purpose of this
function. I start vwith something of a disadvantage. It is
quite obvious to any of you looking at the platform that I am a
very new Prime Minister and therefore I am underdressed for the
occasion. ( Laughter) WIhen I look at the Premier, this resplendent
creature, I am only grateful that he didn't bring this out for the
last Premiers' Conference. I would have found him quite irresistible
had he done so. But the Mayor has shown his consideration for me
rather than leave me isolated in civic uniform. He has foregone
his own robes of office and sat with me here in this rather dreary
outfit which marks the normal attire of the man of affairs in these
quickly moving times. But what a wonderful thing to see growing around us
not just a university but one which by its distinction of
architecture, its modernity, its appropriateness in the glorious
setting in which it finds itself will be a show-place in the life
of Australia in the future. It is a proud thing for Townsville,
it is a proud thing for all of us to be able to share the experiece
of today, and the contribution which this university will make to
the life of the northern part of Australia, and then reaching out
to Australia as a whol-, can only be speculated upon at this stage.
But no-one doubts that it will be a significant contribution for
Australia, and I personally do not doubt that it will be making a
valuable contribution to the well-being of the people in Asia and
South-East Asia generally.
Here we have a seat of learning that will be facing
problems that possess some novelty in academic circles. There are
problems which are special and peculiar to a tropical area. There
is a proximity here to our north. ern neighbours which will make this
university a focus of interest for them. There is the close
/ 2 
-2-
association you will be having here with the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research, and I understand a School of Advanced
Studies is to be established here alongside you also. Now this
combination of activities cannot fail to contribute notably to the
well-being, to the advancement of the north of Australia, and
having put our hands to the job, it is well it should be done
so handsomely as the planning of the university would indicate to
you. It is not, of course, so very long ago that the
Commonwealth Government was almost a stranger to activities of
this sort. Under the Constitution, education has been a matter
in the province of the State Government, but as the years have
gone on, the electorate which has proved so demanding in other
directions has also turned its attention to education. Indeed,
I suppose education is one of the most sensitive areas of government
at the present time, both in the Federal and the State sphere.
Certainly it is a subject matter w/ hich we cannot ignore if for no...
other reason that the burden on government budgets these days has
become heavy indeed. As I said in lielbourne only a week a. o, we
are almost at our wits' end wihich is perhaps the right sort of
phrase to use in relation to a problem of education at our wits'
end to know how we are going to finance the pro; gramme recommended
to us in the next triennium.
But what has been called the education explosion
has manifested itself as far as arree concerned in expenditure in
this last Budget year of 130' i and that is just about double what
the bill was three years ago. From what w-e Coe of developments
ahead, it is quite clear that the Commonwealth will be making a
very large contribution in the future as will the States. Indeed
when you mentioned, I. 1r Vice-Chancellor, that in a not so very
remote point of time you could get your education for fourpence
a -eek, I ,-ondered whether progress had been entirely advantageous
fron the point of view of governments.
~ ie have a small population in this vast continent
of ours. f! ear e building it as rapidly as no can with our
irigration programmLe and with such encouragement as we can offer
to those capable of forming families to go about that task in an
enterprising way, but we still have by standards of our neighbours
to the north a very small population i. n a very large area of land.
And yet increasing responsibilities are being requested of us and
we face up to those in a spirit of acceptance. We feel Australia
can make a contribution to a better . orld order in this area of
the world in which ve find ourselves.
One of the consequences flowing neces arily from
this is a need to have people of quality. If we have a few
people, then they must be good people, they must be -ell trained
people, people with a sense of responsibility, people who possess
the characteristics which we regard as the high-uater marks of the
Australian temperament. It is through institutions such as these
that we can lead our people on to better standards, that -o can
encourage them to make a more valuable and far-reaching contribution
to the area in which we have our being.
And so, Ir Chancellor and Iir Vice-Chancellor, you
have the good . ishes of us all in the future development, the
future success of this institution. I couldn't feel happier that
it has been placed in a to'., n which is making its oun presence
felt significantly in the gro; wth of Australia. Townsville / 3 
-3-
epitoises Australian growth at its best diversity of activity
in a splendid Australiansetting; it has almost all the assets a
community could hope to find around it in climate, in charm of
appearance, in diversity of activity, And now to enrich and
further diversify the life of the community, you will have a
large university population, you will have an added Service
population which contributes its own measure of colour and
ceremony to the life of the community.
You, r I'ayor, I think, can look forward with
satisfaction to the Townsville of the future, and all here feel
confident that in the better Australia of the years ahead,
institutions such as this University of Townsville will be
making for the more notable Australia of the future.
And so e w: ish you well. e from the Common: ealth
and I am sure you, Mr Nicklin for your part will be doing our
best year by year to meet the increasing financial demarnds you
will be making upon us. At least will know that our funds
have been spent in a cause which w. ill produce for us richer
dividends than almost anything else that Comonruealth and State
funds could be devoted to. You will find in us a willingness
to help. For your part, if you ma. ke the most of the opportunities
which arise hero, you will be providing residential accomodation
and servicing students from this whole northern area. The very
demands for these services have already far exceeded the
projections comteraplated for them when these were made in 1963,
and e can anticipate that with the general growth of prosperity
in this area and greater industrialisation in so many directions,
population will grow and the requirements for university
education will grow. A successful future, therefore, for this
university, and in order that the building can proceed without
any danger of falling around us, I have to lay a stone which
apparoitly is going to enable further construction to proceed.
And so, ' Ir Chancellor, if you will lead me to my
task, I will perform this important duty. 



65/ 125
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 73/ 1966
DEATH OF MR. J. S. COCKLE, M. P.
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Halt
We are saddened by the loss of a close colleague
and a good friend. Mr. Cockle enjoyed the respect of the
Parliament for his obvious sincerity and -rood sense. He had
a special knowledge of the shipping industry which enabled him
to contribute most informatively when problems connected with
that industry were under debate. We shall miss him from our
party room discussions. My J'overnment joins me in offering our deep
sympathy to Mrs. Cockle and the members of his family.
CANBERRA, 3rd August, 1966. 



65/ 126
FOR PRESS P. M. NO. 74/ 1966
DEATH OF SIR JOIJ NORTHCOTT
Tribute from the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Sir John Northcott's death brings to an end a
long career of distinguished national service. He
achieved eminence in top military positions, made history as
the first Australian-oorn Jovernor of New South Viales, and
served as Administrator of the Commonwealth.
After his retirement as Governor, he continued
to be associated with many public activities.
Sir John Northcott was a warm, friendly man who
typified the Australian character at its best. He will be
remembered with respect and affection.
CANBERRA, August, 1966 



FOR PRESS 2
P. M. No. 75/ 1966
DEPUTATION ON FOUR WEEKS' AkNhUAL LEAVE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister this morning received a
deputation on four weeks' annual leave for the Public Service.
After the meeting, which lasted for one and a
quarter hours, the Prime Minister said
" Together with Mr. F. H. nWheeler Chairman
of the Public Service Board, I listened to the
case presented by the deputation. I undertook
to bring the case before Cabinet after having
studied it fully."
The deputation comprised
Mr. A. E. Monk, President, A. C. T. U.
Mr. P. D.
Mr. I. S. Allsop, President, Australian Council of
Salaried and Professional
Associations.
Tenebaum, Vice-President, Association of
Architects, Engineers, Surveyors and
Draughtsmen.
Mr. R. G. Spratt, President, High Council of
Commonwealth Public Service Organisations
Mr. D. L. Linehan, Member of High Council and
Secretary Administrative and Clerical
Officers Association.
CANBERRA, August, 1966. 



FOR PRESS: 65/ 127
P. M. No. 76/ 1966
COMMONWEALTH AID FOR COMSERS OF MUSIC
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
For some time it has been suggested from various
quarters that the Commonwealth Government give financial support
designed to encourage the development of Australian music.
From time to time the Government has examined the
question, but decided against taking any action, largely because
young musicians and composers are able to benefit from the
Commonwealth University Scholarship Scheme, and because
considerable help is given to musia through the activities of
the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
The Commonwealth Government has now decided to
provide assistance to enable Australian composers to make their
works known. This is an important type of aid not previously
covered by any form of financial assistance from the Commonwealth
Government. Each year a sum of money, initially $ 10,000, will
be made available for the purpose of having composers' * riginl zamical
scores copied or printed in numbers sufficient for them to be
played by orchestras, and to have these scores played by orchestras
and recorded on tape for audition purposes, but not for commercial
use. Arrangements for the administration of this aid
have yet to be decided, but they will be made known as soon as
possible. CANBERRA, August, 1966. 



( 6/ 121
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 78/ 1966
ANNIVERSARY FOR PRIME MINISTER
It. ; ias thirty-one years ago today that 7; he
Prime Minister was elected to the House of Representatives
in a by-election for the seat of Fawkner in Melbourne.
A meeting of the joint Uovernment Parties
today recognised the anniversary by passing a special
motion of congratulation. Mir. Holt was 27 whsn he successfully conLested
the poll on the 17th August, 1955.
CANBERRA, 17th August, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 79/ 1966
WARRINGAH REPRESENTATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Following the announcement by the Speaker that
it was not proposed to issue a '. rit for a by-election in
Warringah prior to the general election, the Commonwealth
Government has given consideration to arrangements to enable
requests and representations to reach it from Warringah
electors. Senator Cotton has agreed, at the Government's
request, to attend to constituency matters and act as a
channel of communication from the electorate to the Government
and the Parliament.
CANBERRA, 18th August, 1966, 



4-65/ 123
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 80/ 1966
BIG VIET NAM ENGAGEMENT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Australia is saddened by the loss of these
splendid men. My deep sympathy goes to those who
have been bereaved, and to the wounded in their suffering.
CANBERRA, 19th August, 1966 



ST. STEPHEN'S DAY CELEBRATIONS
PADDINGTON TOWN HALL,-SYDNEY AUGUST. 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This is for me a very happy arnd stirring occasion because
: I come to you both as the present Head of the Australian Government and
also, as our Chairman has reminded you, as the former Minister, who
can regard himself in a sense as the godfather of many of you in this room
tonight. I have had now, many years of service as the head of a
Department in an Australian Government, altogether, I suppose, about
18 or 19 years. Seven of those years were spen! with the portfolio of
Immigration and I don't recall any time in my public life which gave me
a warmer and richer sense of satisfaction than those years I 3pent as
Minister of that portfolio, helping to build the Australian nation that
is progressing year by year into the promising future that awaits us.
Now this function tonight is, I think, a very happy
expression of the blending into the Australian community life of the
traditions, the customs, the cherished recollections of many
nationalities who have come to settle in this country. I know that for
the Hungarian people, the celebration of St. Stephen's Day is an
occasion of great significance, an occasion of intimate recollection,
perhaps even nostalgic recollection of the history of a people who have
contributed so much in the history of mankind to the development of
the human personality. Although many of you today are fully Australian, both
in the legal sense and in the sense of the full adoption of your new
country, we can think of you for the purposes of our gathering here
tonight as the Hungarian community in Australia. And here you are
recollecting the things that help to build character and personality
hope in the years that were with you before and in ihe years that are
with you in your adopted homeland.
Now one could imagine that in a less favourable
environment a national community such as the Hungarians might have
wanted to conduct an occasion such as this exclusively to themselves,
but it is a mark of your own feeling of Australian citizenship that you
gladly welcome into this gathering the head of the Australian Government,
other Parliamentary representatives and many Australian friends. Now
we appreciate this. You may recall, some of you, that several years ago,
as Minister for Immigration, I was at a gathering at which the
Hungarians were represented and the other national groups in the
community life of Sydney, and I said then that they must not imagine that
we Australians of native birth in any way resented the fact that the
national groups should maintain their customs and their traditions, sing
the songs of their country, and preserve those things which they cherish
from their former homeland. Now we meant that, and I remember
illustrating that comment with a reference to the Scots in Australia, and
no-one could wear weirder costumes than the Scots. Certainly no-one
could play weirder music than the Scots and yet Australians had managed
to tolerate them very satisfactorily for many years.
The Hungarians, of course, have their own special
attributes. I was told many years ago that the most beautiful women / 2 
-2
in the* Worlcanie from Hungary. ( Applause) I don't want to lose too
many Australian votes by saying that the Aussie girls can't match the
Hungarian girls, but i. am quite certain that we have lost nothing from
your presence as a continuing element in our midst.
Now it is a stirring thought, ladies and gentlemen, that
in the Australia of today, one in every five is either a migrant of the
post-war period or a child born to migrant parents. Indeed, if you take
the younger age groups in this country, one in every four is a migrant
of this post-war period. One in every four in employment in our
manufacturing industry. One in five of the work force of the nation.
This constitutes a very considerable addition to our national strength, but
also in subtle and sometimes undiscernible ways, personalities, the
traditions and habits of life of those who have come to join us are making
their impact on the life of the Australian people. I speak as a fourth
generation Australian when I say I think it is a very much pleasanter life that
we enjoy today because of the variety that has been brought to us by so many
national groups who have come to join our community in these post-war years.
In that influence, the music, the culture, the science and the
skills of the Hungarian people have also made a significant contribution.
Tonight you celebrate an influence in your lives which has
been something moulding character, something which has served as an
inspiration over the centuries for the Hungarian people in order to
preserve an identity, an identity through centuries of domination; whether
that domination lasted for a short or long period of time, it has sought at
times to crush the spirit of the Hungarian people and their own traditions.
And yet such has been the strength of character, the toughness of fibre
of' the people of Hungary that you have preserved that entity and the
traditions which you are cherishing here tonight.
We, your fellow Australians, can rejoice with you in an
occasion which is moving to you and because of that becomes significant
for us. The things which St. Stephen worked for and brought into your
country are to be found in their own form in this country of ours. He was
a great statesman, a great reformer. He was devoted to his people. He
gave them a religious fervour and faith which has withstood the test of
pressures through the centuries. It is proper that the memory of this
great man, influencing the development of your national history should
be honoured in this way. We in Australia can't point, in the life of our
own country, to centuries of history and tradition. Those of us who come
of British stock, even if we are removed, as I am, by three generations
as a fourth generation Australian, we still have a heritage which has
shaped the institutions of this country, and I believe that you, too, have
come to appreciate that democratic heritage.
Here you can breathe the air of freedom. Here you can find
opportunity. Here you have found the incentive which has enabled you to
build a life, a prosperous life, a happy life, a secure life in the community
of Australian people. Because you and we cherish that spirit of freedom,
we are determined to play our part in its preservation, either inside our
own country, or if the challenge comes outside our shores. The Australian
people in two world wars fought on European soil and suffered nearly
half a million cas~ ualties in the cause of freedom. So it is not surprising
that at this time Australian men, some of them of Hungarian origin, are now
in Viet Nam, fighting again for the cause.
Freedom extends to our institutions. We can point to free
elections. W can point to a free press. But we must always remember
that freedom is never free in the sense that freedom can be preserved
without cost. And some of you in this room tonight fought a battle for
/ 3 
-3
freedom, and you went into exile from your own country only when it was
clear that if you did not, freedom could not be preserved.
I remember very vividly in 1957 going in Austria to the
border and watching the points across which there were still many
Hungarians coming. I went to the camps in which there were still
many Hungarian refugees seeking a new homeland, and it was as the
result of the arrangements that we were then able to make that some
14, 000 of you came to this country. And what was Hungary's loss
became Australia's gain.
You have shown a high sense of responsibility in the
country of your adoption. I don't think I know any national group which
has a higher proportion of its settlers taking up naturalisation inside
Australia. I have had through my time as Prime Minister, and then
through the years, the longer years as Minister for Immigration, no
cause that I can recall to regret, through any episode which has occurred,
that we should have welcomed so many of you here. You have done well,
you have behaved as responsible, contributing citizens to Ai~ stralian causes
and we value your presence with us.
The ideals which St. S t ephen gave you, you have cherished
with us and they have contributed to our own Australian way of life, and it
is the hope of myself and my colleagues that over the years ahead you will
continue to find happiness with us, that your prosperity will march with
the prosperity of the Australian nation. A grea~ t Australian Governor-
General in the person of Viscount Slim, whom some of you will remember,
wrote to me recently and said, " What a fascinating time to be Prime
Minister of Australia" and what a fascinating time to be part of Australia,
part of its growth, part of its promise, part of the years, the shining years
which we see ahead of us, because we have every confidence that given
freedom from war, given opportunities for the development of our national
resources, this country will become one of the leading nations of the world.
Wc have no wish to lead or to be in the rating of leadership
or amongst the leading nations simply for selfish ends. We know that
left to ourselves, we can build a life a happy life, but there are
responsibilities, and we haven't shrunk from them whether in the military
field or in the field of international aid, and perhaps the events of the psist
few days in Viet Nam are symbolic of the Australia of the future. Brave
men serving their country with devotion, skill and courage, and helpirgto
build the greater Australia of the years ahead.
Now in that growth and greatness, your community will be
playing its part. It will be helping us with the variety which comes from
centuries of culture in which we have had no part, but you can become part
and your traditions can become part of that Australian nation made up of
people of many nationalities. I believe we have succeeded in avoiding
some of the problems and errors which developed inside the United States.
We studied what had happened with their migration programme and we
applied those lessons in the development of our own, So it is that we have
had far fewer social problems, far fewer nati;-mal frictions. Indeed, with
a Good Neighbour M-. vement joining in the work of integration, we have
had an experience which has proved itself to be the greatest peace-time
achievement of the Australian people. You are part of our success and
tonight we salute you for the way in which you have joined with us and
become an integral part of an Australian family.
I wish you all happiness in the years ahead and together
may we go on to build the Australia to which we all aspire. 



65/ 12-4
F'OR PRESS: P. M. No. 81/ 1966
PRIME MINISTER SEES VICTORIAN PREMIER
The Prime Minister Mr Holt Lhad a thirty-minute
discussion with the Premier of l'ictoria, ir Henry Bolte, in
Melbourne this morning.
During the meeting, which was held at the Prime
Minister's Office, Sir Henry gave Mr. Holt a survey of
Victoria's financial difficulties.
The talks were a result of a re qxest for a
meeting , made by the then Acting Premier, Mr. Rylah on the
Preiers behalf while Sir Henry was overseas. STir Henry
announced his request for talks with the Prime Minister on
long-term aspects of his State's financial problems when he
arrived back from overseas recently.
At today's meeting, the Victorian Premier sought
further joint talks between the Prime Minister, hims~ 1f and
the Premier of New South Wales, Mr. Askin. Mr. Holt said
he would discuss this proposal'with his Cabinet colleagues
when they met in Canberra tomorrow.
ICANBERRA,
22nd Auguist, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 82/ 1966
U. S. PRESIDENT'S TRIBUTE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Hnlt, today
released the text of a message he has received from
President Johnson. The message reads
" The courage of Australian men and the
skill of Australian arms have once again been
demonstrated on the field of battle.
Yesterday's engagement evokes the
admiration of all who treasure bravery arnd
the gratitude of all who prize the just cause
for which we fight in Vie tNam.
We mourn with you those brave men who
were lost and pray for the quic-k recovery of
those who were wounded.
Please extend my commendation to the
courageous officers and men of the Australian
forces in Viet Nam.
When you were here, I said: ' When a
fight comes looking for you, it is good to have
Australians standing and fighting by your side.'
The Viet Cong know today better than before
what I meant.
' With warm personal iega rds.
LYNDON 3. JOHNSON." 1
CANB3ERRA, 23rd August, 1966. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT, IN THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON THE
24TH AUGUST, 19 6
NAVAL SUPPORT FACILITY IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Government has decided that an investigation will
be commenced this year into the feasibility of establishing
Naval support facilities for the R. A. N. at Cockburn Sound, near
Fremantle. The Royal Australian Navy has indicated the
desirability of such a facility in the short and long term.
It has been decided that before any firm decision
is taken, an expert technical investigation should be carried
out at Cockburn Sound by a firm of consultant engineers to be
engaged through the Commnonwealth Department of Works. The
purpose of this investigation will be to select the most suitable
site for the possible establishment of the facilities, prepare
a design study and cost estimates. The results will be the
essential basis for further consideration by the Government.
The terms of reference for the study and the necessary arrangements
will be completed as quickly as possible.
While the investigation will be directed primarily
to the requirements of the it will of course, take
fully into account the possible needs of Allied Navies for use
of the proposed facilities including, in particular the possible
needs of the Royal Navy. In this context, honourable members
will recall that I said last February, following the talks with
Mr. Healey, the United Kingdom Minister for Defence, that we in
Australia if we were considering in future the establishment
of facilities here for the purposes of our own growing establishment
would take into our thinking the circumstance that these
facilities might at some point of time and in some contingencies
be needed for United Kingdom Service requirements.
-In deciding to have the feasibility study made the
government has also taken into account the continuing development
in the Cockburn Sound area and hence its growing capacity to
provide industrial support. The investigation now ordered into
he question of a further expansion of defence facilities at
Cockburn Sound is in harmony with the Government's general policy
of encouraging regional development in appropriate areas of
Australia in accordance with their particular characteristics
and potentialities. Naturally, the Commonwealth activity will proceed
in the closest collaoration with the Western Australian
Jovernment to ensure that Naval requirements and plans are
properly integrated with those of the Vestern Australian State
authorities for the development of the area. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 83/ 1966
PRIME MINISTERS' CONFERENCE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, will leave
Australia next week to attend the Commonwealth Prime Ministers'
Conference in London.
The conference begins on the 6th September and will
continue until the
Mr. Holt will travel to Britain via New York and
is due in London on Friday, 2nd September. He expects to be
away from Australia for no more than three weeks during which
the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwen, will be acting
Prime Minister. Accompanying the Prime Minister at the London
HCaosnlfuecrke nacned wial ls mable l tnheu mbMeirn isotfe ro fffoirc iEaxltse, rnianlc lAufdfianigr st he MrS. e crPeatualry
of the Prime Minister's Department, Sir Jchn Bunting, the
Secretary of the Department of External Affairs, Sir James
Plimsoll, and Mr. G. J. Yeend, an Assistant Secretary of the
Prime Minister's Department.
Personal staff accompanying the Prime Minister will
be his Private Secretary, Miss P. A. De Lacy, and his Press
Secretary, Mr. T. Eggleton.
CANBERRA, August, 1966. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
APPROPlUATION BILL ( No. 1) 1966-67
SECOND READING
( BUDGET DEBATE)
( From the " Parliamentary Debates," 25th August 1966]
Mr. HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister) [ 9. O].-The House gave the
Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Caiwell),
under our Standing Orders, unlimited time
to deal with the Budget. He seized the
occasion to make it a workout for his
election campaign. Indeed, in the latter
portion of his speech he cast aside all
pretence of Budget consideration and gave
us his familiar onslaught on the Government's
military participation in South
Vietnam. Since he speaks as the leader of
the only alternative government which can
be formed from the Parliament his comment,
however wrongheaded it may be in
our view, cannot be ignored, so I speak to
it tonight. He charges the Treasurer ( Mr.
McMahon) and the Government with
having failed completely to face up to their
national responsibilities in defence, education,
health, pensions, housing, northern
development, child endowment, the abolition
of the means test, maternity allowances,
wage and salary justice and control of
prices and interest rates.
Mr. Pollard.-How right he was.
11066/ 66 Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-He always has
been right in the honorable member's eyes,
and I give the honorable member credit
for his loyalty; it is as * rare as it is
refreshing. The implication in the Leader
of the Opposition's speech is that there
is no upper limit to Commonwealth
expenditure. I did not hear him at any
point indicate any direction in which the
Budget provisions should be reduced. I do
not think he argues that any of them should
be reduced. I do not want to misrepresent
' him, but I think that is his position. If
that is so-and he has a list of glittering
undertakings-then all we can assume from
this is that there is no upper limit and
that the sky indeed is the limit. In our
view no responsible government with its
obligation for the wellbeing of the
economy could accept this viewpoint. It
is a view that ignores the huge increase in
expenditure already proposed in this
year's Budget and the increases of recent
years. We heard the honorable gentleman
promise the abolition of the means test,
and it is a very attractive proposal. 
Mr. Calwell.-That is right. Attractive
proposals. Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-Did the honorable
gentleman not promise the abolition?
Mr. Calwell.-I suggested attractive
proposals for its abolition.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-The honorable
gentleman talked about the abolition of the
means test as being one of the matters that
the Treasurer had failed to meet.
Mr. Calwell.-That is right.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-The honorable
gentleman made no reference to the cost
of his proposals for the abolition of the
means test. He must be aware that the
complete abolition of the means test would
cost, on present entitlements, $ 300 million.
It would also result in the virtual doubling
of expenditure, now running at the rate of
$ 63 million a year, under the pensioner
medical service. I shall have a little to
say in a moment about social welfare, but
I give these figures as indicating to the
House just how irresponsible is the honorable
gentleman's whole approach. He gave
no indication of what the cost of his alternative
proposals would be on the Budget of
any particular year. We are charged with
not making adequate progress in the affairs
of the economy. Let me point out that
Commonwealth expenditures last year were
more than double the level of ten years
earlier. They rose by $ 600 million in 1965-
66 and they are estimated to increase by
a further $ 600 million to almost $ 6,000
million this year. No responsible government,
I repeat, could superimpose on these
increases further large amounts such as the
Leader of the Opposition appears to have
in his mind. Indeed, the level of Commonwealth
expenditure is a broad indication
of the extent to which the Government is
drawing for its purposes on the resources
available to the community. It must not
draw so heavily as to cripple the private
sector. As a government we have tried to
strike a balance between public and private
spending-a balance which will best promote
the progress and economic wellbeing
of the economy and of the Australiar
people. We have objectives of an economic kind
which are well known. We have mentioned
them in every Budget in recent years. We
have the objective of national growth. We
press on with the development of Australia's
resources. We associate with that,
full employment for our people. We have
a sustained programme, on a large scale,
of immigration with all the pressures that
this adds to an economy which, at present,
' is not merely trying to provide as much
of its own capital facilities as it can but
has to cope with an enormous increase in
our defence provision.
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-The Prime Minister
sounds like Blue Hills
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-The honorable
gentleman is much more entertaining, but
much -less sincere, and I am prepared to
leave it on'that footing. We ' have sustained
these objectives quite consistently throughout
our period of office. The Leader of the
Opposition speaks of the lack of confidence
on the part of business in the future growth
of the economy. What of the lack of con-
. fidence if by some miracle a Labour government
were to come into office? What lack
of confidence is there in the community
when on the last quarter's showing our
housing commencements were at the rate
of 113,000 a year and when our people
are enjoying one of the highest standards
of housing to be found anywhere in the
world? No country ' has a higher percentage
of owner occupancy than this country.
Mr. Hayden.-How is private investment
going? Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-I will tell the
honorable member in a moment.
Mr. Hayden.-It was half a million
dollars last year.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER ( Mr. Lucock).
-Order! I warn the honorable member
for Oxley.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-No other country
has a higher number of houses containing
five rooms or more. No other country
has a higher percentage of owner occupancy-
70 per cent.-than has Australia. I
mention this because time tonight is not
going to enable me to give many illustrations
of the current state of the economy. 
I will have half the time that the Leader
of Opposition was able to take. However,
there we have a barometer indication of
, the current state of the economy. The
present level of unemployment registrations
throughout the whole of Australia is 1.2
per cent. Do honorable gentlemen opposite
regard that as evidence of stagnation? This
is the situation in a year in which-and
there was no acknowledgement of this from
' honorable gentlemen opposite-this country
has, so far as the two principal pastoral
States of the Commonwealth are concerned,
passed through one of the most
serious droughts in our history. We have
some figures about the drought's effect on
our sheep population. During the year our
sheep numbers dropped by 14 million
whereas normally there is an increase of
6 million in the total Of OUr flocks. So in
a year when Australia sustained a total loss
of 20 million sheep our economy went
on almost without fluctuation, with about
99 per cent. of our people regularly in
employment and with work vacancies still
offering. The economy moved on. Only a
few years ago a drought of this degree
would have had disastrous consequences
for the Australian economy, so it is a
measure of the diversification of the Australian
economy and its basic strength that
we were able to come through this difficult
period of adjustment with so little dislocation
in the affairs of most of the citizens
of our country. I am asked about private
investment. Ninety per cent. of the capital
fixed investment in this country is provided
inside Australia itself. Despite our difficulties,
we provided last year-
Mr. Hayden.-Yes, but how much this
year? Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The
honorable member for Oxley should recall
what was said to him by the Chair only
a few -minutes ago.
the eqHlARLD HOLT.-We provided
last year, out of our own savings,
of our gross national product for the
purposes of capital fixed investment. There
as only one country in the world which
exceeds that percentage. It is Japan. It is
of interest to note that in the last year in
which honorable gentlemen opposite were
in office 20 per cent. only was so invested. That was not a bad performance at all at
that time, but ours is a good deal better
than they were able to produce.
There has been talk about stagnation and
lack of development. The honorable member
for Dawson ( Dr. Patterson) is very
eloquent on the lack of development. I
would remind him that I was in Townsville
a couple of weeks ago, going through the
formal ceremonies of launching a major
university and a major military establishment
there, both flowing from the policies
of this Government. Only today, members
of the Government have been sitting in
consultation, with State Ministers to consider
the question whether the Ord River
project should be developed further. I
know that honorable gentlemen opposite
say: " Of course we will develop the Ord.
Of course we will give the Snowy Mountains
Authority an opportunity to carry on
its work. We will jump on every bandwagon
that will -give us one vote tas it
passes In his Budget speech the Leader
of the Opposition offered a whole shooting
box of attractive proposals. Any time honorable
gentlemen opposite can, in a completely
reckless and irresponsible way,
undertake to do something which they
-think will attract a little passing support,
they do not hesitate to do so. Do they
think that the people can be -fooled as
easily as that?
The Leader of the Opposition, in his
Budget speech, said that there had been
no improvement in real wages during our
teryn of office.
Mr. Calwel.-It is completely true, too.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-He repeats
that statement tonight, but it cannot stand
up to the facts. The honorable gentleman
gave the figures for two years, 1964-65
and 1965-66. Well, the Consumer Price
Index had moved 7.5 per cent, over those
two years. The average weekly earnings
per employed male unit-that is the test of
what people are actually -receiving in this
country-had gone up 12.6 per cent. As
we know, the honorable gentleman is never
very happy when making speeches on
Budgets. He does a rather laboured job of
reading an unfamiliar document, and when
he interposes an aside of his own he usually
finds he has fallen into economic error. In
his speech the other night-I have no doubt 
that everybody above grade 2 at school
who listened in picked up his error-he
gave figures on this real wage argument
and talked about how the Consumer Price
Index had -risen from 127 to 132.1.
, Mr. Calwell.-They are the figures of a
Government department.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-Yes, but it was
the honorable gentleman who said there
had been a rise of over 5 per cent.' I hope
he does not repeat the error this time. In
the subsequent 12 months he said, the
Consumer Price Index has risen another 3.7
per cent., which means a rise in prices of
nearly 9 per cent. in two years." He also
brought in the food component of the Index,
which he said had risen from 128.5 to
135.9. That was a rise, he said, of over
7 per cent. I think my colleague, the Postmasteir-
General ( Mr. Hulme), would quickly
correct the honorable gentleman's arithmetic
on that. I mention that because the
honorable gentleman went on in the course
of comment to say-
I hate to bore the House with these figures, but
they are important.
One might reasonably ask: If they are as
important as all that, why does he make
errors of 20 per cent. and 25 per cent, in
his recital of them. The increase in the
Consumer Price Index was not 5 per cent.,
or over 5 per cent., as the honorable gentleman
said. Indeed, the arithmetic will quickly
establish this. It was in fact 4 per cent.
So he was 25 per cent, in error there. In
the following year the Index increased by
3.7 per cent., and the honorable gentleman
was out 12 per cent, there. The increase
over the 2-year period referred to by the
Leader of the Opposition was 7.5 per cent.,
so he was 7 per cent, out in that particular
comment. It is not of any great importance,
except that the honorable gentleman himself
said it was important. Of course, the
relativity movements in the Consumer Price
Index is of itself significant in relation to
movements in wages and the standards
of the community.
The honorable gentleman went on then
to talk about the rise in prices and how
this is without control under the Government.
My colleague could point out to him.
that in the last two Budgets this Government
increased taxation by over $ 7 Thillion
on both occasions and that these taxation
Wi 7. increases, falling, as they did, heavily on
consumption items, of course had some
impact on the Consumer Price Index. So
too did the drought, with its effect on meat
prices. What should in all fairness be taken
as the test is the run, as the Treasurer
gave it, over the five-year period, which
showed that Australia had enjoyed a remarkable
period of stability, equalled by very
few countries in any other part of the world.
One could go through every aspect of this
Budget and find answers which would completely
demolish the arguments which the
honorable gentleman has brought to it.
Coming to social welfare, no section of
the Parliament has a monopoly of consideration
or concern for the aged or for
those who are invalided, and the present
Government has a record in that regard
unmatched in the history of this Parliament.
When I say " the present Government" I
refer, of course, to the Government of my
distinguished predecessor over the period of
the last 16 years. I have the figures for
social welfare contained in the Budget for
1948-49, the last full year of a Labour
Government. I know that the honorable
gentleman opposite finds this highly unpalatable,
because he wants to posture before
the pensioners of this country as one of
a party which has the sole concern for
their wellbeing. But just as the trade
unionists vote for us in their hundreds of
thousands because they know where their
welfare lies, so the pensioners, who know
that it is out of a healthy expanding
economy that more provision can be made
for. them, give us their support election after
election. And well they might, because
compared with-
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.-Order! I
would be reluctant to name any honorable
member during the Prime Minister's speech
but if the honorable member for Oxley
constantly interjects I will have to take
action against him.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-The relative
figures are $ 160 million of expenditure in
1948-49 and $ 1,028 million of expenditure
in the Budget just introduced by my
colleague. All the juggling with movements
in the Consumer Price Index or the value
of money will not gainsay the fact that
there has been a very remarkable increase
in social welfare provisions by Governments 
on this side of the House. There have been
new benefits, new provisions, increased payments.
None of us, of course, regards what
has been done as the complete answer, any
more than we regard the enormous increases
we have made in provisions for
education as a complete answer. The
Treasurer and the Government, with whom
the Treasurer in Cabinet discusses, of
course, these problems in all their detail,
have had to tailor the requirements of
the nation to fit our revenue resources. It
would have required an increase of 10 per
cent, in personal income tax and 10 per
cent. in company tax to bridge the gap of
the deficit which the Treasurer has budgeted
for on this occasion. When one measures
this against the string of proposals that the
Leader of the Opposition has undertaken to
put into effect, one gets some idea of the
sort of task that confronts him.
I want to devote the concluding minutes
of my speech, as the Leader of the Opposition
did with his speech, to the situation
in South Vietnam. I stated the ob ' jectives
of this Government in South Vietnam in
the House on 31st March. They are,' of
course, to assist the Government of the
Republic of Vietnam, at its request and in
the light of our own assessment of the
nature of the conflict there, to resist the
armed aggression of Communist North
Vietnam waged through the Communist
aggression of the Vietcong, the so-called
National Liberation Front, and by North
Vietnam's own regular armed forces. This
agg-ression, we know, is aimed at taking
over the South by a combination of force,
terror and subversion.
Our second objective is to free the 15
million people of South Vietnam from the
threat of oppression and terror which
would be their lot under the domination
of the Communists of the north, and to
help establish conditions under which they
would be able to choose and develop, free
from coercion of any kind, the forms of
government and of society that they themselves
want. Our thi-rd objective is to
demonstrate that we in Australia honour
our treaty commitments to our friends and
our allies, that we stand by our alliances.
By denying victory to Hanoi and Peking in
South Vietnam we believe the spread of Communism in South East Asia can be
checked. There will be encouragement, we
believe, to those moderate elements that
we are already supporting through the
Colombo Plan and in other ways in the
work of modernisation and of economic
and social progress. We seek a peaceful
settlement of the conflict through negotiation.
The Leader of the Opposition wants the
withdrawal of Australian forces. Does he
want the withdrawal of United States
forces also?
Mr. Calwell.-That is their business.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-" That is their
business he says. It is no business of
ours, apparently, in the opinion of ! honorable
gentlemen opposite, whether United
States forces remain in South Vietnam or
not. Does the Leader of the Opposition
expect our A. N. Z. U. S. and S. E. A. T. O. ally
to carry the burden of security in South
East Asia virtually unaided by us-or, for
that matter, by anyone else other than the
hotly -pressed South Vietnamese? Australia
-and -most Australians share this viewhas
a vital interest in the presence and
active participation of this great power in
the area of Asia and the Pacific. We have
an obligation to support the United States
in this role, an obligation arising from our
treaty relationships. We have a role as an
ally having the Game belief in liberty and
freedom, with a similar devotion to democratic
process and with international
interests directly involved in preserving
South East Asia'fromn Communist domination.
We hope for an expanding future
with the countries of Asia and of South
East Asia in particular. These hopes would
vanish with Communist domination of an
area so important to our wellbeing and our
security. I want to refer honorable gentlemen opposite
to a most important and significant
speech by the President of the United
States, delivered on 12th July 1966. 1 want
to know whether honorable members on the
other side of the House share -the views
expressed by President Johnson. They have
thrown jeers and gibes -at me over my support
of American policy; I want to know 
where they stand on American policy. Do
they disagree with these statements of
President Johnson-
Asia is now the crucial arena of man's striving
for independence and order-and for life itself.
This is true because three out of every five people
in all this world live in Asia tonight. This is
true because hundreds of millions of them exist on
less than 25 cents a day. And this is true because
Communists in Asia tonight still believe in force
in order to achieve their Communist goals. So if
enduring peace can ever come to Asia all mankind
will benefit. But if peace fails there, nowhere else
will our achievements really be secure.
By peace in Asia I do not mean simply the
absence of armed hostilities, for wherever men
hunger and hate there can really be no peace. I
do not mean the peace of conquest, for humniliation
can be the seedbed of war. I do not mean
simply the peace of the conference table, for
peace is not really written merely in the words of
treaties, but peace is the day-by-day work of
builders. So the peace that we seek in Asia is a peace of
conciliation between Communist States and their
non-Communist neighbours; between rich nations
and poor; between small nations and large;
between men whose skins are brown and black
and yellow and white; between Hindus and Moslems
and Buddhists and Christians. It is a peace
that can only be sustained through the durable
bonds of peace; and through international trade
and through the free flow of peoples and ideas;
and through full participation by all nations in an
international community under law, and through
a common dedication to the great task of human
progress and economic development.
Is. such a peace possible? With all my heart I
believe that it is.
I1 support President Johnson because what
he said there he has stated precisely in the
terms of goals which Australia can also
accept in this area of the world. The Leader of the Opposition closed -his
speech by offering the nation a choice. He
said-Our policy on all matters will be decided by the
Federal Parliamentary Labour Party in due course.
There has been no change in the constitutional
arrangements of the Labour Party.
The honorable gentleman is still subject
to the faceless 36, as we saw the other
day in connection with the State aid issue.
The Leader of the Opposition makes the
claim that his Party will face the electorate
on 26th November united, determined and
confident. This claim of unity and confidence
is, on the face of it, ludicrous. For
most of the life of this Parliament the
Australian Labour Party has presented
the spectacle of a rabble. The people have
the choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, between
this Government, united on this great
issue, and the Labour Party, confused and
divided; a common defence of freedom or
a walk-out on our friends and allies; the
understanding of the Communist drive for
world power or Labour's refusal to see
what is happening in our part of the world;
policies that look to an expanding future
or policies bogged down in the past; rule
by those chosen by the people or rule by
36 faceless men; a Government with
leadership or a Labour Party run by
factions; the strength, unity and purpose
of this Government's policies or the disunity
and confusion of the Australian Labour
Party. We know the choice that the people
will make.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PaRNER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



UNTIL 5 PM. SUNDAY. 28TH AUGUST. 1966
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 84/ 1966
FUTURE OF ST0' VY MOUITAINS AUTHORITY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Commonwealth Jovernment has been giving a
good deal of attention to the question of the future of the
Snowy Mountains Authority. The major work in the Snowy Mountains
area will be completed on present estimates by about 1972, and
the Government hopes it will be found possible for a continuing
use to be made of some of the specialised skills which the
Authority can provide. Examination has been conducted by means of studies
at the official level and inter-De artmental discussion. These
have, of course, included consultaion with Sir William Hudson,
Commissioner of the Snowy Mountains Authority and his senior
colleagues. There has been consideration by Cabinet itself. WVhat
clearly emerges is that it is mainly in the area of State works
that the future collective use of the skills which the Authority
has built up is likely to be found. The works programmes of the
Commonwealth and notably the water resources programmes in the
areas under its control offer limited scope compared with those
of the States. Before a final decision can be made about the future
of the Authority, it is necessary that the Commonwealth Government
should be in possession of the views of State Governments as to
whether thev would see a requirement within their works programmes
and the funds likely to be available to them, to engage the skills
of the Snowy team to the extent necessary to sustain a workable
organisation. The Commonwealth's purpose would be to ascertain
in general whether they would re-ard the continuation of the
Auttorit as likely to serve Sta te and Commonwealth purposes in
a valuab e way. Most of the State Governments have, of course,
design and constructing authorities of their own, but some or
indeed all, of them may feel that they could be considerably
assisted by the services of the Authority. There have already been
instances of this. Australia is the world's driest Continent7 and all
Uovernments, State and Commonwealth, recognise that continuin&amp;
progress in water conservation is essential to further expansion
of production and to national development. Our recent drought
experience has brought home to us all how gravely affected
Australia continues to be by the lack of regular supplies of water
in adequate quantities. There is much that Australia can do by
its ovm efforts to meet its growing needs for power and water.
The skills, experience and expertise of the Snowy Mountains
Authority should if the States decide to avail themselves of
them be capable of making a valuable contribution for these
purposes. We propose, therefore, to consult promptly with the
State Governments on the specific question of the Authority's
future. Before we can finally decide on the size, role and
structure of a continuing organisation, we must have been able to
assess the extent to which tie States would avail themselves of
the services of such an organisation.
CANBERRA, 28th August, 1966.
EI,, IBA~ RuOED 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 85/ 1966
ASSISTANCE TO SUGAR INDUSTRY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Premier of Queensland has made strong representations
to me concerning the difficult situation facing the sugar
industry in Queensland and New South Wales.
Primarily this has come about through the catastrophic
fall in the world free market price for sugar. This has
happened at a time when the large expansion programme undertaken
by the industry some years ago is coming to fruition in a big
increase in sugar production.
Recognising the great importance of the sugar
industry to Australia, especially as an export producer, the
Commonwealth has been examining this problem earnestly and
sympathetically. It is far from being an easy problem. Although on
the production side the sugar industry is unquestionably sound
and efficient, and although it has showm a commendable spirit
of enterprise, it is up against a world market for its product
which is extremely weak and may well remain so for a considerable
time to come. In the circumstances, these quite uneconomic prices
impose great financial difficulties on producers in the sugar
industry and on the substantial communities in large areas in
Australia which have been developed through the establishment
of the sugar industry and depend on it for their livelihood.
For the most part, there are no comparable alternative
opportunities for production and employment in these areas.
My colleagues and I have been-treating the matter
as one of the greatest urgency and, in co-operation with the
Queensland Government, our efforts will be continued until a
solution has been found.
CANBERRA, 29th August, 1966 



PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR HECLD HOLT IN NEW YORK 1ST SEPTEMBER, 1966
President de Gaulle's Statement on Viet Nam
President De Gaulle is reported as saying in Phnom Penh.
Cambodia that the United S ates must agree to a timetable for the
withdrawal of its forces from Vietnam before a negotiated settlement
of the war is possible.
The disturbing feature of this statement is that the French
President seems to demand that firm commitments be made for the
withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam before even the opening of
ne-gotiations. It seems that President de Gaulle ignores the basic cause of
the fighting in South Vietnam, which is the agression both indirect
through infiltration and subversion and direct through the movement of
regular armed forces by the regime ini M~ r-tf eighbour,
South Vietnam. Surely any question about the withdrawal of American and
Allied forces should take place within the context of negotiations for a
settlement and must be balanced by guaranteed undertakings that the
people of South Vietnam would no longer be subjected to the aggression
from which they are suffering.
Those of us, like the United States and Australia, who are
supporting South Vietnam have many times appealed for discussions which
would indicate willingness on the other side to move towards a settlement
on just terms based on the Geneva Agreements of 1954.
The free countries of South East Asia have felt a strengthened
security and made noticeable progress behind the shield provided by the
American presence in South Vietnam.
Speaking as the representative of a country situated close to
South East Asia, and with recent, first hand knowledge of conditions there,
I must say that an untoonditional withdrawal of American forces would cause
grave concern among the people of South East Asia.
It is not a question, as President de Gaulle is reported as saying,
of the peoples of Asia submitted to the law of foreigners from over the
pacific. The people of South East Asia understand and welcome the support
of the United States and others in helping themto establish the conditions under
which they can really decide their future for themselves, free from fear of
aggression. 



66/ 13;
FOR PRESS PM. No. 86/ 1966
DEATH OF DR. VERWOERD
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
W'hatever political views one holds, the
assassination of a national leader is repugnant.
It calls for general condemnation.
I express my sympathy for the sorrowing family
in their sadness.
LONDON, 6th September, 1966 i 



66/ 133
FOR PRESS P. No. 87/ 1966
DEATH OF DR. VERWOERD
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon,
J. Mchwen
Mr. McEwen said that he had been greatly shocked
to learn of the assassination of Dr. Verwoerd. He had today
sent messages to South Africa's Acting Prime Minister, Dr.
Donges, and to Mrs. Verwoerd expressing profound sympathy and
regret over this tragic event.
The Government had not been able to agree with
some of the policies adopted by the South African Government,
but it was always possible to respect Dr. Verwoerd's personal
qualities. The ending of his life in this way in the heart
of Parliament itself must be a matter for the greatest regret.
CANBERRA, 7th September, 1966. 



ROYAL COMMONWEALTH SOCIETY LUNCHEON
LONDON 8th September 1 966.
Speech by the Erime. Ministeir Mr Harold Holt
Your Grace, Ladies and Gentlemen
Our Chairman and I have attended a number of Commonwealth
gatherings, usually uncomfortable, but by no means as agreeable as this
meeting we have in company with you today, and I speak a little feelingly
because I think I've spent one of the more uncomfortable of my mornings
in the service of the Commonwealth this morning at the Prime Minister's
Conference; One of our delegates has been going for a couple of hours and
is still in play. I don't mean to keep you anything as long as that, and indeed
I felt that thiere were about three matters that I could hope to cover and then
at question time perhaps we will supplement and broaden out a bit what I've
been sayin-y or touch on other matters which could be of interest to you.
The three things I thought I would canvamwith you today would be
first the contrast which exists and I speak now not as an old Prime Minister
but as an old campaigner whose first ministry was in 1939 and attended the
first of the Post-War Prime Ministerial Conferences when the New Commonwealth
was emerging. And there is a contrast, of course, to be painted between the
conditions under which Prime Minister Conferences were held then and how they are
held at this time. The second thing was to say something quite briefly about Rkodesia.
which quite clearly is the dominating issue of the Conference briefly, because
we are still in discussion on it and I've not yet made any comment myself in the
Conference. although I would have hoped to do so this afternoon. but for the
rather lengthy contribution which seems to have absorbed most of the working
time so far today. The third aspect which I hope to have time to touch on arises from
some of the things I've been reading. more particularly over recent months
following a couple of visits I made to Washington.
I'd always re~ arded myself as a fairly staunch supporter of the
Commonwealth of Nations and, in particular. of the British -Australian coqnection.
but I see myself described by some as having sold out to the United States or
having thrown in my lot with America. Well, of course. there are some very good
reasons why Australia should be close to the United States, which you will
appreciate, but I would hope to find time to tell you something of the continuing
link which exists between this country and Australia, not merely links of sentimentalthough
these are powerful but material links of trade, mutual problems of
security in the area, and other matters of that sort.
Now, firstly, contrasts between the Commonwealth Conference as
I first knew it. when one could gather all the delegates into No. 10 Downing Street.
It was, of course, in those days a white Commonwealth Conference; there were
no difficult racial problems to concern ourselves with. The delegations fitted
comfortably into No. 10, the discussions were cosy and intimnate, from men of
like -minded views on the problems of the world. It was all very agreeable and
it helped to knit us together very closely indeed, and there is today. of course,
a quite remarkable contrast as a result of the evolution that has gone on since
the second world war. / 2 
-2
The new Commonwealth was given its first expression in the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conference of 1948 when we had
India Pakistan and Ceylon added to the former white and aaropean racial team.
but since that time of course, there has been the proliferation of other
membership and also certain changes inside the composition of the old
Commonwealth with the result that as we sit round the table at the present
time there are the four old Commonwealth countries of European racial
derivation rhe United Kingdom Canada, Australia and New Zealandand
with the full teamn there would be 19 others from Asia and from Africa
and other parts of the world. There are 22 Delegations represented at this
Conference, quite a good muster considering the subject matters to be discussed,
but one of the questions which we shall all be asking ourselves increasingly as
time goes on is a sort of mental debit and balance sheet so far as the Commonwealth
is concerned. I know that there are many people that have their doubts about the
continuing value of the Commonwealth, some of them outside this country and
some of them inside it, and I don't think we have been assisted in forming an
objective judgment by those who arrive on these shores threatening to withdraw
unless their terms are acceded to. This, not unnaturally, provokes a reaction
amongst many people inside this country that the United Kingdom might be more
comfortably placed without such ungenerous or unfriendly or critical associates
inside the Commonwealth. Now I think bath of these developments are to be
regretted. They are both, in a sense, understandable and it calls on our
patience, our wisdom, our tolerance to see them in their true perspective.
But if there are to be these uncomfortable problems in an uncomfortable world.
perhaps we are better off and I incline to that view myself subject to what
emer-yes in the course of the next few days we are, I believe, better off having
these exchanges, however searching and even acrimonious around our own table,
able to round off the sharp edges of discus nion with the personal and intimate
contacts we have outside the conference room itself. That surely is to be
preferred to the alternative of long-distance exchanges; either at the United
Nations or some other international forum.
I'm quite certain that the Commonwealth has been a force for good
in the years which have preceded our present situation. It has and I speak as
a veteran parliamentarian who has attended many Commonwealth Conferences in
the Parliamentary field, and quite a number of conferences of Prime Ministers
it has undoubtedly contributed to a better understanding of each other and our
problems. it has established personal contacts which have bred respect for the
other man's point of view, and has developed a better and more realistic
appreciation of his national position and so all these things are advantages.
But on the other hand must be weighed the cost to the United Kingdom in terms
of international confidence. If it is to be a punch-bag for visiting delegations.
some questioning the good faith of the Government of the day, some asserting that
there are racial prejudices which are complicating the solution to these difficult
questions then it may well be that Great Britain pays a price in international
respect and confidence which is far outweighing the advantages which the
Commonwealth currently brings to it.
These are matters of judgment which can be resolved. I think more
fittingly by a United Kingdom Government weighing up the ' Pros and Cons' than
by those of us who can take a rather more objective view of what lines of criticism
are being developed against this country. But I've heard a great deal in recent days
which I believe is neither fair to this country and is not practical in the political
measurement that we bring to policies directed at particular problems.
Now, just to give an illustration surely the best and most effective
answer to any charge that the United Kingdom has allowed racial prejudice
to distort its view of these questions is the nature of the gathering in which we
participate at this present time. As I said, it's not so long ago it was an
entirely white and European community of representatives European as to
race, at any rate and outlook. But by the de~ iberate choice of those who were. 1.3 
-3
at that time the members of the Commonwealth and, in particular, in response to
British leadership, we have seen emerge the Commonwealth of Nations multiracial,
representative of all the national groupings at least all types of
national groupings, differing creeds, all the differences which we are conscious
of, those of us who have an enthusiasm for the Commonwealth or have attempted
to contribute to its continuance and successful operation. These are the cliches
of Commonwealth, in a sense.
We know that embraced in our membership is about a quarter of the
world's population covering about a fift'i of the world's total area, and it would be
a remarkable and welcome achievement if over the period of years we could
demonstrate to the rest of the world tiiat this multi-racial association succeeds,
that it has brought people closer together, it has helped to solve difficult
international problems and it has promoted economic progress. national
security and a general situation of peace. Now these are the great objectives of
our Commonwealth community and it would be, I believe, a tremendous sacrifice
of aspiration if. because of irritation or our own frustrations or, indeed, the
irritations and frustrations of other members of the Commonwealth we were to
find withdrawals or damage being done to the structure of such magnitude that the
Commonwealth ' lid not possess a continuing existence and a hopeful future. And
so over the critical days which lie ahead of this particular conference I hope that
these thoughts will be uppermost in the minds of the Delegates. and that they
shall apply the test of what is fair, what is practical, to the suggestions and
solutions which come to us around the table.
Now the second matter that I wanted to mention was a passing
reference to the question of Rhodesia and~ here. perhaps, is the illustration of
my comment that much of what I have heard has been neither fair nor practical.
When the United Kingdom's own good faith is brought into question in this matter,
those who make these charges I believe ignore the relationship which has existed
over the years between the United Kingdom and Rhodesia.
When it is urged that force be employed then, in my view. that is
an impractical course. I would very much question whether a Parliament in
the United Kingdom would give support to a Government which directed force
against the people Rhodesia when the possibility of other solutions had certainly
not been fully exhausted.
We in my own country have seen this as a special problem between
the United Kingdom and its former colony, but we have, for our part subscribed
to the programme of sanctions which was agreed upon and our current
arrangem ents apply to about 96 percent of our former imports from Rhodesia.
But there is, I believe, in this issue a test of the good se nse, a judgment of what
is practical and what is fair in relation to the United Kingdom itself, and when it
is known. as is the case of course, that the United Kingdom which could have
resolved this matter of itself and through its own policies has brought the
Commonwealth as a whole into conference with it, that again is I believe, a
substantial answer to any charge of bad faith or failure to deal with it in a
Commonwealth spirit.
I can't go over the ground of the Rhodesian issue in any detail because
the discussion is still before the Conference. I haven't spoken 012 it there, and
although our practices are changing, I think not necessarily for the better in
relation to public disclosures, I at least would like to say rather more to my
colleagues before I say a great deal on this in public. But perhaps it's
reflective of the changing situation, that I make that comment about the changing
procedures. In earlier times it was an intimate, confidential discussion with
Prime Ministers reporting back to their cabinets and the world hearing very
little about what went on beyond the rather sterle language of the communique. 
4-r
Well, all this has changed, I repeat not necessarily for the better, the
highest common denominator of agreement that we seemed to be able to work
out on this business was that Delegations aould roake known their own views to
the press, but were enjoined not to discuss the views expressed by others, and
as somebody said when this suggestion was made, " That's a counsel of perfection".
Well, we've now reached a point where, I gather, on one earlier occasion
I don't know whether it's repeated on this one. countries have engaged the services
of professional Public Relations Consultants. Obw heads of Delegations give
a direct interview to the Press following the contribution that they have made
inside and all this marks a contrast between what had gone before and the current
situation. But are we to condemn the whole system on account of what may seem to
some of us to be imperfection in its practice? Perhaps in the current state of the
world and with the sensitivity on these issues of race. of colonial evolution that
kind of public use made of what is regarded clearly by some as a political forum
or a means of national propaganda, this is part of the refriction on the machine in
modern times. But out of it all, although I confess that I came away from this
morning's discussion a little more pessimistic than when I went in about the future
of the Commonwealth. I've still retained in my own heart an optimism that when we
come to the end of the Conference talks we'll have felt that it has been of value to
have these frank exchanges together to carry away with us a mre realistic awareness
of how developments in particular countries are affecting the Governments of that
country or of zeighbouring countries and in this way at least assist towards a
more effective solution of the perplexing international problems which are vexing us
all in these difficult times.
Now let me turn from that because I'm not -unmindful of my undertaking
to answer some questions. Toput the question to myself I was just writing some
notes for this this morning. I did it in shorthand terms by Baying " How British
is Australia? I wouldn't have thought I had to ask myself that question but when I
read these Press commentaries that Australia is going through a metamorphosis of
ideas and attitudes and policies which is tending to weaken our link with this
country well this is I won't use the word ' nonsense' because there have been
changes of a quite important and material kind which I shall refer to but it
misreads the Australian situation altogether to imagine that there is not a strong
continuing link of affection and mutual interest between this country and our own.
it's not the same relationship which exists with our powerful friend the United
States. Th Srelation ship with the United States is a relationship of friendship, of
comradeship of mutual interest in that area of the world. The relationship with
this country is for most of us a relationship of family of kinship and there are
these different attitudes ' idach obtain as between friend and friend and between
members of a family and one is very conscious of it as we come here or as you
come out, as I hope you do. to see us.
But let's face quite realistically together some of the changes which
have been occurring. I refer first of all to immigration. It may interest you to
know that since the second world war a total of 2, 400. O J people in round figures
have come to Australia as long,-term or permanent arrivals. They haven't all
stayed there of course, but most of them have. by far the overwhelming proportion
of them have stayed there, and included in this total -and this is sometimes overlooked
is the fact that more than 5UJ percent of these arrivals have been British,
and so. Fithough in some ways you'll discover some changes in community living
in Australia we get better food and drink than we used to get ' Thanks to the
arrival of Italians and Greeks and Dutch and Germans and other nationalities
you can get almost any type of meal including Chinese and Japanese cooking as you
want it. Australia has at least on that account become a very much more delightful
place to live in but more than half, I repeat. of the immigration has been still
from the British Isles. A 
Now this t-irmportant when I go on to the next detail, and that is
that of the people living in Australia today one in five has either been a post-war
migrant or the child of a post-war migrant, and when you get down to the younger
age groups say up to 30 or 35 or thereabouts the proportion becomes
significantly larger one in 4 of the young people in Australia would have been
either a migrant or the child of a migrant. Some people knowing these figures
have assumed from it a weakening of the British composition of the community
well. I give you the other figure again to offset that for you've provided us with
something more than half of the total and the tendency. of course. has been for
these other nationalities I've mentioned to make their useful and helpful
contribution at the cultural level, at the community level, in productive terms,
adding skilld and their own enterprise to the national effort, but the country is
still overwhelmingly a British community.
Now I don't say that its attitude tends to become more British in the
sense of emulating what goes on in the British Isles. If we're going axywhere we're
not going American, we're going Australian, and there is. I think a stronger sense
of nationalism a feeling of growing pride in Australia its achievements, its
potentialities, even its hazards as our own people see a larger place for themselves
in relation to the affairs of Asia, and this is certainly worth bearing in your mind if
you are to inderstand what is happening out there.
Now there's been a great deal of talk in this country, I know. about
what again has been described in shorthand terms as a defence policy east of
Suez, or a British effort east of Suez, and I've been myself irritating enough to
try to demonstrate to people in Governmental and other high places that this must
not be either overlooked, forgotten or ignored in relation to the future of this
country. Heaven knows, we all appreciate the burdens which the United Kingdom
has carried for the rest of the world, and I'm not seeking to add to those. We shall
be carrying ourselves a greater share of responsibility as we grow in strength as
we shall in the years ahead, and again our great ally in the Pacific, the United
States. in recent significant pronouncements from President Johnson has made it
clear that the United States sees for itself a continuing role in relation to economic
progress in Asia and the security of the free countries of Asia. You get a
reflection of this in a recently-formed association of countries, what we call the
Aspac Group, the Asian and South-East Asian group of countries, which have come
together for reasons of mutual interest. They include Japan. Thailand Korea,
Vietnam Malaysia, the Phillipines. Australia New Zealand, now which is the
9th? anyway there are 9 of us there in that area of the world. It's not a strong
defensive combination or intended as such but recognising that we have joint
interests in the successful development of t rade, of exchanges between our two
countries, no dominance by azy particular major power, but a recognition of
common interests making association desirable.
This is a quite remarkable contrast of course, with the situation of
a few years ago when Japan was the country that we had been fighting. Today our
trade with Japan is second only to that of the United Kingdom. By next year it
wl. certainly be our first customer n current trends. Just to give you one
illustration of the way in which our trade will be building in future years, we
currently have iron ore contracts negotiated with the Japanese to a value of
over one thousand million pounds sterling and these have yet to get fully under way
and we believe this to be only the beginning of a growing trade in this commodity so
basic and vital to the steel industry of Japan.
Our trade with that country, I think I can give you a figure or two on it,
has grown from about six million pounds in 1951 our imports in 1949-50 were
000, 000 sterling and our exports S19, 000, 000. iaasyear Itport
hld grahaft m 000, 000 to œ L 2, 000. 000 and exports from the
œ 19, 000, 000 to œ 188. 000, 000. Our trade through buth-East Asia and
Asia generally well, trade east of Suez has built up from 16 percent of our total
trade in 1951/ 52 to 33 percent in 1965/ 66 and the likelihood of that increasing is
established by trends in the trade curves with the various countries of the area.
/ 6 
* 1 
-6
So, vYien you put allithese-things together I think you get somne explanation of
Aust~ alian attitudes which have seemed at this distance to reflect even a
change of orientation a change of sympathy and if not of allegiance at least of
association, but when you see the basis for these things, the security contribution
which the United States makes to us through our treaties under Anzus The
Australian and New Zealand Treaty with the United States and the Treaty
arr'angements made with this country and with the United States under the South
East Asia Treaty Organisation. these things quite clearly -have their impact on
Australian attitudes. This growth of trade on a quite dramatic scale with countries with
whom trade was almost non existent 10 or 15 years ago, this ap. in is effecting
the concentration of our outlook which was in my early days in public life almost
entirely directed towards the British Isles and Europe generally. These days at
least a large part of our attention is given to the possibilities developing for us to
our north, and of course out of trade and security arrangements there is a
growth of personal contact.
It was not entirely for the significance that has been attributed to it,
that my own first visit as Prime Minister outside my country was to a group of
countries in South-East Asia rather than to the more traditional sources of
Au stralian contact and association. I say it wasn't with quite that significance.
because my role and intention was to see our own troops where they were stationed
in that area of the world.. But in a result it developed into a quite sizeable
diplomatic exercise and I was interested to see subsequently that the countries of
Asta themselves were reading into this an Australian interest, a lively interest in
our future with them which they were welcoming. Well the need for it is clear
and I think that Australia can, by the growth of our own economy and our contacts
with these countries, make our own international contribution to the objectives
of Which the United Kingdom ad the United States have in relation to the world
ge~ ierally. We are helping, we believe in this way to preserve freedom for
thcose peoples of Asia who feel threatened by communist aggression. We are
striengthening the economies of the free areas by the increasing trade, increasing
aid and eventually we would hope through these massive programmes which the
United States has in contsmplation.
Now please see all these things in their perspective. but this doesn't
detract in any substantial way from the feeling that Australian people have, that
our destinies in the future as in the past will be closely linked together and that
the problems which you face both in relation to your internal adjustment and the
problems in relation to the rest of the world will always be of acute interest
to us and of sympathetic concern to the people of my country.
Now Mr Chairman I haven't left all that time for questions I
apologise for going, not as long as my colleague from an unnamed Commonwealth
country, but longer than I had intended. Thank you very much.
Que stion How important S~ ir, to Australia is the continued presence of British
troops on the ground in Malaya?
Answer Well we think there is an importance which goes beyond the security
consideration measured purely in military terms. The rather curious arrangement
which has built up over the years whereby a Commonwealth force has been
stationed in Malaysia and a large naval base has been operated out of Singapore,
these establishments have wi~ th the troops located at them been a stabilising and
moderating factor we believe in the affairs of the area, and I know that this view
is shared by the Government of Malaysia and certainly the Government of Singapore
and when we had our talks earlier in the year with Mr Healey we made this fact
sufficiently powerfully known to him to have some impact we believe on British
thinking and we welcomed the decision which was then made. We don't ask for
large forces to be there, but we think that you people in the United Kingdom underrate
your own influence and the character and strength which Britain still possesses
around large areas of the world. 17 
-7
Question I wonder-' whether the Prime Minister would be good enough to tell
us whether the future plans of Australia contemplate the early arrival of Asian
immigrants, particularly the country with which they now have trade worth
000, 000, 000 and the trade it is said is likely to increase.
Answer I am asked as to whether we contemplate an influx of Asian immigrants.
I do not. We do have in Australia at the present time a considerable influx of
Asian students to our schools and universities amounting to about 12, 000 or about
percent of our total university population and the figure is tending to grow. This
is one of the useful ways in which we are proving helpful to the people of Asia
and indeed if we were to say to those students that they were to remain on in
Australia when their courses were completed, I think the friendly relations
currently existing between Australia and the Governments of the area would
quickly be affected for the worse. They want the students back with them to help
them with their own problems. But I don't think It's generally realised that
attitudes in Australia are rather more liberal and sensitive on these questions
than is usually conceded to them.
I said, half jocularly when a question somewhat along these lines
was put to me as I was leaving Australia " Well. you know a country which has
just elected a Chiniaman to be Mayor of Darwn and a Japanese to be Shire
President of one of our Victorian Shires and has invited an American Negrq
Dean Dixon to run the Sydney Symphony Orchestra can't be too racist in its
general attitudes" and I don't know of any complaints of discrimination inside
Austa~ tlia, A.@ j. complaint of discrimination on racial grounds.
But the question of immigration on the large scale it is not as if
there hasn't been some history of these matters in the past. There were times
in Australian history in the past when the migrants came in as a result of
encouragement and it was because of the social and racial disturbances which then
followed that restraints had to be applied. There would be no answer to the
population problems of Asia to be found in our own country on a basis of Asian
migration and indeed if one talks to the political leaders of these countries I
think they recognise the value for them of a strong-growing homogeneous Australia
rather than one divided by a plethora of minority elements contributing to
national weakness. But in the administration of the policy, we do have room for humanity
and good sense. An Asian who marries an Australian takes up citizenship by
that fact alone. The children are of course Australian children and there is room
inside the policy for admission on a permanent basis of Asians who have some
special contribution to make to our national advancement.
Question Sir, can you see a future growing up in Australia as a buffer say
between Asia and the rest of the Western World?
Answer Well, I should hope we wouldn't have to regard ourselves as a buffer,
because I would trust that the relations between Asia and the rest of the Western
World will be cordial and co-operative. Certainly that will be so of the kind of
Asian countries with which we are associated in the Aspac Group.
Australia is not a large country in terms of population although we
are large in area and I believe large in potential. But we don't claim the
capacities of a major power to the extent that a national capacity for friendliness
and a well-developed spirit of mateship can contribute in our discussions in Asia
to better relations in Asia and other parts of the world well that will be freely
forthcoming. Question Is it true there is growing opposition in Australia Sir to your
Rhodesian Policy? 
-8
Answer I amceRtinjy-not. consctous of it if there is. I don't think Australians
have followed with anything like the same detail developments in Rhodesia as they
have, for example in Vietnam which is an issue of very much more direct concern'
to us and to our security as it is seen from there at any rate. But there has been
in Australia as a carry -over of a comradeship in arms of two world wars and
the admiration for the early settlement under difficult conditions in that part of
the world of British settlers in particular a friendliness and a sympathy which
does affect the public attitude to this particular question. That has not~ however,
prevented either the Government, the Parliament and the people from supporting
the policies we have pursued of maintaining sanctions against the present
Administration. Question What will be the future of the Commonwealth if all the African
countries walk out of the Commonwealth?
Answer Well? Hope that's a question we don't have to answer.
I would certainly have hoped that there is sufficient responsibility
and tolerance and recognition of the quite serious and damaging effect it would
have around the world for us to avoid any action of that kind. However it is
a question which events will answer before all of us are very much older.
4 1 b 


P. M. No. 88/ 1966
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, conferred this afternoon with the Premier of Queensland Mr. Nicklin, together with the Federal Treasurer, Mr. McMahon, the Queensland Treasurer, Mr. Chalk, and the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. Adermann.
The conference arose as a result of negotiations for a loan initiated by Mr. Nicklin on behalf of the sugar industry with the Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, several weeks ago.
In the light of experiences over the last two seasons, great difficulties are and have been experienced by the sugar industry due principally to the extremely low open market price of sugar and in part to drought.
The industry's proposal had been that the Queensland Government should loan the industry $19 million, repayable over a period and that the Commonwealth Government should put the Queensland Government in a position to assist the industry in this manner.
Mr. McEwen and Mr. Nicklin jointly announced after today's meeting that following intensive studies by the Governments, agreement had been reached and the Queensland Government will put the arrangement before representatives of the industry.
To cover financial requirements for the marketing of the 1966 No. 1 Pool of the Australian sugar crop, the Commonwealth will facilitate the provision of advances to the Sugar Board, against the guarantee of  the Queensland Government, from the Reserve Bank through its Rural Credits Department at its standard rate of interest of 4 ½  per cent.
These advances will be repayable within one year and will be replaced by a repayable grant from the Commonwealth to the Queensland Government after 1st July, 1967.
This grant will be repayable over a period of ten years, commencing in the middle of 1970. During the period before then, it will not be subject to interest. Thereafter, it will carry interest at the medium term bond rate prevailing at the time the grant is made.
Commonwealth and State Ministers agreed that before the new sugar agreement is negotiated next year the two governments will consult on all facts associated with the sugar industry.
 CANBERRA 14th September, 1966.



PRESS CONFERENCE -GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR HAROLD HOLT AT THE SAVOY HOTEL, LONDON.
16th September. 1966.
We've i: ust concluded~ a remarkable Conference perhaps an
historic one. To take the brightest view of it one could even speculate that
this marks another milestone in man's long search for peaceful collaboration on
a basis of multi-racialism but that is. i repeat taking the optimistic view of
things, and this could only be confirmned by subsequent expe'~ iences in which the
lessons of this cjDnference had been learned and some of the more unsatisfactory
features of it removed, There were some unsatisfactory features. Most of these were
evident enough. The practice which had develop d, I think it showed itself at
Lagos. but this was the first time I'd experienced a process of regular Caucus
meetings on what was blatantly a racial basis of membership and we would be
most critical of the continuance of this kind of practice on any sort of regular
basis at any future meetings.
The concentration of attention on Rhodesia occupying more than
six days of the discussion necessarily limited opportunities for consideration of
the very many other important matters before us and in the result consideration
of such important areas of discussion as the world political situation and the
world economic situation tended to be disjointed and inadequate as to the total
time available and on some aspects of subsequent subject matters there was scope
for little more than a perfunctory treatment. I think that although delegates had
opportunity to speak. the fact that there was limited time had the effect of
reducing the contribution which many would otherwise have made and, in some
instances. I think discouraged delegates from making any contribution at all.
In the result the discussions were unsatisfying in these two important fields,
containing as they did these matters of considerable impor-tance and concern for
Australia. I made a statement myself on the world political situation
concentrating my own remarks on the Asian scene and Vietnam in particular, and
when we came to the communique I registered at that point my concern that we had
not had an adequate and satisfying discussion on Vietnam and gave notice that if
this issue was still a current topic. th!? t we would expect a very mnuch mnore compkle
discussion on Vietnam at the next C,-nf eriance.
On the world economic situation I was given ie role of leading
the discussion there and, although there were some other speakers it didn't
secure a very widespread discussion not that any great significance should be
a\ 1tbt awcheerde vtoe rtyh amt ucith wina sa gnoret eam ceonnt traosv teor stihael gfieenlde rafol rc oCuormsemso nthwaet aslthho uPldri mbee foMllionwisetde. rs
The communique reflects to a considerable degree the Australian contribution and
we were not challenged on any of the more positive points that I put forward in the
course of my own presentation.
I said at the outset that taking an optimistic view of things, one
could regard this Conference as having brought the Commonwealth successfully
through a critically testing period, not only was it an issue of great difficulty.
complexity and delicacy involving as it did aspects of race, aspects of minority
rule. historic association between Great Britain and Rhodesia the evolution of
new nations on the continent of Africa itself these were only some of the facets
of this most absorbing but typical question and although the communique reflected
the differences of view that were held at some stages of the Conference it seemed
most unlikely that any communique reflecting at least that degree of agreement
could have been produced and there were even expectations that there would be
walk-outs from the Onference, -erhaps on a quite considerable scale. And s 
-2
to have come through all these swirling currents and landed the Commonwealth
safely on the other shore is something of an achi avement.
It has left problems unsolved, including the Rhodesian issue
itself., It has merely pointed two directions in which action may follow but even'
the most optimistic would not imagine that we had satisfactorily settled the
Rhodesian issue. But have in mind that of all the situations in the world that could
present difficulties for us this is the only one on which any pow erful disagreements
were voiced; there were other matters on which differences of view, of course,
are held. There is no uniformity of view, for example, on ~, ietnam but I think
itf s worth commenting that there was so much agreement on so many other issues
and the communique reflects a good deal of constructive, positive work at less
controversial levels which mark an organisation capable of doing a job of work for
its member countries. I think that the Secretariat has provided some valuable strengthening
on the organisation side. We're still feeling our way with the operation of the
Secretariat, I think several members would be reluctant to see it build itself into
an organisation that was attempting to influence policy thinking of its members, but
it can do a very useful job at the administrative level and in maintaining closer
co-ordination between Commonwealth countries making the affairs of each more
widely known to the others, and these things can be counted as credits which have
emerged from this particular Co) nference.
So that weighing the experiences of the last two weeks on a scale of
balance, I would feel that on balance the conference has demonstrated some succesSE.
It has also revealed dangers in relation to our future conduct which if allowed to go
unchecked, could themselves lead to a weakening of the Commonwealth Association.
Would you like to put any queries, Gentlemen, on any of these
aspects Q. Was the Common Market discussed at all?
A. Yes, but Mr Wilson made it clear that there was no early move in
contemplatiou that Britain did want to enter the Common Market.
The terms of entry had not been made any easier for it as the
recent visit of M. Pompidou revealed, but he repeated the assurance
that he's given on other occasions that the United Kingdom would not
enter the Common Market without giving full consideration to the
views and situation of dher Commonwealth countries.
Q. Mr Holt, from the tone of your speech this morning it seems that
you would examine rather carefully coming to a Commonwealth
Meeting again if Rhodesia was going to be dominating the conference
to such a degree with the African Caucus.
A. Well I wouldn't be serving ultimatums up myself but I think that
when the agenda for the next meeting is proposed we would want
to be assured that there would be reasonable opportunities for
discussion of the wide variety of matters which interest so many
other members of the Commonwealth, as I found it necessary to
point out on the sixth day, or was it the seventh day that we had for
six days of the conference been discussing the affairs of, or leaving
untouched the affairs of nine-tenths of mankind. and in resisting the
move that was bei ng made then for another adjournment so that the
Caucus could go into action and this is so with three-fifths of the
world's population east of Suez, and we hadn't got within a week's
sailing of that area after the first six days.
I see some paper this morning has a reference as to how I came to
be in the chair perhaps I can clear that little point because I / 3 
-3
thought it was not without and I don't want to make overmuch of
it my temporary occupancy of the chair actually arose as the
result of a proposal by Mr Lee Kuan Yew it wasn't Mr Wilson's
nomination. He was away at the time and they wanted to get on
with the business, so having occupied the chair at that session I
think on occasions when he was absent subsequently Mr Wilson
thought it convenient that I should carry on and did so. but
somebody I see in the paper mentioned that it was because I just
happened to be across the table from him so did Mike Pearson
and a few other people buL I think we can say that Australia found
a friendly atmosphere among the delegates.
We talked quite frankly and realistically on matters involving
questions of race. There was no disposition on our part to either
retreat from the Australian point of view or to conceal its light
behind the curtain, and f feel that there has been a gain for me
personally in relationships which have strengthened with the heads
of delegations. I've come to know a lot of them much more
personally aad had many opportunities for formal discussion with
them which was helpful.
I gather that some of the Asian delegations in their comments to the
Press have expressed appreciation that Australia was showing such
an interest in Asian affairs and playing an active part so that too
is useful India, in particular, commented a lot on it.
Q. Mr Holt, do you think our relationships with Africa have been harmed
at all by our close stand with Britain on this Rhodesian issue?
A. Well no, I think that follows from what I have just been saying. I
don't think so because Atrstralia made it clear throughout that we
regarded the Rhodesian issue as primarily a matter between Great
Britain and her Colony and while we welcomed the opportunity
which Great Britain had provided to other Commonwealth countries
to offer their views about the situation, we still felt that in the
final resort it was a British responsibility to decide how it was goinag
to deal with the situation and so we were anxious to avoid adopting
courses which were not acceptable to the United Kingdom and which
would merely serve to complicate its task. We were therefore against
the use of force, and we feel that so far as the aspect of sanctions are
concerned, again the United Kingdom will have to be selective in the
application of sanctions if difficulties are to be avoided and dangers
escalate in the southern part of Africa.
Q. There would be no doubt about your support of Britain in the TJi~ ted
Nations for these sanctions if she chose to apply them
A. I don't contemplate any difficulty for Australia in that coursl but I've
not yet. of course, had an opportunity to go over the work of the
Conference fully with my own colleagues or, for that matter with
Parliament, but this is a consistent course that Australia has been
following. We've applied sanctions to imports from Rhodesia covering about
96 percent of our trade from that Country and the particular matters on
which further sanctions might be applied don't affect Australia oil,
for example, if they decide to intensify oil sanctions. I would just
emphasise that Australia remains a free agent in the course that it
is to adopt. We're not committed to any line of action but you asked
whether I thought there would be any difficulty about it, I don't
foresee it. but we're able to decide our own course on that.
You say you'll want assurances when the next agenda is drawn up 
-4
that Rhodesia won't dominate it and that you'll have an opportunity
to discuss other matters. Say if these assurances aren't forthcoming.
A. I'm not talking about formal assurances, I think there's general
agreement that there was a quite disproportionate amount of time
even coniceding the importance of the subject and the highly
argumentative content of so many of the contributions but we felt,
several of us, that the Commonwealth was suffering in the eyes of
outside observers from what would appear to them to be a failure
to manage its business in a practical and sensible way.
Q. There wasn't a move to have the next Conference other than in
London.#?
A. Yes Well, when you say there was a move, that matter was
discussed and we all agreed that it was not a question of a
principle involved. One suggestion had been that because Britain
had formerly been regarded as Head of the Commonwealth whereas
now we were all equal members at least in a juridical sense
that we shouldr't come reptatedly to London. I took up the commenton
this myself pointir. g out that it was a matter of convenience for,' most
of us to meet in London, that most of us had bi-lateral arrangements
with Great Britain on a variety of matters and we were able to deal
with these at the same time as coping with the affairs of the Prime
Ministers.' Conference. Most of us had larger official establishments
in Londoni than any other part of the Commonwealth. It is the
headquarters of the Secretariat so that it would be rather more of
an operation to move all the officials around, and most of us. if it
were held somcwhere else, would still find it necessary to come on
to London to take up discussions with Ministers here. But where we
came out on it was that we agreed that we wouldn't adopt any hardand-
fast rule that as a matter of practice meetings would be held
mostly in London, but we didn't exclude the possibility of going to
another Capital either to mark some historic occasion or
( interj ection such as the Centerrary of Canada) well such
as the Centenary of Canada, well I don't know how Mr Pearson would
respond to that, but I rather got the impression that he thought
London was a pretty good place to hold Conferences.
However, there was no lengthy discussion or any substantial
argument about it it was accepted generally as a statement of
how things might operate in the future.
Q. Mr Holt, you mentioned your concern that so little time was spent
in discussing Vietnam. Do you think the Commonwealth could
really do anything useful in this regard?
A. Well, I think it's important that the Commonwealth be better
inf * ormed and more knowledgeable about Vietnam than it is.
it seems to me to mark an inadequacy of attention when I point
out that I'm the only Head of Government, so far as I'm aware,
certainly from within the Commonwealth and for the last twelve
months anyhow outside it, to have visited Vietnam and a lot of
people make very powerful speeches about what ou ght to be done
in Vietnam without really having very much direct knowledge of
what is occurring there. But if we can't have visitations well at
1k. ast let's have some really searching di scussion and I would
like to find my fellow Commonwealth colleagues declaring where
they stand on it, if they take exception to Australia' s stand
Indicating why th~ ydo so. At the moment I think we've got, as do
most of our members, a fairly wishy-washy attitude on Vietnam, full
8ae~ V? ns but not a vw pactical contribution to what ou~ ght t o be
d 



PRESS, RADIO AND TV INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT AT MASCOT
AIRPORT, SYDNEY. ON HIS RETURN FROM THE
PRIME MINISTERS' CONFERENCE. LONDON 19TH SEPTEM3ER. 1966
Well, gentlemen, as you will have gathered from my comments
in London, the conference I have just attended was a very remarkable
one. I don't expect ever to attend another like it and certainly
I have never attended one like it before. M11r. Wilson, when he was
commenting on the conference said that it had come through the flames
and -there had been a testing of the Commonwealth Association, but it
had come through successfully, and I think that is a comment which
can be made although it leaves many question marks about the future
of Commonwealth Conferences in the years ahead.
I think that we all felt that the solution which emerged
after six iays of di.-1-ussion on Rhodesia was not entirely satisfactory
to anybody, but it represented the highest common denominator
of agreement which could be achieved, and the c,; mmunique put out
on this subject indicated that there ., ere still some important
differences of view amorgt members of the Commonwealth some feeling
that force was the answer; others joining with Great Britain in
believing that there should be an opportunity given to the Smith
regime in Rhodesia to come to constructive and positive negotiation
with the United Kingdom Government which would ensure that eventually
majority rule would prevail in that country. The main points of
difference here were that the Afro-Asian-Caribbean group, which
developed the habit of meeting as a caucus in the course of the
conference, wished to ensure that there was no grant of independence
without majority rule ' being a condition of it. The United Kingdom,
on the other hand was prepared to ne-gotiate on the basis that
provide4 there was a guarantee of majority rule, there could be a
gradual evolution to this result.
The position now is that in the absence of some successful
outcome from negotiations, there is likely to lae a move to the
United Nations for selective sanctions, but Australia is in the
position to determine its own course as these developments become
known. The Rhodesian matter was of such burning interest to
many of the heads of delegations that it occupied six of the eight
days, and at one point, I felt it necessary to remind the conference
that we had spent six days of our eight on the affairs of this
particular country, and that nine-tenths of humankind who were much 
-2
affected by-ether aspects of our agenda had not been under
discussion at all.
We did turn, as a result of the move I made at that time to
prevent further adjournment, to a consideration of the world
political situation, but unfortunately the discussion of w,-, hat were,
for us, tremendously important matters Viet Nam being perhaps the
most important in Australian eyes this discussion was of a rather
disjointed and perfunctory character because there would be adjournments
while we had aspects of the Rhodesian matter draft
communiques and matters of procedure broight back under our notice.
Much the same applied in the case of the talk on the world
economic situation. I was given the task of leading the discussion
on this subject matter. It contained some elemonts of very great
importance, not only to Australia, but to the world generally,
including the pressing matter of international monetary liquidity.
It remains a fact that reserves the world's reserves are not
growing in proportion to world trade. Gold production, except in
South Africa, is declining in the free world, and we are seeing
symptoms of shortages of liquidity in various developments vfhch
are now coming under notice. The fact that money is so scarce, that
it is costing so much, that interest rates are becoming so high, the
actions of the United Kingdom and the United States in restricting
the movements of capital out of their countries by investors into
other parts of the world, these are all symptomatic of a growing
problem of international monetary liquidity.
It has been relieved to a temporary degree by the swap
arrangement which was entered into recently by the United Kingdom,
but the problem remains.
Now, there were a variety of other matters at the conference
which did, I think, reflect a more hopeful aspect of this Commonwealth
Association. There was remarkably little controversy on
a number of matters of a fruitful kind, and these are reflected in
the communique which was published at the end of the conference.
This augurs quite well for the future in that there were so many
matters on which a positive, constructive co-operation was manifest.
But what marred the conference was the evidence of racial associations
through this caucus system which, I believe, prevented a fair and
objective study of the subject under review and could be quite
4angerous and certainly distur-bing to many members of the Commonwealth
if this were to become the practice at future conferences.
The disproportionate time devoted to one subject matter was again
a weakness. When all these things are taken together, the fact remains
9 / 3 
-53-
that the heads oS daeiegations of 22 countries in a multi-racial
association, representative of all the principal racial groups,
and a vast degree of different attitudes, habits of life, history,
tradition, matters of that sort, were able to come together and
reach an agreed document in respect of a most complex and explosive
issue. It was a conference in which you had all the elements
drama, tension, humour, frustration, exasperation and a variety of
other factors, but out of it camne agreed communiques, first on the
controversial issue of Rhodesia itself and the second covering a
wide variety of matters dealt with at the conference.
And so some will be able to claim with justification
that the Commonwealth has come throug~ h a testing period with the
prospect of going on to better wiork in the future. Others will
argue that the price paid in the adoption of these undesirable
techniques in the emergence on such a scale of racial attitudes, that
these things are both harmful to the future of Commonwealth
collaboration and create dangers of their own and perhaps arguaments
of their owin for the future.
In my judgment, we will need more than one conference
before wve can come to a final judgment as to wihether this is a
continuing contribution to the well-being of mankind. But my own
tentative conclusion is that this does remain the best hope for
mankind of a multi-racial association for construotive purposes,
and like the United Nations itself, because the aspiration that
it embodies is one of the highest that man could hold, we can't
discard lightly the desirability of maintaining it in the future. 



66/ 135
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 90/ 1966
DEATH OF SIR JOHN ALLISON
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Sir John Allison had for many years been a leading
figure in the life of Australia.
He had given much valuable voluntary service to the
Australian UJovernment and had been prominent in an honorary
capacity in many fields of community service.
He was a warm, strong personality, and his practical
good sense made him a natural leader among men. His views and
guidance were frequently sought and valued.
His passing is a loss to Australia, and his many
friends and I include Mrs. Holt and myself in their number
will mourn him and will feel deep sympathy for Lady Allison
and his sorrowing family.
CAN 3E RU
21st September, 1966. 


 P. M. No. 90A/1966
The South Australian Premier today placed oefore us his State's request for finance necessary to install a natural gas supply pipeline.
Mr. Walsh is not contemplating a direct loan from the Commonwealth but did want various possibilities examined  point made in briefing only and not for attribution..... Most practical course, if acceptable to other Premiers, would be a special allocation under the semi-governmental programme)
The Premier handed over a documented case of pages. This will require detailed study by appropriate departments and will then be considered by Cabinet. It will be dealt with as expeditiously as possible.
CANBERRA,22nd September, 1966.


PM 91/1966
Apart  from a dealing with a few pressing ceremonial matters from his sick bed, the Prime Minister has had a restful day.
His doctor examined him again this evening and found that the virus was taking its normal course.
He has prescribed sedatives to ease the chest pains that are a sympton of viral pleurisy.
23rd September 1966


 No. 789STATEMENT BY THE ACTING TREASURERTHE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.ISSUE OF SPECIAL BONDS SERIES NCONVERSION OFFER TO HOLDERS OF SPEC7IAL BNDS SERIES B,
A new series of S3pecial Bonds  - Series N  - will be on sale from Monday, September 26 in the form of either Bonds or Inscribed Stock, and will continue to be available for subscription until further notice. The new series will replace the present Series M Special Bonds, which were first issued in February 1966.
Announcing this today, the Acting Treasurer, Mr. Holt, said that holders of Special Bonds Series B, which finally mature on October 1, will be able to convert their holdirngs to the new series.
The new Series N Special Bonds will be issued withthe same interest rates and redemption prices as Series M.Series N Bonds will carry an interest rate of 4-21per cent from the date of application until February 28,1969; then 4-1 per cent until February 29, 1972; and then 5-4per cent until February 28, 1974.Series N will be finally redeemable on March 1,1974 at a price of 103 per cent. As with earlier series,holders will have the option of cashing these securities atpar ( or better) subject to one month's notice, at any timefrom the date of the first interest payment on September 1,1967. Between September 1, 1967 and February 28, 1969Series N may be cashed at 100 per cent; then at 101 per centuntil February 28, 1971; and then at 102 per cent toFebruary 28, 1974.I
Holders of Series B Bonds will be entitled toreceive on October 1 their usual half-yearly interest paymentplus a cash bonus of 3 per cent of the face value of theirinvestment. If they decide to convert into Series N Bonds,they will also receive new Bonds with the same face value asat present. If they decide to redeem their Series B Bonds,they will receive their half-yearly interest payment, thecash bonus of 3 per cent, and the face value of theirinvestment. Individual holdings of Special Bonds will continueto be subject to a maxiumum limit of $ 20,000 ( all seriescombined). Canberra, A. C. T.23rd September, 1966


PM No 92/1966
The Prime Minister is feeling a little brighter today but still has the pain associated with viral pleurisy.
The doctor examined Mr Holt again this morning and is satisfied with his progress. The virus is runing its normal course and there are no complications.
Canberra 24 September 1966


PM No. 93/1966
The Prime Minister is continuing to make satisfactory progress.
Hoowever, as viral pleurisy normally takes five to seven days to run its course, Mr. Holt will have to remain in bed for a day or two yet. He is hopeful that he will be back in Parliament during the week out this will depend on his further progress. 
His doctor gave him a thorough check-up today and confirmed that there were no complications.
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Calwell rang the Lodge today to enquire about Mr. Holt's health and to wish him well.
25th Septebmer, 1966. 


Mr Holt is spending his fourth day in bed at the Lodge recovering from a mild form of viral pleurisy.
His doctor who examined him again this morning is staisfied with the Prime Minister's progress. 
Exactly when Mr Holt will be able to return to work will depend on his further progress, but the Prime MInister is hopeful that he will be able to attend to at least some of hsi parliamentray duties during the week.
he will not be opening the CSIRO exhibition in (Ki******)  tomorrow morning.
Canberra26 September 1966



66/ 14
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 95/ 1966
6.30 P. M. !. I' 0NDAY 26th.
PRIME IINISTER'S ILEALTH.
The Prime MIinister is on the mend, but no decision has yet
been made as to when he will return to his office.
Although he is still in bed, he had a number of official
callers at the Lodge today, and dealt with a considerable
amount of Governmental business. He is hoping to be back in
Parliament before the end of the week.
His doctor is satisfied with his progress, and thorough
examinations have shown that the Prime Minister is in good
physical condition, However, even a mild form of viral pleurisy
takes as much as a week to run its course. Press Secretary, 


FOR PRESS - No 797 
The Acting Treasurer ( Mr. Holt) announced today the appointment of Sir Kenneth Coles as Deputy Chairman of the Decimal Currency Board in place of the late Sir Alfred Armstrong, who had been Deputy Chairman of the Board from its establishment in June 1963 until his death last July.
Sir Kenneth has been a member of the Board since its establishment and was also a member of the Decimal Currency Committee.
CANBERRA, 27th September, 1966 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 96/ 1966
CONFERENCE OF HEADS OF 7XOVLRNJWMENT ON VIET NAM
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mvr. Harold Holt
The Australian Th'vernment warmly commends the
proposal put forward by President Mvarcos of the Philippines, in
consultation with the President of Korea and the Prime Minister
of Thailand. It appreciates the offer by President Marcos to
make arrangements for the conference to be held in the Philippines.
Since this is a conference of Heads of Government
whose forces are joined in resisting Communist aggression in
South Viet Nam, there will naturally be an assessment of the
military situation. But also the Australian J'overnment sees the
conference as one which will look towards the attainment of a
just and enduring peace, and towards the further development of
programmes of civil aid and economic reconstruction in South Viet
Nam, and in the area generally, which would buttress freedom and
progress. With each of these aspects coming uinder discussion,
the Australian .3overnment sees great merit and promise in the
proposal. I will be attending the conference and I am looking
forward to joining in consultations with the Heads of allied
Governments. CANBERRA, 27th September, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 98/ 1966
VISIT BY THE PRIME~ MINISTER OF MALTA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Halt
The Honourable Dr. Giorgio Borg-Olivier,
Prime Minister of Malta, will visit Australia as a
guest of the Government from 1st to 12th November.
Australians recalling the gallant resistance
of the Maltese people during the years of the Second World
Y Iar will warmly welcome this visit. It will also have special
interest f or those many thousands of Maltese who have settled
here under the immigration programme.
At the recent Prime Ministers' Conference in
London, Dr. Borg Olivier told me how much he was looking
forward to his visit to Australia which is home to the biggest
Maltese community outside of Malta itself.
In New South Dr. Borg Olivier will visit
Sydney from lst-3rd November and the Snowy Mountains on 9th
and 10th November. In Victoria, he will visit Melbourne from 4th
to 7th November and will then travel to Canberra on the 8th,
returning to Canberra from the Snowy to attend the Remembrance
Day Ceremony on 11th November.
He will leave Sydney for the United States and
Europe on Saturday, 12th November.
In addition to leading the GTovernment of Malta
as Prime Minister, Dr. Borg-Olivier is Minister of Commonwealth
and Foreign Affairs. On his Australian visit, he will be
accompanied by Mr. F. E. Amato-G'auci, 11.3. E., Secretary of
Commonwealth and Foreign Affairs.
C ANBERRA,
27th Septemuer, 1966 



FOR PW; jSS: 66/ 14A
P. M. No. 99/ 1966
CHA IRMAN OF C OMMONZEALTH GRANTS C OMMISS ION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Halt
Sir Leslie Melville, has been has been
appointed Chairman of the Commonwealth Grants Commission as from
tomorrow ( 1st October). Sir Leslie, who is already a member
of the Commission, will replace Mr. P. D. Phillips, C. M. G.,
whose term of appointment as Chairman expires today
September) Mr. Phillips has occupied the position of
Chairman of the Grants Commission since 1960. During his
period as Chairman, Mr. Phillips has made a significant
contribution to the work of the Commission and has maintained
the hig-, h standard set by his predecessors in this office.
The new Chairman, Sir Leslie Melville, has had
a distinguished career as an economist and has also occupied a
number of important positions in the service of both the
Commonwealth and State U'overnments. He was an Executive
Director of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development and the International Monetary Fund from 1950 to
1953, Vice-Chancellor of the Australian National University
from 1953 to 1960, and Chairman of the Tariff Board from 1960
to 1963. Sir Leslie has also been a member of the Reserve
Bank Board from 1959 to 1963 and again since 1965. Prior to
his appointment as a member of the Grants Commission in 1965,
he occupied a senior position with the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development.
The Commonwealth Government is fortunate in
having the services of a man of Sir Leslie's standing and
experience. C ANBERRA, September, 1966 



66/ 145
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 100/ 1966
TALKS WITH PREMIERS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister said this morning that he would
discuss with Sir Henry Bolte and Mr. Askin the timing of
a meeting with them and the other State Premiers.
Mr. Holt said he had no wish to retreat from any
earlier undertaking to hold talks with the Premiers of New
South Wales and Victoria. However, as requests had now
been received from all the State Premiers, it seemed
preferable to meet together rather than hold a series of
. separate conferences.
Mr. Holt pointed out that at his press conference
yesterday he had said he would propose February as a
meeting date but that if Sir Henry or Mr. Askin saw
problems in this he would have no wish to breach any
undertaking with them.
CANBERRA, 1st October, 1966 ~-i 



66/ 146
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 101/ 1966
SIR ALAN WATT ARTICLE
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I thought highly of Sir Alan Watt during his
long and distinguished period with the Government.
Before commenting on his article in any detail, I would
like to read the full text.
This much seems clear from the Press reports,
that the techniques of a discreet and cautious diplomatist
are not necessarily the same as those to be employed by
the political leader who must determine policy and make
it widely known. From the press extracts that I have seen, it
does seem that Sir Alan has fallen into the error of
assuming that politicians are less conscious of the
consequences of their statements than my own experience
suggests them to be.
CAN BERRA,
3rd October, 1966. i 



RADIO INTERVIZEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR HAROLD HOLT,
AT PAR LIAMENT HOU FF, CANBERRA. 6TH OCTOBER. 1966.
MR HOLT: It gives me particular pleasure to be able to announce
that President Johnson has found it possible to pay a visit to Australia
en route to the Conference at Manila. As you will know, I have been
pressing President Johnson ever since I saw him in Washington earlier
in the year to make a visit to Australia, and when I found that he would be
in thiis general neighbourhood for the Manila Conference, I pressed that
invitation again, and it is very gratifying to find that he has been able
to make the arrangements necessary to visit this country. I amn sure there
will be value from the visit and in a sense it is quite an historic visit in th~ at
it will be the first visit made by an American President dur.! ig his period -of
office. Here, already, we have a good dividerdout of the Manila Conference.
It was the fact of the Conference which has brought him to this area, and
being in the area, he is making it possible for himself to see something of
the countries in which he finds a growing American interest.
Q. Sir, can you tell us the cities he may visit while he is here
in the country?
MR HOLT: I understand that in Australia he will hope to visit
Melbourne where he spent so many happy hours in war-time during his
service out in the Pacific. He would certainly be expected to pay a visit to
Sydney, and of course we would plan for an official visit to Canberra where
I hope an appropriate Parliamentary occasion would be staged.
Q Can you tell. us the dates, please Prime Minister?
MR HOLT: It is planned that he will arrive here on the 20th and
leave on the evening of the 22nd. 


PRESS BRIEFING GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR HAROLDHOLT, FOR THE HEADS CF BUREAUX IN THE PARLIAMENTARYPRESS GALLERY AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA. 6TH OCTOBER. 1966.MR HCLT: Well, yentlemen,, I think you have had confirmationor at least the announcement about the dates for this Manila Conference beingnow the 24th and As you are aware, the later dates proposed provedhighly inconvenient for both Mr Holyoake and myself and I am very appreciativeof the fact that the views which we put on this matter had the effect of brin. g-ingthe date of the Conference back to a more manageable point from our view.Mr Holyoake was, I thinkc, in even more difficulty than I over the matter inthat his election campaign begins, I understand, a week before ours here inAustralia. In addition to that, I am very glad to be able to announcethat President Johnson will be making a visit to Australia on his way to Manila.The likely dates of tne visit are 2uith October to 22nd October that is Thursdayto the Saturday. Exact times have not yet been worked out and will be affectedby the detailed travel arran.-ements that he makes, and the probability that hewill be making a short visit to New Zealand on his way here.But this visit to Australia was, as you know, urged byme. I renewed the invitation to L-e President when I saw him earlier in theyear, and when it became clear that he would be in this general neighbourhood,then H pressed our request the more strongly. I am sure it is very gratifyingto Australians generally to learn that he has now found it possible to includesuch a visit in his itinerary. I am sure it will be a most valuable visit fromour point of view, and in a sense it will be an historic visit as this will be. thefirst occasion in Australian history that an American President in his periodof office has made a visit to this country. We have had two visits by VicePresidents, and several, of course, by Secretaries of State but this visit willbe unique in our experience and all the more welcome on that account.I can't give you any details as yet as to the programme.Not only will we need to clear that with the President but I shall obviously haveto examine the possibilities open to him while he is here and make suggestionsfor consideration which will be designed to see that his time with us is employedto the most effective degree, at the same time taking into account his ownwishes. I know, for example, that he would hope to renew his acquaintancewith Melbourne where he spent so many happy hours while he was here duringthe way years, and I could hardly imagine him visiting Melbourne and therewould be something of a riot in the land without him including Sydney also inthe it!. nerary. Whether it will be possible to extend beyond those possibilitiesI don't know taking into account, of course, the fact that it would almostcertainly be felt appropriate that there should be a Parliamentary function herein Canberra. Parliament will be in session still, at that time, and this wouldbe a most appropriate way of giving a formal recognition and tribute in thecourSe of the visit. Will he be staying at Government House?MR HOLT: He may have a personal wish to stay at the Embassy soI can't say at this point of time. I may say that all this has only been clearedup quite recently. / 2
-2-When did you know definitely that he was coming?MR HOL. Well, I thought it was highly likely yesterday, but rightfrom the outset I have been hopeful that this could be arranged. At firstit appeared that this would have to be done after the conference, but whenthe conference was postponed, I pointed out that both in New Zealand andAustralia we were getting very close to the opening of an election campaignand I thought it was not desirable in those circumstances that the visit shouldcome following the conference. It was preferable that it should take placebefore. I am glad it was possible to take this consideration fully into account.Is there a possibility, Mr Prime Minister, that the Presidentmight open North-West Cape?MR HLT'.( Laughing) I think geography has a say in a matter of thatsort. There ate some complications that we have to sort out. For example,I understand that Sir Henry Bolte is opening the refinery at Westernport on theFriday, and there is a Civic Dinner for me in the Melbourne Town Hall thatnight. So there are all sorts of adjustments which several of us will need tomake in our pro-grammes if the maximum value is to be derived from the visit.C. You spoke of a Parliamentary function, Sir. Do you envisagethe President addressing a joint meeting or a banquet, a State Banquet?MR HOLT: Well, I would have thought as on certain other occasionswhen notable people have visited us we might have a Parliamentary function,either a L. icheon or a Dinner, at which speeches of welcome could be made,and in this case the President reply.Q. Sir, is Mr. Rusk coming as well?MR HOLT; I think that's h~ ghi.,' Jikely,. yes. ; To 4he best of my knowledgehe will be in the party. Is the visit being announced from Washington, Prime Minister?MR HOLT: Yes, but I think a little later than here.Q Would you invite the State Premiers to any ParliamentaryfunctionMR HOLT: I would like to, more particularly as it is likely there willbe several States he won't be able to visit.Do you expect Mr McNamara to be with him too?MR HOLT: Well, I haven't got any detail of the composition of his owndelegation, and I think I should leave that for him to announce. We have yetto work out fully our own, but I hope to do some work on that tonight.C. Will Mr Calwell have a chance of speaking with the Presidentwhile he is in Canberra or while he is in Australia?MR HOLT Well, I think that is a matter to which the AmericanAmbassador would need to give some attention. Certainly we would put noobstruction in Mr Calwell's way.C. He will be coming to Canberra first, will he Sir?MR HOLT: I think that is likely, but again, he will be in his ownplane and we'll need to work out a programme which fits in with his traveltimes of the flight from New Zealand to here whether some period of rest / 3
-3-is desired before he embarks on official talks or functions. These things willall have to be sorted out.Q. You don't think the timing of the visit, Mr Prime Minister,will involve the President in Australian political matters?MR HOLT: Not at that point of time. Well, the political season nevercloses, in my experience, in this country! There are certainly no politicalmotives behind the visit. It is a visit of goodwell, and I think illustrates theregard in which he holds Australia.Q You seem elated about the visitMR HCLT: Well, it is an historic visit and I am glad to have playedsome part in adding this particular chapter to the Australian story. Butquite apart from that, I do see considerable value in the visit. I think itwill focus a good deal of world attention on the interest which the Presidenthas been displaying quite clearly now for some time in the problems ofAsia. There is a very interesting speech, incidentally, on that, and theAsian situation generally, which I recommend the specialists amongst youto study in this last issue of the US News and World Report. This was thetext of the speech by President Marcos to the Congress recently. Those ofyou who have been following what I said earlier in the year on some ofthese Asian matters will be interested, I think, to see how closely the viewsof the President of the Philippines worked out in relation to those which Iexpressed earlier.Q. Sir, will the people of Sydney and Melbourne have everyopportunity to see the President by way of open-car parades or something?MR HCL'r: Well, having brought him here, we don't want to keep himon ice somewhere. We would most certainly hope that there would beopportunities for him to see and be seen by as many Australians who findthemselves able to take advantage of the visit. But we can't say at thispoint of time just what the programme is, but it certainly is not going to bedesigned as a programme confined to officialdom or to Parliamentarians.Q. Mrs Johnson is she coming too?MR HOLT: I have no firm confirmation on that. I am still hopingthiat she will be. What about the " gals"? Are they coming?MR HOLT: V13ll, they will be very welcome ( Laughter) and we havemade that clear. But, again, I will be able to fill you in on quite a few ofthese details later onQ. Are you despatching a senior officer of your Departmentto the United States forthwith to discuss the detailed arrangements?MR HOLT: V-ell, Waller, our Ambassador in Vjae-hington is righton top of this. In fact, we would probably bring WV; aller out here afterthere has been further discussion on the details. We have got thorougkay.adequate staff there, and, of course, Mr Hasluck is currently in New York.Q. What about the security arrangements? These would befairly substantial.MR HOLT: I have no doubt. And I am expecting a minor invasionof gentlement of the Press! Not merely of the United States Press, butI would think this would attract the interest of Asian Press as well. But,again, you are asking me abou ponso etail which have not been . reablved.



FEDERAL COUNCIL OF THE LIBERAL PARTY
OF AUSTRALIA
Held at the Hotel Canberra, Canberra, ACT 1CFPH OCTOB3ER., 1966
Mr. President and Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It's a matter of very great pride, I assure -you, Mr. President,
to have this privilege of addressing Council for the first time as Prime
Minister. My association with the Liberal Party, of course, goes back to
its formation. It has been a matter of continuing regret for me that I can't
claim to have been one of the founding fathers who met at Albury on that
historic occasion, but I think I can justly claim to have been the first Member
of Parliament to have risen to his feet at a public gathering and declared
himself a supporter of the new party. And so my association goes back to the
formation of the Liberal Party, and it is not inappropriate that having had, I
think, seven years as de facto Chairman of the Policy Committee, entrusted
to that task by m y former distinguished predecessor, I should have had this
closest of associations with liberalism from the outset.
Indeed, I really begin to think about my advancing years when I
recall that I am the only -member of the Liberal section of the Cabinet to have
been in the Cabinet at the time of its formation in 1949, and to have been in
the Parliament, of course, for many years before that. Perhaps it makes one
a better Liberal to have been active in the Parliament in the days when
there were no Liberals with a capital and very few with a small
certainly on our side of politics, at any rate.
I see it as a matter of pride, Mr. President, because one could
hardly conceive an organisatlon which more effectively allowed a government
and a party to express itself in terms of its political policies and aspirations.
If you were to be looking around the world for a model of the relationship
which should exist between a parliamentary party and an organisation which
had developed to support the principles of that party and to assist with its
policy, thenl know of no better model that I could recommend than the Liberal
Party of Australia. Here we have been able to build on experience which the founders
of the party possessed. We have the greatest asset of all, perhaps, in a
philosophy of liberty, of freedom, of personal initiative, of free enterprise
and I say this is a priceless asset because if one is faced with a difficult
problem in the political sphere, if you ca n turn to the principles and
philosophy of liberalism, then that particular problem becomes so much the
easier to resolve. It's a great advantage we possess over our political
opponents. They have no policy, no philosophy for the modern, growing,
expanding, exciting enterprising Australia of these times. They have a
musty, doctrinaire, obsolete policy of which they seem to be thoroughly
ashamed at election time.
I recall that in recent elections, Mr. Calwell has undertaken
that the policy won't be resorted to for at least three years. How can one
subscribe wholeheartedly to a political policy and programme if you are not
prepared to go out and fight wholeheartedly for the philosophy and policies
of your own party. But that is where the AustralianLabor Party stands today,
as I hope to exemplify to you in one or two instances as I go along. It seems
to be suffering from a sort of schizophrenia. It starts off with an attitude / 2 
-2
and refuses to follow through the logical consequences of the attitude it has
adopted. I have just put that in the broad at this stage. I shall hope to
illustrate it for you as I go along, but it would be well if outside this
particular room and far beyond, the delegates and branches from which they
come, and the State Divisions from which they come, if there were a
realisation throughout Australia that here you have in the Liberal Party, a
parliamentary party working in the closest and warmest, friendliest
of co-operation with its political organisation. It is a live and vital political
organisatiori, able to assist us in our policy determinations by the very
effective work of our joint policy committee of whom half the members are
drawn from the Parliamentary party, and others from the State Divisions and
assisted by the policy discussion of our annual council meetings.
What a contrast:. Here, no attempt to dictate to those who
have been elected by the people to serve them in the Parliament, but a
partnership in which there is discussion, there is persuasion, there is
co-operation, but never at any point in the history of the party has there been
attempt at dictation to those whom the people have elected. We have always
recognised inside this Liberal Party that the final responsibility must rest
with the parliamentary party and in those States where we have the
opportunity to govern at this time, the responsibility with that government,
assisted but not compelled by the organisation of which we form a part. There
is nothing faceless about you, Sir ( turuing to the President) nor those around
us. I was just going to make the comment that there are some rather
distinguished, certainly handsome faces to be found around the room, and I
would want for no better manifesto than to have a series of photographs of
those wvho comprise the advisers to the Liberal Party through its organisation
and those who for themselves claim the right to tell the parliamentarians In
the Labor Party just what their policy should be and how they should vote.
One of the encouraging things about the Liberal Party of these
days is the forward-looking character of its policies and of its membership.
It is not surprising, although certainly this hasn't been the historical
experience of the past, that a younger generation of Australians is turning to
the Liberal Party rather than the traditional turning to the left of a younger
generation. I had an interesting confirmation of this, rather indirectly, in
a document which reached me from the Students' Representative Council of
Victoria following a referendum conducted on the issue of National Service.
Now, not surprisingly, there wasn't a large university percentage vote for
National Service. I am a former university student myself, with a fair idea
of how I would have noted In f act, the particular scheme of National Service
which operated in my time was no more popular than that which operates at
the present time. I will have something to say on National Service before I
conclude. But the point which intrigued me in this document was that
they analysed the voting attitudes and then related them to the political
outlook of the students concerned. They gave the precise figures. Those
who supported the Liberal or Liberal and Country Party totalled 1, 179.
Those who supported the Australian Labor Party 671. Those who supported
the Democratic Labor Party 221; the Communist Party 20 I was glad to see;
undecided 501. But it was rather revealing that, despite the unpopularity
with them of National Service, there were still 1, 179 of them prepared to
vote for the Liberal Party as against 671 for the Australian Labor Party.
When you throw in the Democratic Labor Party, which on these issues of
Viet Nam and National Service strongly support the Government policies, you
will see that the combined vote just about doubles the vote for the ALP and
this from the younger, intelligent area of the Australian community as
reflected in these particular educational institutions. I thought it was
certainly informative and encouraging. / 3 
-3
I want now to say a word or two about National Service.
In the address I give you tonight it would not be practicable to cover the
many issues we will be discussing in the course of the election campaign.
So I have selected a few which are highly controversial and on which we have
a clear view and attitude ourselves, and I hope we can rely upon your staunch
support on. these as we move into the campaign.
But let me say a word or two about National Service.
Perhaps I should preface it by saying that one of the features of our political
experience at this time is that we have to learn to live with our geography.
In my early days in Parliament, our attention was concentrated on the
British Isles and the countries of Western Europe. To a much lesser degree
the United States of America came into the picture. But for most of us in
those earlier years the countries to the north of Australia represented some
rather picturesque stamps in an album without very much else beigg known
about them. They just didn't enter into the scheme of things. Our trade with
them was small, our contacts with them quite minor. Those who could
afford the price of a journey overseas spoke of going " home", by which they
meant the British Isles, and two or three weeks on the " Gontinong" that was
about all their ambitions ran to. If you could come back with a suitcase
absolutely covered with labels of all the fancy hotels you had stayed at that
was a memorable phase in a lifetime.
But we have become increasingly conscious over recent
years and made very conscious of it at the time of Pearl Harbour that
destiny had placed Australia in a world very different and alien to the kind
of world we formerly lived in. We were a European projection into the
Southern Hemisphere, but it became obvious that we had to begin pretty
smartly to think of ourselves as geographically, at any rate, part of the
Asian scene. This now presents to us some of the most exciting and
promising potentialities for the future of this country. One has only to study
what has happened in the way of trade over recent years. The nominal
trade we had with Japan in the years following the war, even in the early
1950' s, was not great. Today it is more than four and a half times what
it was in the early 1950' s yet both we and the JApanese believ e that we are
really still living on the threshold of the trade experience that will develop
between our countries. Australia is a great supplier of foodstuffs, raw
materials, and yet with a manufacturing capacity which, on some items, will
enable us to compete in the markets of the world.
In the motoring industry, the products of General Motors and
other companies have been successfully sold around the world in competition
with those produced by countries with a longer experience in this field than
ourselves. If we can hang on to our price levels and our costs, then although
as far ahead as any of us can see we will be relying upon our primary industries
for the major part of our export income, we can still conduct ourselves in a
manner to be competitive on some of our manufactured items.
But speaking of our place in the geography of Asia, part of
the background may be seen In respect of what we have done in Viet Nam and
about the National Service Scheme which has become associated with it.
Why are we in Viet Nam? We are not there because we are trailing along
at the coat-tails of the United States of America. Three Presidents of the
United States, one after the other, have decided that it is of importance' that
their country should be giving assistance in the struggle in Viet Nam. I have
said before and I say it again, that when President Johnson succeeded the late
President Kennedy, the greatest concern I felt as an Australian Minister in
the national Government was that under this new Administration, the
Americans might decide that they were going to pull out of the struggle in
Viet Nam because, in my thinking, Australia's security is far more
directly involved than that of the United States itself. The United States .* 9/ 4 
-4
wants to see the kind of world in which aggression does not pay off; but for
Australia, looking at the long-term consequences of successful communist
penetration into South Viet Nam, there could be no security for as far ahead
as we can see. It would have been a disaster of the first magnitude if it had
occurred. So I hope that when we have the privilege of welcoming the present
leader of the American people it will not be out of our minds that his own firm
resolution and determination and clear -sightedness have kept the Americans in
Viet Nam and now looks like carrying the allied forces and the South Vietnamese
people either to a victory or a position of strength in which negotiations can
be carried out for the benefit of the people of South Viet Nam and for the
greater security of Asia as a whole.
I stress this because first of all there is a disposition to think
that this was all President Johnson's idea. But he is the third President in
a row to have felt this way about South Viet Nam. In the same way, some
people think it is my bright idea to have troops in South Viet Nam. Well, my
distinguished predecessor had no doubts in his mind as to the course Australia
should follow; nor did his Cabinet; nor do my supporters. I don't know any
item of policy on which I could claim that the two Government parties are more
firmly united than they are on the issues both of our presence in South Viet
Nam and the National Service component which we -have found it necessary to
Introduce into the regular military forces of this country.
We take up unflinchingly the challenge which Mr. Galwell
repeatedly throws down to us that the main issues of this forthcoming election
are to be the Government's policy in South Viet Nam, our presence there, and
the introduction of National Service with some of our national servicemen
forming part of regular units taking their place in Viet Nam. This particular
policy of National Service was adopted after the Government had taken the
decision to build up the strength of the Regular Army. The current goal is
000 or thereabouts. It was taken after repeated efforts had been made to
recruit volunteers up to the number desired. But with well-paid jobs plentiful
in Australia, the response was quite inadequate when the Army's high
rejection rate was taken into account. I don't complain myself about the high
rejection rate the Army maintains. There is a very good reason for insisting
on a high standard. Australia, which can ill-afford any extravagance in the
use of its manpower, needs a highly efficient, mobile, well-equipped regular
force capable of being placed to the best national advantage. And it must be
stressed because the implications of this . never seem to enter the skulls
of our political opponie nts that National Servicemen are integrated into
units of the Regular Army.
Now just view this against the Labor Party policy, which Mr.
Cal~ vell and his supporters proclaim, of withdrawing National Servicemen
immediately from Viet Nam and then bringing back the remainder later,
after we have had discussions with our allies. I would like to be a fly on
the wall while the discussions with our allies take place, We might need an
interpreter there to sort out what some of them are saying. But I think the
Americans could express themselves in pretty blunt terms.
There is a sort of schizophrenia about the Labor Party and its
policy attitudes, because I don't think they can be oblivious to the importance
to Australia's security of resisting communist aggression, yet they seem to
be quite unmindful of the consequences to Australia's treaty arrangements if
this sort of policy was pursued. The truncated units would be incapable of
performing effectively. Those that remained behind would be, for most
practical purposes, out of action until units could be reformed, presumably with
reinforcements of regular volunteers to be sent from Australia. Australia
would play a quite inglorious role as this adjustment went on. While our
allies were doing the j ob of resisting aggression and helping to clear the
* 0 111/ 5 
Viet Cong and the Ncrth Vietniamese-out of-areas-of South Viet Nam as
their military successes developed, there presumably would be Australian
units, truncated to a substantial degree, just sitting there and waiting for
some rebuild in their strength. But why rebuild them in strength if you
are going to hold discussions with your allies about taking them out at the
first available opportunity.
This seems almost incredible in a country whose shield is the
strength of ANZUS and when the strength of ANZUS is the strength of the
United States of America. No-one has any doubt in their minds about that.
But it is almost incredible that this one sure source of our strength should
be so recklessly destroyed by a Labor Party incapable of seeing Australia's
interest in straightforward and direct terms. Can we ever imagine an
alliance with the United States would be the same again if Australia, a party
to ANZUS and SEATO, behaved in this fashion? Yet this is the Labor Party
of today. It is c o chance event that they should adopt this kind of attitude
to National Service. They were only able by the narrowest of margins to
muster minimal approval for the North-West Cape station, and even then on
terms which, had they been in government, I am sure the United States
would have found unacceptable.
There is another interesting matter to which I would direct
your attention. It arose out of the action of Mr. Sam Benson, the Member
for Batman, in accepting his expulsion from the Labor Party because of
his membership of the Defence Action Committee. He made a most
interesting revelation which resolved what had been something of a mystery
in my own thinking. That was the occasion of the invitation to a delegation
of six Labor men to visit Singapore, an invitation issued by the Premier of
Singapore, Mr. Lee Kuan Yew.
He had been down here as a guest of the government a short
time before, and frankly, it had seemed a little odd at the time that he should
issue an invitation to half a dozen members of the Labor Party to go and
visit Singapore. But Mr. Benson has now given us the reason, and he says
that they were invited because Mr. Lee wanted to tell them how disturbed
he was by the attitude of the Labor Party to Viet Nam, because, ladies and
gentlemen, don't imagine we are the only people who are concerned about
the treatyin Viet Nam.
If you read the statements of the spokesmen of such countries
as Thailand, the Philippines, or the countries on the periphery of Asia and
Malaysia also you will find there a general concern and acceptance of the
threat which is posed to them. What for some people may be a rather
academic " domino" theory of one country going after the other is regarded
as very far from academic in the eyes of the leaders of the countries I
have just mentioned. And Mr. Lee and I am quoting Mr. Benson's version now, not
my own got them there to tell them how concerned Singapore was that if
Viet Nam fell, Singapore would feel gravely threatened. They were expected
to pass this information on to their colleagues in order that there might be
a more realistic appreciation of the threat to this area of the world.
Accordi ng to Mr. Benson, he did discuss this matter with his own branches,
but, again according to him, as far as he was aware, no other member of
that delegation did so, nor have they uttered anything publicly since then
which would have conveyed any inkling that this was the story put to them in
Singapore. / 6 
-6
I think they had a responsibility, if that story was put to them
in Singapore, to make it known, whether they approved of it or not. At
least it was a contribution to the discussion the store of knowledge we had
in relation to this area.
Now some people find National Service according to their
description of it as immoral or undemocratic. But have they studied
anything of history? If they have, they would appreciate that it is of the
essence of democracy that people should give service to their own country'
when the need arises. Several of the most solidly-established democracies in
the world have maintained their own systems of National Service, including
the United Kingdom, the United States, Italy, Greece, France, the Netherlands,
just a few of the countries that one could mention.
I want to say a word or two about our decision to include aliens
in the National Service scheme. This was only taken after a good deal of
thought and considerable diplomatic discussion with their representatives
here and in their own countries. But what must be remembered and I
think this distinguishes the Australian position from that of most other
countries is that the immigration programme has brought hundreds of
thousands of settlers from foreign countries to Australia. There are, for
example, in Australia approximately 270, 000 people of Italian origin,
130, 000 of Greek origin and more than 11,30, 000 from the Netherlands.
Surely it is not unreasonable that the quite limited number of nationals from
these countries who would be called up for National Service should make a
contribution to the security of a nation which has provided new opportunities
and a prospering existence for so many tens of thousands of their fellow
nationals. Or is it expected that the &amp; fence of this half million people I
have just referred to should be solely the responsibility of native-born
Australians? It must not be overlooked that for those who feel so strongly
about National Service and wish to avoid it, there is the option of joining
the Citizen Military Forces, provided that they enlist in the CMF before
the ballot inducting them into National Service is held. Aliens have the same
option to join the GMF. They have even longer to make up their minds
because they have to be two years in the country or aged 21 before they
become subject to the call-up. In the last extremity, any alien who feels
so strongly about this that he would prefer to leave the country before being
called up is permitted to do so.
Now let me just say something about the economy. This is always
a matter of interest to governments and to the individual citizen. The
Australian economy, throughout our period of office, has been pointed
firmly in the direction of development and rapid. national growth. Indeed,
we point to the greatest era in Australian development which has occurred
since the Liberal Country Party coalition came Into office at the end of
1949, and it is our determina tion that this national expansion shall continue.
It has been affected in its pace in recent times, first by the factor of defence
and secondly by the incidence of drought on a severe scale in New South
Wales and Queensland. Defence has been a major preoccupation of the
GJvernment for the past three years. We have had to cope with the challenge
presented by Indonesian confrontation of Malaysia and communis t aggression
in Viet Nam. We have certain responsibilities, not only in relation to our
home defence but for the security of Papua and New Guinea. Confrontation
has receded, but the struggle in Viet Nam still goes on. We have never
allowed this preoccupation with defence to diminish our interest in the
condition and progress of the economy, or to weaken our determination to
push on with expansion in its manifold aspects. / 7 
-7
I would like to remind you that Australia's attempts at
national growth have met with serious obstructions, particularly in the
course of this century. It is worth reflecting on this because the United
States of America declared its independence in 1776, just twelve years
before the founding of the first settlement in Australia. At that time, the
population of the United States was less than 4 million people. Today it
is over 190 million people. We are still hoping to reach the 12 million
mark. The major factors which held back Australian progress were the
two world wars and the depression of the 1930' s. This little country,
as it then was of less than 7 million people, sustained half a million
casualties in two world wars. We lost more people killed in the first world
war than the United States. This must never happen again while we can do
anything to avoid such a national catastrophe.
The policy which the Government has been pursuing, the
programme of National Service and the build-up of regular armed forces,
are the things which can do more to save a needless loss of Australian
lives than simply relying on a response In times of emergency of volunteers
to meet a critical situation.
' Th is is not a Government of warmongers. It is not a Government
which is unmindful or regardless of young Australian lives or young
Australian opportunities. We are here to conserve these things, but to
conserve them by policies which ensure that Australia will be able to play
an honourable and effective part in the security of the general area in which
we live, but which will not be looked to to pour In hundreds of thousands of
relatively untrained young Australian manhood should some critical
situation develop there. Have this in your minds as the critics turn on the
scheme which we have developed. Ask them what is their alternative.
What is the Labor Party's alternative to the schemes that we have for the
defence of this country? I have heard Mr. Calwell talk about the fresh-faced
boys that are brought in under the National Service Scheme. Does he
realise how many of the volunteers were younger and are younger than the
men we are bringing in under the National Service Scheme? What is
their policy on these matters? I invite you to say, " I have listened to them
closely and I have no clear mind as to where the Labor Party stands" Nor
do they, because each member seems to have a different interpretation and
a different view of what Labor is proposing to do.
Now we have had a quite acute economic problem of diverting
resources on a considerable scale for defence purposes without interrupting
the strong even flow of economic growth. I believe that we can claim that
we have made this adjustment with skill. I pay a tribute, as I am sure
my colleague the Treasurer would, to the splendid advisers we have in
the Treasury of this country, men who are honoured throughout the
financial world all around the world. We have been able, therefore, to
conrbine development and national growth with a stability which has provided
us with some of the soundest foundations of any economy to be found around
the world. The economy has taken on board a really big defence effort.
Expenditure this year estimated at 000 million is more than double that
of 1.962/ 63. This has been done without seriously retarding essential
growth and without producing a selous inflation. Our current stability
reflects the strength, the resilience and adaptability of an economic
structure which rests on firmer foundations than have e ver before existed.
Our external position remains strong and with the favourable
seasonal trend, we should have a big export income. In the years ahead,
the development efforts which have been put into mineral, beef and other
primary production should be coming in in support of an enlar ged export
s / 8 
8-
income.. Discoveries of oil and gas should also relieve to some degree
our dependence on imports. While we appreciate the capabilities of our
economy, we should never underrate the difficulties of bringing great
developments to pass and keeping growth going steadily and strongly up
to the full physical limits of our usable resources. This is a task which
calls for intelligent foresight, careful forecasting and intensive day to day
studies of the immediate trend of things. We know very well how quickly,
and at times dramatically, a promising situation can take a turn for the
worse. As the year proceeds, the economy should feel the effect of the
higher average weekly earnings now being received and the stimulus of
demand from higher farm incomes.
The employment situation has held well. We watch this closely,
of course, at all times since we have the responsibility not merely of keeping
an existing work force fully employed but adding to their number year by
year as the new army of school-leavers becomes available and the Immigration
programme adds its massive contribution. This year, the potential
increase has been reckoned at 120, 000 which will require a rise of about
3 -per cent. in our civil employment for the year. To cover an increase
of that magnitude there -has to be, among other things, a substantial
increase in manufacturing employment, and for that reason In particular,
we have been keeping a close watch on the trend of consumer spending
which is the largest determinant of activity in the manufacturing sector.
Recent figures of building approvals suggest that dwelling
construction is going along extremely well. It is worth noting that approvals
for other forms of building showed a sharp dip earlier this year, ran at
quite high level for some months thereafter; they showed some fall in
August and the latest figures are again promising.
Our holdings of gold and exchange are over 200 million and
we have behind them untouched drawing rights with the International
Monetary Fund to the order of $ 600 million. In such basic respects as
these, there are good grounds for confidence in the general trend of the
economy. Difficulties can, of course, arise. Such as, for example, the
sugar industry which has been affected at the present time by the disastrously
low price for sugar on world markets.
The motor car industry is passing through a difficult phase, and
these situations have to be closely watched and where necessary, met as
they occur, just as we met the drought situation through last year. If at
any time we judge the general position of the economy to be slower than
is desirable, we will not hesitate to take expansive measures adequate to
meet the needs of that situation.
Now the final thing I want to mention, and I wil I do so much more
briefly than the subject deserves, is the contrast in attitude between our own
Government, with its view of an expanding Australia, and that of our
Opposition on the subject of overseas investment. Again this schizophrenia
shows up because the Labor Party is wholeheartedly behind the immigration
programme they are all for importing people but they refuse, apparently,
to accept the consequences. If you import people, if you are to give them
employment as well as to sustain the pace of your own economy, then you
must also import capital, and I for one am not afraid of the consequences
of importing capital. On the contrary, I am quite convinced that apart
from its economic benefits, it adds to the security of this country. If tiere
is 000 million of investment from the United Kingdom or from the United
States, as the figures roughly suggest at this time, then there are thousands
of dollars of good reasons why they liave a pretty strong interest in the / 9 
9-
welfare and security of Australia. This country can't hope to defend itself
in the area in which we find ourselves with 100 million restless, turbulent
people just above us in Indonesia and all the ferment and yeasting that is
going on in Asia at this time, simply of our own resources. If me attempted
to do so, you could put up the shutters on a deveic pment programme for
this country. And here we are building great industries, new skills, new
techniques, opening up avenues of employment for our people, opening up
sources of revenue for the Commonwealth Government which it in turn can
devote either to the assistance of the States or the welfare of the Australian
people in defence, social services, or any one of a multitude of avenues to
which our f inances can be usefully directed. We are told there must be an
Australian equity and I like to see Australians putting their savings into
these ventures where they can. We are not a thriftless people. There is
only one country in the world which applies a higher percentage of its gross
national income to capital investment than Australia and that is Japan. We
invest 27 per cent. of ours, against 17 per cent. in the United States and
per cent. in the United Kingdom. Ninety per cent, of our investment is from
an Australian source. That extra 10 per cent, is what helps to make us grow
at a more rapid pace than we could contrive for ourselves. And If these
industries prosper, then we take a large Australian equity from them in the
form of 42-2 per cent, of their profits, and if they want to remit dividends
overseas, 15 per cent. of tax on those remitted dividends.
All around Australia you can see the evidence of the growth this
hhaavs eb rao duigrhetc tu sA, utshter anlieawn oepqpuoitryt unini tiGese nietr ahla sM bortoourgs h-Ht ousld. enT'sr, u eb, utw we ed ognet't 42-2
per cent of their profits, and they have, over recent years, exported overseas
to a greater value than the remittances they send overseas, so there has been
no suffering to our external balances.
Look at the transformation David Brand will tell you about it
occurring in his State with the great investment there in mineral development
which will help to build an Australian export Income in the years ahead.
We are lucky that most of this investment is coming to us from big countries
with which our people readily assimilate, and the executives from those
countries who come out here readily assimilate in Australia. If any of my
State colleagues have had an experience of being pushed around by any of
these people, I would like to hear of it from them. I never have, and I don't
believe that they have. The capital, once it comes here, almost wli-hout
exception, beds down and adjusts itself to Australian policy, Australian
philosophy and helps to serve the Australian people.
Well, I have mentioned these things, ladies and gentlemen,
becaus~ e they are in the realm of public discussion at this time. I have only
sketched some of the answers to them. But my final word to you Is that this
great Liberal Party has a tremendous and continuing national responsibility.
Nobody in his senses, looking at Labor In disarray, with a team I ncapable
of giving Australia the government it needs in these times, could imagine
Labor in office for years to come. We havc. had the responsibility ofleading
Australia through these new, enterprising, adventurous years of the
post-war period when a new chapter has openecd in the history of this country
and that chapter is by no means concluded. There is a new era of change
which we have to recognise, the explosive, difficult, delicate issue of raceto
which we have to adjust ourselves, live with -n this area of the world, both
as members of an Asian region and as members of a Commonwealth of nations
in which these days there are only four of the old members left, out of a
total of 23 to be expanded to 26 in a few months' time. We have to tread 
lCour
way carefully, delicately, but at the same time when occasion demands it,
firmly, in this kind of company. Now, can anybody conceive that the Labor
Party, as at present constituted, can do that task for Australia? Of course
not, and so the responsibility rests with us and rests in particular with the
Liberal Party to give the leadership that the nation requires. Each and every
one of us, whether we are members of the Parliamentary party, whether in
the organisation itself, whether we come from a State Division on its executive
or from one of its branches, has a contribution to make, not only to the
Liberal Party but through the Liberal Party to the welfare and security of
Australia. A n d it is because I believe that most fervently I am proud to
have the honour of your Parliamentary leadership, and I hope in that leadership
that you and I and my own team together will write new chapters of
Australian history of which succeeding generations of Australians will be
fully proud. 


E M B A R G 0 NOT FOR PUBLICATION O. RM ID N I GHT BROADCASTING BEFORE MIDNIGHTFOR PRESS: P. M. No. 107/ 1966ITINERARY FOR PRESIDENTIAL VISITStatement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold HoltThe itinerary for the visit to Australia by President Johnsonfrom the 20th 23rd of October has now been drawn up.The programme, arranged by the Commonwealth Governmentand American authorities in consultation with the relevant States, has beenapproved by the White House. The variety in the itinerary will give thePresident and Mrs. Johnson some contact with distinctive features of theAustralian scene and way of life.In particular, I am very glad that it has been possible todevise a programme that, within the limited time available, will enablelarge numbers of Australians to see the President. There will beofficial drives through the streets of Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane, aswell as Canberra. An adjustment to the President's initial plans means that hewill now be in Australia for an additional night, the 22nd. The originalarrangement provided for departure from Australia late on the night ofSaturday, 22nd October, but this has now been changed in favour ofdeparture on Sunday morning.When this change was made, it was contemplated that thePresident would spend Saturday night in Canberra and make an aircraftrefuelling stop of about 45 minutes in Brisbane, but it is now providedthat he will fly to Brisbane on Saturday night and leave Australia fromBrisbane on Sunday morning. This will not only give the people ofBrisbane a better opportunity to see the President but will give him thebenefit of a longer break of journey in the flight to Manila.The details of the Australian itinerary are as follows:-THURSDAY, 20TH OCTOBER, 19666. 00 p. m. Ceremonial arrival at RAAF, Fairb aimnProceed to Government House, arriving at 6. 50 p. m.Later Leave for Hotel Rex at Canberra arriving at about 7. 30 p. m.Dine privatelyFRIDAY, 21ST OCTOBER, 196600 a. m. The President leaves the Hotel Rex at Canberra for wreathlayingat Australian War MemorialLater Leaves for Parliament House via Australian/ AmericanMemorial30 a. m. Arrives at Parliameut House for call on the Prime Ministerof AustraliaDiscussion with Ministers to follow
-2-FRIDAY, 21ST OCTOBER. ( Contd.)NOTE: During the morning, Mrs. Johnson will undertake a separateprogramme which is not yet final.12. 15 p. m3. 00 p. m.3. 45 p. m.Later7. 45 p. m.8. 45 p. m.SATURDAY, Morning 10.3W0 a. m11. CO a. m3.00 3.30 p. M.p. M.6. 00 p. m.7.00 8.15 P. M.p. m. The President and Mrs. Johnson attend a ParliamentaryLuncheon at Parliament House at which the President willaddress invited guestsTake-off for Melbourne from RAAF FairbairnArrive at Essendon Airport and drive through City ofMelbourneAttend a joint Commonwealth/ State ReceptionTake-off for Canberra from Essendon AirportArrive at RAAF Fairbairn and proceed to Hotel Rex atCanberra22ND OCTOBER., 1966The President receives the Leader of Her Majesty'sOpposition at the Hotel Rex at CanberraTake-off for Sydney from RAAF FairbairnArrive at Sydney Airport and drive through City of SydneyAttend a joint Commonwealth/ State Reception and laterleave for launch trip on harbourTake-off for Canberra from Sydney AirportArrive at RAAF Fairbairn and proceed to Lanyon Stationfor a barbecue given by the Ambassador of the UnitedStates of America and Mrs. ClarkLeave for RAAF FairbairnArrive Ceremonial farewellTake-off for BrisbaneArrive at Brisbane Airport and proceed to Lennon's HotelEvening freeSUNDAY, 23RD OCTOBER, 1966.9. 00 a. m.00 a. m.NOTE Leave for Brisbane AirportArrive Take-off for ManilaThere could be some slight time changes when flyingtimes between cities have been rechecked.CANBERRA, 12th October, 1966.


P. M. No. 106/ 1966
The delegation to accompany me to the Manila Conference on Viet Nam has now been arranged.
It will include the Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Paul Hasluck, the Minister for Defence, Mr. Allen Fairhall, the Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, Lieutenant -General Sir John Wilton, and seniorofficers of the Prime Minister's, External Affairs and Defence Departments and The Treasury.
Together with the necessary secretarial backing, there will be some 20 people in the Australian party. For a number of practical reasons, including lack of available accommodation on regular flights, ithas been decided to take advantage of an arrangement offered on satisfactory terms by Qantas for the charter of a jet aircraft for the journey to and from Manila. Seating will be made available to the New Zealand Prime Minister, Mr. Holyoake and his official party and also to a number of representatives of Australian press, radio and television who are arranging to go to Manila for the Conference.
The charter flight is so scheduled as to permit me to remain in Australia until the end of the visit by President Johnson and the arrangement will also enable me to leave for Australia immediately the conference  ends. Another advantage is that all members of the party will be able to arrive as a delegation instead of arriving and being received in Manila in separate groups over a number of days.
We shall leave Sydney on the morning of Sunday, 23rd October. The aircraft will arrive in Manila late in the same day in time for such pre-conference administrative and other meetings as may be necessary. By leaving promptly at the end of the conference, I expect to be back in Canberra for the closing days of the Parliament. 
The Australian delegation: 
The Prime Minister, the Right Honourable H. E. Holt, M. P.The Minister for External Affairs, the Right Honourable Paul Hasluck, MP.The Minister for Defence, the Honourable Allen Fairhall, M. P.Lieutenant -General Sir John Wilton, Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee.Sir John Bunting, C. B. Secretary, Prime Minister's Department.Sir Edwin Hicks, C. B. Secretary, Department of Defence.His Excellency Mr. J. K. Waller, C. B. Australian Ambassador to the United States.Mr. G. A. Jockel, 0. B. First Assistant Secretary, Department of External Affairs.Dr. R. J. Whitelaw, First Assistant Secretary, Department of The Treasury.His Excellency Mr. F. H. Stuart, Australian Ambassador to the Philippines.His Excellency Mr. L. H. Border, Australian Ambassador to the Republic of Viet Nam.Mr. H. D. Anderson, Assistant Secretary, South-East Asia Branch, Department of External Affairs.Mr. A. T. Griffith, Assistant Secretary, Defence and External Relations Branch, Prime Minister's Department.Mr. J. L. Allen, Delegation Secretary, Department of External Affairs.
CANBERRA,12th October, 1966.



66/ 165
M AN I LA-CONFERENCE
NOTICE TO ALL MEDIA
I would appreciate early advice from all news media
planning to send correspondents to the Manila Conference.
In order that the necessary accreditation can be
arranged, our Embassy urgently requires the names of Australian
correspondents covering the conference. For use on identification
tags, I need a passport size photograph of each correspondent as soon
as possible. I would also like to know proposed travel arrangements and
whether accommodation in Manila has already been arranged.
Mr. Holt has agreed that newsmen may, if they wish,
travel to and from Manila in the Prime Minister's special charter
aircraft. They would be charged for their seats but the cost is
likely to be less than the regular commercial return fare. I will
require early advice from those who want to travel in the aircraft.
Camera men and photographers should let me have a list
of their main equipment so that the Embassy can make the necessary
arrangements with the Philippines Customs to prevent such equipment
being placed in bond.
The latest estimate is that there will be over 600 correspondents
visiting the Philippines for the conference. A. EGOLETON
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister
12/ 10/ 66 1%, 



I 1
FOQR PRESS: P. M. No. 108/ 1966
MR. CALWELL'S REPUDIATION OF A. L. P. POLICY
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
Once again the wide division in Labor ranks has been demonstrated
by Mr. Caiwell' s speedy repudiation of policy points extensively circulated
in New South Wales, allegedly under the authority of the State Secretary of
the ALP in that State. It is reported that more than 500, UuO copies of a
pamphlet containing twenty-five points of Labor policy are being distributed
as th-e first shot of Labor's campaign in New South Wales.
After a detailed report of many of the main policy points had appeared
in the evening press, Mr. Calwell issued a prepared statement last night
explaining that the policy items had been taken from a document issued by
the New South Wales Branch of the Party and comprised extracts from the
Federal Platform of the Party.. He denied that these items had been agreed
on for inclusion in the Policy Speech. He asserted that the Policy Speech
had not yet been written.
These developments highlight the confusion which exists in the ALP
on policy matters. They add to the uncertainty in the public mind as to the
source of Labor Party policy. Does it proceed from the Federal Executive,
the so-cal led " faceless 36", or from the Parliamentary Party itself? The
incident provides another instance of Mr. Calwell repudiating much of the
official Platform of the Party on the eve of a general election. It will be
recalled that he went so far in one election Policy Speech as to give an
emphatic pledge that major, and highly controversial, areas of the Platform
would not be given effect during the life of the ensuing Parliament. No one
imagines that Mr. Oalwell, a dedicated socialist has abandoned these
policies. All but the most gullible would realise that, once firmly entrenched,
he and his colleagues would at some point of time give effect to policies
for which they have been striving throughout a political lifetime.
While Mr. Caiwell says the Policy Speech has not yet been written, the
Secretary of the ALP in the senior State of the Commonwealth, is apparently
permitted to flood New South Wales with policy undertakings derived from the
official Platform, but, on Mr. Calwell's statement, lacking any sponsorship
from the Federal Parliamentary P-arty.
Mr. Calwell says " categorically", to use his own term, " that there will
be no promise to introduce a thirty-five hour working week, with a subsequent
reduction to a thirty-hour week in the lifetime of the next Parliament", although
this is a significant objective set out in the Platform. He says he " will not
mention tax cuts or tax increases"~ Is he trying to imply that there will be no
changes in tax rates by a Labor Government over the three year term of a newlyelected
Parliament? Apparently with no change in revenue, a glittering
cluster of new benefits is to be provided. He says he " will not talk about the
establishment of a non-profit national insurance office to compete with private
enterprise". Does this mean he has no intention of adopting any such
policy, or the other socialist objectives of the Party, over the life of the
next Parliament? Honesty and good faith demand that the Labor Party comes to
clear decisions as to what it is the Australian people are being invited
to endorse. What has so far emerged is a species of fraud on the public.
CANBERRA October, 1966. 



PRESIDENT JOHNSON'S VISIT TO AUSTRALIA 1966
Hol tFaIifba. mx Airport, Canberra, A. C. T. OCTOBER, 1966
Mr. President and Mrs. Johnson, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Well, it has really happened! We have been waiting for a long
time for the President to come to visit us. We have been hoping that he
would come to visit us and now, as a product of this great conference which
is to be held in Manila, we have him here in Australia with us.
Mr. President, this is not only a notable visit. It is an historic
visit because you are the first President in his period of office ever to visit
this country indeed the only one and it is historic because you are on your
way to what we believe will be a conference directed to our hopes of peace and
a better future and, we believe, fruitful in the results that it will produce.
Although the air of Canberra is chill and brisk, as it so often
is, our welcome is warm and tremendously sincere, and you will find that
warmth of welcome wherever you move around Australia or wherever
Australians are to be found. Those unfortunate enou~ gh to be unable to see
you in the cities, will follow your movements with close interest and attention
as you move into the cities of Australia and on your journey north.
It is, of course, not surprising that there should be a warm
welcome in Australia for an American President, because indeed there is a
welcome In Australia for any of the citizens of your great country. We
Australians have always found it easy to be on terms of close friendship with
you. We have reason to appreciate what the United States has meant to this
country, and in our time of greatest peril we recall with gratitude the
contribution you -made to the security of this nation. And so the American
people stand warm and high in the hearts of the Australian people.
But we welcome you not merely as the leader of this great people,
Indeed the leader of the free world in these difficult times, but we welcome
you and Mrs. Johnson as two warm likeable human be-ings whom we have come
to admire and respect, and I am sure that as we in Australia get to know you
better as we hope to do in these days of your visit, there will be established
between you and the Australian people a lingering bond of affection which will
persist down through the years.
Now, Sir, I am not proposing to offer you on this occasion a
spate of Parliamentary oratory. You will be subjected to quite a barrage when
you lunch with us tomorrow. But I do want you and Mrs. Johnson to know,
and through you, the American people, whose friendship we value so much,
that this visit has been welcomed tremendously by the people of Australia.
We hope that you will find in the visit interest and enjoyment with us, and you
will go away feeling not only a better knowledge and even deeper appreciation
of the Australian people and what they mean, but that you will treasure through
your lives the memories of this, the first Presidential visit to this country.
Finally, there is the circumstance that you, Mr. President in
your period of office have revealed a close and deep awareness of the problems
of Asia, and in particular of South-East Asia, and this is something which we
appreciate tremendously. We think it means much for the peace and progress
of the world as a whole, and your positive contributions to the aspirations you
hold could be a landmark in the history of the world. We wish you well, and
success in the endeavours you will bring to these great objectives.
Mr. President and Mrs. Johnson Welcome to Australia: 



66/ 18i
FOR PRESS
The President of the United States of America, Mr.
SLyndon B. Johnson, received the following message from Her Majesty
The Queen on his arrival at Government House, Canberra, this evening
" I am delighted that you have been able to visit
SAustralia for a few days before going on to the Conference
at Manila. You have already been in Australia and experienced,
as have I, the warm hospitality and generous spirit of my
Australian people. I know on this your first Presidential
visit, you will be doubly welcome, both in your own right
and as President of a great democracy with which we are proud
to be in such close alliance. I wish you a safe and successful
journey. Elizabeth R.
S CANBERRA, October, 1966. 



DISCUSSIONS WITH THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATS OF AMERICA
Agreed Statement issued by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
and President Lyndon B. Johnson
During the morning the Prime Minister and senior members
of the Ministry have had discussions with President Johnson onmatters of
maj or current concern to the two countries.
It has been helpful both to the Australian Ministers and to the
President to have this opportunity to take further and in person the cort inuing
exchange of views between the two Governments on these matters.
The discussion concentrated on the problems of Asia, and
particularly the problems of Viet Nam. It was agreed that the military
position in Viet Nam was now demonstrably such that North Viet Nam could
achieve no military victory. It was, however, clearly recognised that it
would be necessary firmly to maintain the present military effort until a
satisfactory settlement could be negotiated. The fighting could only end
when it was clear that the great issues at stake had been secured.
The President expressed warm appreciation for the efforts of
the Australian forces in Viet Nam.
In the light of the improved military outlook, the prospects for
a Ipeaceful settlement in Viet Nam, and for its social and economic development,
were examined in some detail, and in preparation for the Manila Conference
due to commence on Monday, October 24. It was agreed that this conference
would hear a review of the continuing military situation and prospects but
would concentrate most of its attention to considering how conditions could best
be established and secured for the future peaceful development of Viet Nam
and of Asia generally. The longer term prospects for the future of Asia were also
considered. There was on both sides an expression of continuing concern
for the wellbeing of the nations and peoples of Asia, and an emphasis on the
urgency of bringing about conditions favourable to rapid economic and social
advancement. The return of peace to the region will provide an opportunity
to expand and improve the effectiveness of the efforts now being made to this
end. The recent efforts by Asian nations to increase their co-opera-.
tion amongst themselves in economic and political fields were reviewed. It
was agreed that these efforts by the nations of the region, to take a larger
hand in shaping their own destiny by co-operation, represented a most hopeful
and practical development which would continue to command the support of
our two governments.
CANBERRA, 21st October, 1966 



STATEMENT BY TH. I PRIMEI MINIST Mi. HARCLD HCLr,
IN THI; HOUSE CF REPRESENA'rIVES
21STCCTCBER, 1966
ORD RIVER PROJECT.
I desire to make a-statureni a tio, co the Ord River Project.
This matter has been raised by the Honourable Member for Dawson ( Dr.
Patterson). It is. of course of wide interest, and especial interest to
Honourable Members from Western Australia. The Cabinet has given
very close consideration again and extensive consideration to the
request which had come to us from the West Australian Government for
financial assistance for the development of stage two of the Ord River
Scheme. Mr. Cleaver What more needs to be done?
I have sent a letter, following the decision of the Cabinet, to
Mr. Brand, the Premier of Western Australia indicating the Government's
decision not to commit itself to provide financial assistance for stage two
of the Ord River Project at present. In this letter I indicated that major
uncertainties still exist in regard to the future prospects of the scheme,
which the Commonwealth Government felt could be clarified only in the light
of further experience with the pilot project comprising stage one of the scheme.
These uncertainties are, of course, related to the request that the
Commonwealth commit itself to funds in excess and perhaps over the years
substantially in excess of $ 70 million over the next 15 years, and to the
present considerable commitments on the Commonwealth's limited resources.
More importantly, in the context of the project itself, our
uncertainties are closely tied in with unresolved doubts about the viability
of the scheme. The terms of the letter in order to save time were
telephoned through to the W'est Australian Premier's Department. I have
since received a telegram from the Premier in which he comments that he
has received my telephone version of the letter and that he found it difficult
to believe that such a decision had been made. He asks: " What more can
be done to satisfy you on the Ord? What other evidence do you want? Cur
belief is that the Ord River project could be the forerunner of similar
developments in the north. A great vision for Australia is being unduly delayed.
The telegram ias just reached me. This Government would
emphatically deny that we are lacking in any way a vision for the
development of this country which, during the period of office of my
predecessor and of the Parties which I now have the honour to lead in
Government, has made the greatest surge forward in its development. We
have created the environment for development. We have encouraged projects.
We have maintained the economic policies which have produced these results.
In Western Australia very considerable sums are currently being outlaid
and have previously been outlaid to encourage development in that State.
However, we also have a responsibility to the whole of Australia that our
resources shall be wisely employed. Our resources are not unlimited, and
when considering a project which involves a commitment of upwards and I
repeat perhaps substantially upwards of $ 70 million then we are bound to
make the closest examination of it.
Dr. Patterson Spread over 15 years.
The Honourable gentleman says " over lb years", but every year the
Government has other commnitments. A $ 70 million commitment does not
become less than $ 70 million simply because the payments are spread over a
number of years. We are spreading payments over a number of years in
respect of a great range of items, some in the field of defence, some in the
field of development. 
Let me.. indicate-some of the difficulties which had to be considered by
us. First, we looked at the world market outlook for cotton. It is generally
a breed that this project at present stands or falls as a cotton project. It is
strictly a monoculture project. There has been no attempt to argue that
there is any alternative which would make it a viable project at the present
time. It has been suggested that there are supplementary crops which
could be grown in assistance of the cotton project but it is as a cotton
project that the venture must basically be considered.
Cotton is a surplus commodity in world markets. In recent years
world production has exceeded consumption and large stocks have accumulated
particularly in the United States Recent UI. S. legislation will probably
put more U. S. cotton on world markets and further depress prices which
have already fallen appreciably in recent times. In fact prices have fallen
since the U. S. legislation came into effect on 1st August, and market
investigations indicate that there could be further falls in the long term.
As to cotton yields, average yields have improved considerably.
However, it remains to be seen whether the farmers can attain a level at
which, without cotton bounty, they would' be protected against likely increases
in farm costs and possible further falls in world cotton prices. We acknowledge
that there is a possibility of average yields reachiAng 1, 00j~ A lb. of lint per
acre, but our technical advice is that this will require intensive research
and a high standard of farming and handling of the crop.
Now I come to the suggestion about stud cotton. One of the arguments
advanced was that the practise of producing stud cotton, that is of allowing
the cotton plant to bear for two seasons, would improve the overall economics
of the scheme. But the experiment was tried out on only 35 acres, and our
investigations overseas suggest that the stud cotton method is not a practice
that is at all widely favoured. Indeed there is some evidence to the effect
that it could attract additional pests and could weaken the prospects of the
venture over the long term. Although considerable cost savings are
claimed for this practice experience to date has been far too limited for us
to draw greneral conclusions about its effect on production costs, yields and
quality. As to supplementary crops, such as wheat and sorghum, these have
not yet been grown commercially in the region and it is necessary to consider
this project fundamentally on the basis of cotton. As to the cattle industry,
the economic and practical feasibility of feeding cotton seed or grain to cattle
in the region has not been demonstrated.
There are a few other circumstances that a national government has to
bear in mnind. The project would involve a considerable expansion in local
production of cotton for sale on world markets, but, as I have said, cotton is
a product that at present is surplus throughout the worldl and the market
outlook for it is most uncertain. In this situation, and haviiag regard
particularly to the fact that the area concerned is relatively isolated, in a
relatively remote part of Australia we must be all the more careful not
to appear to throw out any assurance to those who would hazard their
capital and energies there that we have beconie completely convinced of the
viability of the scheme.
In this situation there is a need to be clearer on the future possibilities
of cotton before committing ourselves or potential Crd farmers to the larger
Ord project. The success of the project is of great importance not only for the
farmer but also from the point of view of our international trade relations 
-3-
including-our relations with many less developed countries to whom cotton
is an important project. In all probability, exports of cotton from Australia
would have to be subsidised. Some $ 17 million has been spent by the
Commonwealth and State Governments in constructing stage one of the
project as a pilot scheme. It is not unreasonable, having regard to the
uncertainty still persisting and the implications of failure, to allow stage
one to fulfil its function as a pilot scheme more completely before
proceeding to the full project.
I think enough has been said to indicate that this matter has been
most carefully considered. This Government, no less than any other
Government and no less than any other political party, wants to do things
which please the people who ask it to do things. But more than popularity,
and more than approval from the government or the people of a State
or from the people of the country as a whole, are involved here. What is
involved is the responsibility we have as the national government to ensure
that development will proceed as affectively as we can contrive and that
we will make the best use of our limited resources of finance, manpower
and the other elements required for an undertaking of this kind. 



PRESIDENT JOHNSON'S VISIT TO AUSTRALIA 1966-
LUNCHEON AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt 21ST OCTOBER, 1966
Mr. President and Mrs. Johnson, Honourable Premiers, Ministerial
Colleagues, Your Excellencies, Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies and
Gentlemen Yesterday I was privileged to express on behalf of the
Government and people of Australia a warm welcome to our distinguished
visitors, the President and Mrs. Johnson. Today we bring to that welcome
the National Parliament of Australia and those distinguished guests who are
here with us. And joining together in expressing that welcome are the
Leaders of the three principal parties represented in the Parliament.
Government and Opposition may differ on many things but
this is one of those occasions, too rare perhaps, but welcome when it comes,
when we can unite in harmonious agreement as to the subject of our discussion.
You will find, Mr. President, as you travel throughout Australia that the
warmth of welcome I have expressed is echoed and reaffirmed wherever you
travel in this country. The first visit of an American President to Australia could not
fail to be an auspicious occasion, a distinctive occasion, and also a happy
occasion. A happy occasion because our two countries have enjoyed a close
friendship for many years, a friendship which radiates throughout both our
communities as I have discovered wherever I have travelled in your own.
Arid I know that Americans coming either as visitors or to stay in Australia
for short or long periods find themselves quickly on a wavelength with us
and speak in warm and even affectionate terms about us, and this is as it
should be. And it is not surprising that this should be so because we are
inheritors in common of so much, as I am sure you will agree, Mr. President.
Eve n in the words of the grace which I uttered earlier this
afternoon, you get an expression of our common devotion to liberty, to freedom,
to independence in our own communities and an urge to help others obtain and
secure and maintain the independence to which they aspire.
We have a common language. We don't always speak it in
the same manner, but the differences that are discoverable between us, I
think are less than some of the differences we discover in our own community.
We are just saying farewell, Sir, here to one Member of the Parliament who
didn't speak very often. It was said he didn't do so because he required an
interpreter when he did. He is a Scotsman'. But he proved the other night
when we had a farewell function to our retiring Parliamentarians that when he
needed to speak, he could speak to very great effect indeed and was very
clearly understood by all.
And this is so of the American people. I don't know how hard
they find it to follow the Australian accent, as we perpetrate it from time to
time, but we get the message from you when we hear your compatriots in
their speech to us. And what a wonderful tradition it is and inheritance it is
to have this common language, we together admiring the language of
Shakespeare and together able to absorb something of the wisdom of a
Benjamin Franklin, a Jefferson or the stirring sentiments and philosophic
depth of an Abraham Lincoln. This is part of our common heritage. ./ 2 
-2
You and we have drawn heavily upon the p olitical experience of the Mother
of Parliaments at Westminster. Our Parliament more closely resembles it
than does yours. The founders of your Constitution were troubled by the
danger that too much power might reside in one area of government and so by
a process of checks and balances you set out to try to balance executive with
judiciary and with Parliament, but in the result, such is the pressure of
modern circumstance, you have produced in the United States the most
powerful executive in the history of mankind.
And you, Sir, have that awesome responsibility in the world of today.
Sometimes, no doubt, a lonely responsibility, but at all times a responsibility
which weighs heavily upon you. Those of us who have watched and come to
admire your tenure of the office of President have realised with what earnestness,
with what sentiment and feeling and intensity you concern yourself
with the problems of your office. We have marvelled at your skill in
achieving through the Parliament of your own country, although you don't
have the direct com mand of it that a Prime Minister with an assured majority
can exercise in the United Kingdom or in this country, but despite that
difficulty you have succeeded in having adopted by the United S13tates Congress,
I think a higher proportion of bills that you have proposed to the Congress
than any President before you in history. That is a remarkable achievement
in itself. But we are not merely friends, we are allies as well. You are the
powerful ally, we are a staunch ally, I hope at all times. And we in
Australia have a full recognition that the security of this country depends
tremendously upon our treaty arrangements with you under ANZUS and under
SEATO. If I may say so, Mr. President, it is under our ANZUS arrange
ments we feel our greatest security lies, and Australia has not forgotten
those anxious periods in the second world war when we ye re closer to invasion
by an enemy than ever before in our history, and the Battle of the Coral Sea
was fought which was the foundation of our subsequent safety and security,
and this then led on to the great campaign under your distinguished General
Douglas MacArthur. This diningroomn of ours has honoured many distinguished visitors
monarchs, statesmen, soldiers but this occasion marks one of the most
distinguished and notable in the whole history of the Australian Parliament.
For us, Sir, this is an occasion in which we honour you and we honour that
wonderful woman who has been such a helpmate to you throughout your long
political career. Mrs. Johnson is welcomed in herself. This tour will be
a great success not merely by virtue of the high office you enjoy but because
Australia will like you and does like you both as very human and lovable
people. You, Mr. President, don't want to go down in history as a warrior
President I think I can say that from the knowledge that I have gained of
you since we first came in touch with each other. You were kind enough,
from the time I took office to assure me that you wished the close and
intimate contact that had been developed between my predecessor and
yourself to continue. I am glad to say that I was also accorded this privilege
by the Prime Minister of Great Britain. Then there have been our personal
meetings. And I have learned through these things that you have an
aspiration which is not a military aspiration, not that of a warrior. You
bring to mind what I remember being taught in my schooldays that "' peace
hath her victories lio less renowned than that of war". You are devoting
yourself to great victories of peace for the future. You have an aspiration / 3 
3-
for a great society in your own country, you have an aspiration for a better
world order in other parts of the world for security for peoples, their
independence. -You want to see their standards of life improve, their
life expectancy improve, hope to dispel the despair that has afflicted
countless millions of the world's population down through the ages. This
has brought you to study the Asian scene where more than half of humanity
resides and which will grow in population even more rapidly than the
remainder of the world. You know there is a short life expectancy, a low
per capita income and you feel with all the power that flows from a country,
which in a relatively short time counted in human history has built up
so enormously its economic strength and power, that you can bring that
strength and power, the techniques you have developed and often pioneered
to the assistance of a needy world.
And we in Australia feel that in Asia at any rate there is a part
for us to play with you as well, and you have encouraged us in that belief.
Now, we are going together to the conference in Manila and we are
striving there to restore peace to a troubled area of the world and we are
striving there also to lay the foundations of that better world to which you
aspire. There is much that an Australian cculd myon such an occasion its
tWe, but we want to hear from you, not the three Australian political
leaders, and I have certainly spoken as long as I should on these matters.
But I have wanted to bring home to you that there is admiration and affection
for you in this country, both as the representative of a friendly country with
whom our destiny has been bound through many conflicts df war -Dd tiany
tasks of peace. We see our destinies being linked together for as long as
our two countries survive and we see importance in the strength of
friendship and the closeness of our alliance.
Because you are so forcefully devoted to these great objectives
we welcome you and we honour you.
And now I ask my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister, if he
will join me and support me in the toast which I propose to offer and I shall
then invite the Leader of Her Majesty's Opposition to join also in conveying
a warmth of welcome to our distinguished guests. 


P. M. No. 110/ 1966
PRESIDENTIAL VISIT 
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, has sent the following telegram to each of the Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland
" ON MY WAY TO MY MANILA ASSIGNMENT I TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO SEND YOU A PERSONAL MESSAGE OF WARMEST APPRECIATION FOR THE MOST WILLING AND EFFICIENT WAY IN WHICH YOU, YOUR GOVERNMENT AND YOUR OFFICIALS AT ALL LEVELS CO-OPERATED WHOLEHEARTEDLY WITH US AND ASSISTED US IN RELATION TO PRESIDENT JOHNSON'S HIGHLY SUCCESSFUL VISIT. AS I CONFIDENTLY EXPECTED WITH MINOR EXCEPTIONS THE PEOPLE OF YOUR STATE RESPONDED MAGNIFICENTLY. GOOD ON YOU MATE."
CANBERRA,23rd October, 1966.


P. M. No. 109/ 1966
Mr. Holt has sent the following message to the British Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Wilson, from his aircraft en route to the Manila talks
"I HAVE BEEN DEEPLY DISTRESSED AT THE SAD AND GRAVE NEWS OF THE TRAGEDY AT ABERFAN. MY COLLEAGUES AND I AND ALL AUSTRALIANS FEEL SINCERELY FOR THE BEREAVED AND OUR HEARTFELT SYMPATHY IS WITH THEM, WITH YOU AS PRIME MINISTER, AND WITH ALL THE BRITISH NATION AT THIS TIME"
CANBERRA,23rd October, 1966.



TRESS, RADIO AND TELEVISION CONEIRENCE GIVEN BY
THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. LHAROLD HOLT AT TOWNSVILLE
( A: BERLEY AIR FORCE BASE)
® i 23rd October, 1966
HR. H OLT This has clearly been a most successful visit anC: far
exceeded my own bright expectations of it when I knew it was to
come about. The Australian people have responded magnificently
and, of course, both for the President and Mrs. Johnson this has
been a great personal triumph. I am sure. mQet Australians feel
that they have a much more realistic r~ pSrj ltR~ se wonderful
people now they have come close to them in the course of this
visit. I want to speak now, not so much of the personal side of it
but of the significance and implications for this country, for the
United States itself, for other friendly countries, and indeed for
the world as a whole, because what has happened as a result of
this visit to New Zealand and Australia and I have no doubt that
as the President proceeds through the rest of his extensive and
arduous itinerary we shall have accentuated what I am about to
suggest. That is that there will have been a concentratior, in these
various parts of the world on this area, on the problems we are
trying to cope with, on the meaning of the Viet Nam conflict itself.
That can't fr. il to be useful, I believe, in making for a deeper
understanding ef our objectives and how we are going about them.
It will also encourage attention to the Manila Conference itself.
Never in the history of this country that I can recall has there
been such concentrated attention through the public media on
an official visit, and with more than 90 per cent. of the Australian
people able to take advantage of televised programmes, they have
been able to keep close to the events. You people in all sections
of the public communications media have done a wonderful job.
You have conveyed faithfully to the Australian people, and to that
wider audience beyond Australia just what has been happening in
realistic, exciting, intere-tin terms that has made its great
contribution to the success of the visit. But we will have,
as I say, this concentration on the area and its problems.
Inside Australia itself, I am sure this will be of value as
bringing wider support for the undertakings of the Government
and our actions in relation to these obligations. It will make
more clearly known American purpose and that of our allies in
relation to these problems. And I speak not only of Viet Nam
in the sense of resolving a military conflict there,
but in iManila we shall be thinking, after we have reviewed the
current military situation, of the positive and constructive
opportunities that will be open to us to better the lot of the
South Vietnamese even while hostilities proceed; butes we
talk together, I am sure we will be thinking also of what can
be done in relation to the area as a whole how these age-old
enemies of mankind, not the human enemies but the enemies of
which the President spoke so eloqently poverty, disease and
short life expectancy and illiteracy, the lack of the amenities
of life that have meant so much to us. These are things
which I know he wants to be dealing with in a practical and
helpful way. And if the conference succeeds in developing
along these lines, then I believe it will have made a: notable
contribution to human advancement which could, in its
consequences, become a quite historic landmark in the history
of mankind. It is encouraging to know that the Australian view
of how the conference should run, its agenda, the objectives we
should be seeking, are so closely in line with those of the
President and his advisers. I am sure that this is true also
of New Zealand. I have just welcomed the Prime iinister of
New Zealand who, with his official party, will be joining me
on the aircraft we have charturedto take the Australian party to
Manila. We have hopes, but not, I think over-optimistic hopes. / 2 
-2-
HOLT ( Contd.)
We realise how difficult it is in a few short days to produce
practical results, but I am sure this will be . a valuable
forward step. We can't fail to develop a more siglificant
and deeper understanding of each other's viewpoints and-recommendations,
and to this extent, there will be an advance made
in our common objectives.
I hope when I come back in a few days and report,
perhaps through many of you here today to the Australian people,
that I shall have news for you and be able to indicate that real
progress has been made. Thank you.
1R. EGGLETON Gentlemen, just one or two questions perhaps.....
Q. Do you think that the visit of the President has given
you encouragement for the Manila talks, Mr. Prime Minister?
1IR. HOLT It certainly has. I think Australia was a tonic and
an encouragement to him. As you know, I have been travelling
with him, at his own request to these functions and to the various
cities he has visited and we have been able to have much good
talk together. And he has reacted in a most positive way
and in a most obvious way so far as I have been concerned
anyhow to the warmth of the welcome he has received. It has
been a remarkable welcome, capped by this visit to Townsville
which holds so much sentimental meaning for him. I knew all
along that this would be on his itinerary not because he had
said so, but from what I knew of the man, I felt he could not
come to Australia and not pay a visit to a city which had meant
so much to him. This w; as apparent right through this morning's
proceedings. Of course, the warmth, the friendliness, the
enthusiasm which he has felt as he has gone around, on his
admission to me has. far exceeded anything he has known in the
United States. And for a political leader, even a great
political leader, it is comforting to know that you are popular
and that what you are doing is so widely supported. It has
been a success not only from our point of view: but a success
in many ways fro..: his own point of view.
Q. Mr. Holt, you have selected the similarities between
your view and that of the United States. Are there, at this
stage, any points of difference between you?
MR. HOLT Not that I am avware of. We shall perhaps discover,
as we hold our discussions together, that there are differences
of emphasis. One of us might want to spend more time on one
aspect of the agenda than the other, but I didn't detect any
differences which were significant enough to be noted in our
talks together. In fact,-I could say quite frankly that there
were no differences ' I could bring to mind anC mention to you here.
Q. Are you more confident now about your prospects for the
general elections than you werc say, last Thursday morning?
i. R. i-OLT Well the short answer is I don't think it has
done us any harm, but I was confident of victory long before
President Johnson came to this country,
Q. Do you think it has changed the views of the Australian
people on Viet iTam?
IR HOLT: I wouldn't claim that, but I do think it has brought a
better understanding for many of those who may have been in some
doubt about the rightness of our objectives. This morning, the
President himself made pointed reference to the fact that in
a democracy, the views even of a minority must be treated with
respect and assured of public mention. And this has been done
in Australia. No-one could deny that. Ours is a robust, forthright
democracy and the people have had an opportunity to consider 
MR. HOLT ( Contd.) both sets of views. But what does, I think,
come into the situation is the fact that this State of
Queensland has always struck me as being more conscious of the
threats which can come to Australia than I1aye the more southern
parts of Australia. You are closer, in your experience, to the
threat of invasion. You have knovwn of the activity which
developed in Townsville itself during the last world war, and
there is the fact that the Coral Sea Battle was fought so close
to the people of this northern area. He was impressed by that
I '-know the warmth and enthusiasm and biendliness without
so far as I could detect in Townsville one sour face being
encountered, or one critical banner being displayed.
MR. EGGLETON: I am sorry, gentlemen. Our aircraft is waiting
so that will have to be all. A 


23RD OCTOBER, 1966.
No Australian Prime Minister can visit the Philippines without recallin with gratitude and admiration the heroic resistance and courage of te people of the Philippines in the Second World  War. It was from the Philippines that General MacArthur came to Australia to base the recovery made by the Allies from their early reversals.
The Philippines and Australia also took part in the United Nations Forces which secured the freedom of the South Korean people from Communist aggression. At the time this seemed a formidable task but it brought forth a vigorous nation which stands with us today in the defence of South Vietnam.
The Philippines and Australia work together for security, national freedom and peaceful progress throughout South-East Asia. We are partners in great enterprises for co-operative economic and social effort, such as the Colombo Plan, J. C. A. F. The Asian Pacific Council and the Asian Development Bank. The Development Bank has its Headquarters in Manila  and should be able to make a valuable contribution to economic growth in Asia.
We meet in acceptance of the historic invitation of President  Marcos and his co-sponsors to work together for the securing of peace, freedom and rehabilitation for the people of the Republic of Vietnam. Our oujective is a just and enduring peace. The allied military effort is not directed to the destruction of the national entity of the aggressor, but it is directed to the termination of aggression. Here in Manila we shall try to further policies advancing the security and peaceful construction of that war-torn country.
The countries represented at this Manila Conference of Chiefs of State or Government have an impressive record of successful work together in international co-operation. Our discussions will bring us a closer identity of policies will strengthen our common purposes and pujlicly domonstrate our dedication to peace, security and progress.



IMANILA CONFERENCE
STATEMENT JY THE PRIMIE MINISTER, IR. HAROLD HOLT
AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE CONFERENCE OCTOBER, 1966
The Australian Prime I. inister, Mr. Harold Holt, said tonight
that he was deli; hted with the outcome of the Manila Conference.
He said he would not have thought it practicable to reach such
' eneral agreement on a host of matters in the time available. It
had ) een a highly suc essful conference and the results were to be
found registered' in three important and significant documents.
Mr. Holt said he doubted if he had ever attended a conference
with more ready agreement on matters of su-stance. One could not
have wished for a more cordial or co-operative spirit and atmosphere
and one left the conference greatly heartened oy the outcome.
He said he was certain from the sincerity, the earnestness
and goodwill manifest at all stages throughout the conference that
there would be a renuine attempt to implement all the goals the
nations had set themselves and all the particular matters in the
communique to which they had su scrioed. For Australia it had been
a heartening experience. The renewed unity displayed in the conclusions
from the conference would contribute to the allied cause in Vietnam.
I 1 


 
MR. HOLT: I have discovered that Parliament will be in session tomorrow,and that's the proper place for a statement of this kind to be made, andpreferably first to my own colleagues in the Cabinet. I don't want to makea statement here today which means that the statement I make in Parliament-tomorrow has already been said. So I feel that what I should do here todayis give you my own impressions and conclusions of the conference, but nottry to go through it in too much detail. I have brought along the parchmentdocument of the " Goals of Freedom" and the " Declaration on Peace andProgress". I have also got with me the official communique. I thought theTV boys would like to take a shot of the page which deals with the " Goals ofFreedom" and the seven signatures with it.I haven't had time to go through the Australian press, but Igather that one or two of them are referring to wrangles that went on betweenus that delayed the conference and held up the drafting and so forth. Well,we have the distinguished Prime Minister of New Zealand here with me, soanything I say can be used against me and challenged by but if hehas ever attended a better-natured conference or a more co-operativeconference, or one in which it wds, found easier to reach agreement on thepoints of substance, then he has the advantage of me. I have not attended aconference where there has been readier dispostion to find agreement-together on the matters that counted, and when you come to think of it, at thedrafting stage, three different documents were produced. The short onesare not always easier to write than the long ones. The " Goals of Freedom" sexpresses the essence of what we were trying to say In our ' Declaration ofPrinciples of Peace and Progress in Asia and the Pacific". I think the correctofficial title I have the document with me is " Declaration on Peace andProgress in Asia and the Pacific". The " Goals of Freedom" were drawn asexpressing the esaance of that larger document.I have never attended a more successful conference myselfand I never expect to, nor a more important conference, because this reachesright out in to the future.Well, that is something that I am prepared to say here today.There are highlights which I would otherwise have referred to but whichcould perhaps more appropriately be dealt with in the Padi iament.( At this stage, the television cameras were switched on)As you will see, we have just returned from what I believeis the most important conference I have ever attended or ever expect toattend. I am quite sure that as the years go on this will be seen as anhistoric landmark in man's long struggle for freedom and it will reveal howclosely identified are the policies of the Asian powers who have joined withthe great Western country of the United States of Am erica and with A1ustraliaand New Zealand from the South Pacific in order to resolve the principleswhich will guide us not only in our policies in respect of the freedom forViet Nam from aggression the Republic of Viet Nam but will also guideus in the positive and constructive tasks we see ahead of us in that / 2
-2( MR. HOLT Contd. country and in the peaceful progress that we feel can bemade in the Asian area as a whole. It was most heartening to findthe sincerity and the complete dedication to the task ahead of us manifestedby all the Heads of Government present. I am sure we all took encouragement from the way in which we were able to agree so readily on allmatters of substance. I haven't had an opportunity of checking theAustralian press accounts in any detail, but I have seen one or tworeference-s which frankly astonished me references to wrangling atthe conference, delays because we couldn't agree on wording and mattersof that sort. Wkell, Mr. Holyoake was present; Mr. Hasluck was presentat much of the discussion and at the separate proceedings in which theForeign Ministers were doing their own drafting, and I would say in theirpresence, and would confidently expect them to agree with me, that itwould be difficult to name a conference in which there was agreement morefully reached in a more co-operative fashion than was the case at thisconference. As to the drafting, when you consider that the conference producedthree significant documents " The Goals of Freedom", the communiqueitself which ran into many pages because there were important mattersrelating particularly to Viet Nam which we thought should be spelt outin some detail for public knowledge and then the " Declaration on Peaceand Progress in Asia and the Pacific". Now these things can't be draftedin double-quick time. No-one would imagine that we came to them asnovel propositions. Indeed, in the " Goals of Freedom", there is nonovelty in the fact that these principles have been stated. Each of usin our turn has stated them at some time or another, probably many times.But what is significant is that seven countries so diversely composedthe grea test power in the Western world, th ese four Asian powers andNew Zealand and ourselves, were able to come to such a consensus andexpress ourselves so forcibly regarding it.You will have noted through the detail published of the communiquethat certain important items have been put more clearly, I think, than everbefore The intentions of the Government of the Republic of Viet Nam.They have made it clear that they are not looking to North Viet Nam to doanything more than abandon its aggression, and that is the least that couldbe asked of any country, and that is all that we have asked in our supportof the Republic of Viet Nam in the south. They have given firm assurancesof their intention to proceed speedily to the creation of democraticinstitutions. They think the constituent assembly will have reached itsdecisions within the scheduled time indeed in advance of it in March, 1967,and that within six months of that constituent assembly producing aconstitution for the country, they will be able to hold elections for ademocratically-elected Parliament.Now this, I think, is a great advance in a country which issubjected to daily attack of one kind or another and is afflicted by theravages of war.There was the agreement to help in the civic programmes of thatcountry. One thing that should be noted in Australia Is that there are limitsase how effectively we can work on these civic action programmesthe tasks of reconstruction and rehabilitation while the Viet Gong are ableto come back and destroy the work which is being carried out. So whereasemphasis in the past has been on what has been known as " search anddestroy" operations, in the future the emphasis will be on " clear and hold"operations. In other words, you don't merely deal with the Viet Congmilitarily, but there is the political Viet Gong remaining behind whichhave been able to destroy a good deal of the work done through the / 3
3-( MR. HOLT Cont.) programmes of civic action, and on a " clear and hold"basis, you donft merely deal effectively in a military sense with the enemy,but you remnain on in that centre to ensure that whatever you are able todo in a positive and constructive way is not subsequently sabotaged.Now these are some of the things which have come out.I would like to put to you the detail of the " Goals of Freedom"Perhaps those of you with television cameras might like to get a shot ofthis particular passage in our documentation. It reads as follows" Vile the seven nations gathered in Manila, declareour unity, our resolve and our purpose in seeking togetherthe ' goals of freedom' in Viet Nam and in the Asian andPacific area. They are1. To be free from aggress ion.2. To conquer hunger, illiteracy and disease.3. To build a region of security, order and progress.4. To seek reconciliation and peace througniout Asiaand the Pacific.In support of these objectives, you will see that each of the~ Heads of theseven Governments represented there have attached their signature as inearnest of their determination to follow these princip~ les through.Now that, if it is carried out, will represent the most remarkableadvance in the story of Asia ever to be recorded. I bel ieve that there arethese revoluti onary processes going on in Asia, revolutionary in the sensethat they represent a movement away from an unhappy past, but hope isstirring in Asia, and that this conference will have lifted the hearts of thepeople of the area of Asia and the South Pacific generally, will have revealedto them a resolute determination because each of those seven Governmentshas said quite firmly, " We are going to see this job through" and if thereare any doubts in the minds of the Government of North Viet Nam as to ourresolution, then I hope this clear and emphatic declaration will have resolvedthosa cbtbt; ( br them.So, with the concentration on the task of securing a peace, if peacecannot be negotiated and surely we have made it abundantly clear that theterms of a peace require nothing more than an aband onment of aggressionnota surrender of national integrity or a destruction of an economy, or thelife of the North Vietnamese people; they are free to choose the form ofgovernment they want, the way of life they want, but they must abandonthe aggression....... . well, if they won't negotiate on those terms, wemust see the thing through, and check the aggression as best we can byour own combined military means. While this is going on, and after acessation of hostilities has been produced, then the tasks of reconstructionand rehabilitation must. proceed.I would conclude by saying just this a bmit the initiatives of theAsian countries which brought us together that it was, I feel a happy auguryfor the conference that it should have arisen in this way. We had a firmstatement from the President of the United States of the major part that theUnited States was willing to continue to play, and the vast expenditure / 4
-4( MR. HOLT Contd.) it was willing to incur in pursuit of our agreed objectives,and no-one could have attended that conference and felt and seen the evidenceof the earnestness, the sincerity and the dedication and the courage ofthe rq) resentatives of the Government of the Republic of Viet Nam. theChairman of the National Committee of Liberation, Mr. Thieu, and thePrime Minister, Kao Ky without feeling that here were men of purposeand dedication, men who could justly require of us support in the task theyhave of restoring the freedom which their country should enjoy and In--mablingit to go steadily forward in peaceful progress.MR. EGGLETON Now, are there any questions?Q. Sir, you are quoted in Manila as saying you wouldn't be reviewingour commitment in Viet Nam until after the elections and that you wantedto give the Australian public a chance to vote on the issue. Does this meanif you win the elections you will regard yourself as having a mandate toincrease our commitment in Viet Nam?MR. H-OLT: This is the situation, if I can state it quite simply. I don'tmake a decision i n the absence of my Calb net. We have a system of CabinetGovernment in this country and I wouldn't accept firm commitments on behalfof Australia in relation to matters of this sort without my Cabinet colleaguesbeing fully informed and having an opportunity to engage in any discussion.Within perhaps twentyfour hours or so, the Parliament will have beendissolved. I have already had letters prepared for my colleagues of theCabinet that f rom the dissolution of the Parliament, no major decision isto be taken which would alter existing arrangements, because this is thetraditional practice as a government nears an election. ( To Mr. Holyoake)I suppose you have the same practice, Mr. Prime Minister.Mr. HOLYQAKE: That's the constitutional way.MR. HOLT: That's the constitutional way, as you say, of dealing withthese matters. So, it is not a case of asking the Australian public to decidewhether or not we should have more troops or less, or more aid or less.They know our policies and the purposes we have in mind. If they re-electus, they must expect of us that we will pursue those policies in the mosteffective way we can. Whether or not this requires an increase in themilitary commitment will be a matter which the Cabinet will then have todecide in the light of thc circumstances which exist. Conceivably before thenew Parliament is elected, there could be moves from Hanoi which wculdrespond to our peace iniatives from this conference. I am not so optimistic asto expect this as a probability, but it is certainly within the reakris ofpossibility. It may be, on the other hand, that the fighting intensifies, thatour allies increase their commitments, and if they were to do so and thesituation worsened, then wie would have to review our contribution in thelight of those facts. I don't thin k that the Australian people would everexpect that we take up a static position, neither moving up or down,regardless of circumstances, but the evidence should be clear enough thatI have no desire to involve more Australian lives in issues which are oftremendous consequence to the long-term future of this country thancircumstances make necessary, not ori y in the judgment of myself but ofmen like Mr. Hasluck and my other Cabinet colleagues who wailbe joiningin a discussion on those matters with me.Q. Mr. Prime Minister, will there be an opportunity beforeParliament dissolves for a statement by the Opposition or any kind ofdebate?
MR. HOLT; Yes, what is now currently planned and I understand thisis in accordance with Mr. Caiwell's expressed wish is that I make astatement to the Parliament tomorrow, proba~ bly in the night session, andthat the Opposition would debate that statement on the Friday. This wouldthen be among the concluding business of the Parliament. What I wouldlike to do is table the documents after Question Time tomorrow so thatthere will be opportunity through the day for them to be carefully studied,and no doubt the texts are already around, but the full and authorithtivetext would be available for their study and then I would make my statementand the debate could proceed on it.Thank you.



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
MANILA SUMMIT CONFERENCE
Ministerial Statement
[ From. the.." Parliamentary Debates," 27th October 1966]
Mr. HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister).-by leave-Mr. Speaker, I report
to the House upon the Manila Summit
Conference from which I have just
returned. Following the Conference I have
made some comment in Manila and also
to representatives of Press, radio and television
who -were awaiting me on my return
last night at Mascot -Airport. All this has.
been widely publicised. Earlier today, I
tabled -in the House of Representatives the
official documents . which emerged from the
Conference. They. are . the Joint Communique
the Declaration of Peace and
Progress in Asia and the Pacific and The
Goals of Freedom I have mentioned these
facts because I believe it is not necessary
for me to go over all of the same ground.
It is proper, however, that there should be
on. the . record of the Parliament an authoritative
account of the Conference and its
results. I attended with my colleagues, the
Minister for External Affairs ( Mr. Hasluck)
and the Minister for Defence ( Mr. Fairhall)
and other members of the Australian official
delegation. This was in response to the
invitation which Australia received from the
14104/ 66 President of the Republic of the Philippines
after his consultations with the President
of the Republic of Korea and the Prime
Ministers of Thailand and the Republic of
Vietnam. This week history was made at Manila.
Sometimes we are too close to great events
to measure their significance. But time, I
suggest, ' will convince us all that the Manila
Conference was an event that helped to
shape contemporary history in our region
of the world. The leaders of seven nations
in the Asian and Pacific region met on
October 24th and 25th to review their wider
purposes in Asia and the Pacific. They
gathered together to chart a programme for
the peaceful and free development of a
great and changing area of the world. This,
remember, is also our part of the world
and we were there in Manila with our
Philippine friends, our Vietnam friends,
our Korean and Thai friends and our
American and New Zealand friends-all
of us looking to the future. The future is
expressed vividly and in a few words in
the Conference document " The Goals of
Freedom 
Mr. Bryant--How is the word spelt?
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-The document
recites that the goals are-
S to be free from aggression, to conquer
hunger, illiteracy and disease, to build a
region of security, order and progress, to seek
reconciliation and peace throughout Asia and the
Pacific. Does the honorable member for Wills, who
sneers at what I have been saying, challenge
any one of those objectives as being a right
and proper objectives for us? To him they
are just cliches. To some people they are
the very finest principles for which men and
women have fought and died through
history. These are not an empty set of
words. Although we were at Manila to assess the
military situation in Vietnam, our greater
task was this vision of the future. The participants
were President-Ferdinand Marcos
of the Philippines, President Park Chung
Hee of the Republic of Korea, Prime
Minister Thanom Kittikachorn of Thailand,
Chairman Thieu and Prime Minister Kao
Ky of the Republic of Vietnam, Prime Minister
Keith Holyoake of New Zealand, President
Lyndon Johnson of the United States
of America, and myself, representing Australia.
We had agreed to make a thorough
review of the Vietnam situation. This was
to include an assessment of the military
position and of continuing resistance to
Communist inspired and directed aggression
and subversion. We wished to look at the
piogresss being made through programmes
of social development and pacification, the
tasks of economic stabilisation and rehibilitation
and the evolution of democratic institutions.
It was part of our purpose to look at practical
means for peaceful settlement of the
conflict in Vietnam. Problems of regional
security, co-operation and development relating
not only to Vietnam but to Asia and
the Pacific generally were also to be examined.
The products of our discussions are
to be found expressed in some detail in the
three documents which I have earlier today
presented to the Parliament. They are the
" Joint Communique the " Declaration of
Peace and Progress in Asia and the Pacific
ahd " The Goals of Freedom
I have described the Summit Conference
as historic. There have been various meetings
in the past of Asian and Pacific Governments, a recent notable instance
being the Asian and Pacific Council
meeting, or A. S. P. A. C. as it has come to be
known, at Seoul in Korea where nine
Governments came together for discussions
on matters of common interest. But until the
Conference at Manila it was unprecedented
for Heads of State and Heads of Government
of seven countries in the Asian and
Pacific region to meet for a collective
purpose. The meeting was historic in that
. sense, but it was historic in even more
important ways. Only great issues can bring
such a meeting about in times when Heads
of Government are so busily engaged. The
issues in this case affect the security and
prospects for a better life of 15 million
people of South Vietnam. They closely
affect the future of the neighbouring
countries of South East Asia. They affect
the basic security of the whole Asian and
Pacific region. Indeed, the world as a whole
is involved in the consequences of the
outcome. These issues produced the meeting.
The documents express our particular
conclusions. I should like to say a word
about the Australian and New Zealand
participation in the meeting. I say with
gratification that each of the Asian Heads
of State or Heads of Government warmly
welcomed me and the Prime Minister of
New Zealand, Mr. Holyoake, into their
counsels. This is a very important factor in
the approach of the Asian ' countries to the
Conference and, even more, to the Vietnam
issue. I mention this and stress it because I
have heard honorable members opposite say
so often that our participation in Vietnam
is alienating Asian opinion against us. Here
is evidence to the contrary. Honorable
members and all Australians will be
interested to note the words of welcome that
President Marcos accorded our parficipation
and that of New Zealand in this Conference.
He said-
The participation in this meeting of the Prime
Ministers of Australia and New Zealand is also a
hopeful augury. These two freedom loving nations
are our neighbours by the accident of geography
but our friends and partners by deliberate'choice.
They are as fully committed as ourselves to the
freedom of Asia and to the attainment of the
secure and just peace indispensable to the economic
development of these combined nations. They have
much to contribute to the attainment of our
common goals.
The opening speech was made by President
Marcos at a public ceremony. It set the 
stage for the confidential discussions which
were to follow. In an eloquent and memorable
address he expressed with deep personal
conviction. a ' longing of the Asia' people
for.' ocial and economic stability and for
freddom from insecurity and military
threat. This. theme,' with particular emphasis
on the' problems ' of'Vietnam, became the
focus ' of the . Summit Conference activity.
It is this'theme that finds expression in the
communique . the declaration, and notably
in the statement of. the Goals of Freedom':
The language of official documents, however
warmly and graphically stated, for
understandable reasons can rarely reproduce
the atmosphere of a conference or its full
significance, or the contacts between the
personalities who participate. As one who
not only was present throughout the Conference-
proceedings but also shared, in ' the
intimate discussions . of those Conference
meetings confined to the participating Heads
of State and IHeads of Government,: I regard
this as being'as important a conference
as I:. have. ever ' attended or . believe myself
everlikely to attend. ' I can recall no conference
in' which agreement. was more readily
forihcoming on all niatters'of substance.. I
have read various ieports since the Conference
which' alleged that there were delays
because of wrangling and that there. has been
surprise' that documents of . such weight
could emerge from so limited a period of
discussion. " There was no wrangling in our
talks together., There'. was strength of purpose;
firmness' bf resolution and dedication
to the principles that we expressed in our
declaration and the statement of our Goals
of Freedom As to surprise, it must not
b'e overlooked that our discussions together
neither began nor ended at Manila. The
Governments represented are in almost daily
contact by one means or another, including
diplomatic representation, cabled advices
and the like. We are familiar ' with each
others' : views. The Foreign Ministers had
met informally and had done some useful
ground clearing immediately prior to the
Conference. Later they did their share of
the work of drafting while the Heads of
Government went ' ahead with their own
ideas of what the c6ntents of the documents
should be. It is not to be wondered at that
a good deal of'time was required for these
purposes and the exchanges of thinking until at a final meeting together the Heads of
Government and Foreign Ministers produced
the documents in the forms they ultimately
took. The communique deals principally with
the situation in Vietnam and the problems
of the present and the future there in the
military, social and. economic fields. The
declaration of peace and progress in Asia
and the Pacific sets out the principles on
which we base our hopes for future peace
and progress in the Asian and Pacific region,
for, as the declaration states-
. In the modern world men and nations have no
choice but to learn to live together as brothers.
The " Goals of Freedom" express briefly,
and in language that all should be capable
of understanding, the essence of our declaration.
We said there-
We, the seven nations gathered in Manila,
declare our unity, our resolve and our purpose in
seeking together the goals of freedom in Vietnam
and in the Asian. and Pacific area.
It struck me as quite remarkable that the
representatives of the Republic of Vietnam
should be able, to accept so explicitly and
however regretfully a continuing line of
demarcation between North and South Vietnam
until a decision had been taken democratically
by the people of both areas for
reunification. They. stated that the work
of the constituent Assembly elected to draw
up a constitution for the Republic of Vietnam
was proceeding ahead of schedule.
They gave an undertaking that general elections
to select a representative government
wduld -be held within six months of the
adoption of a , constitution. Believing that
the democratic process must be strengthened
at the local level as well as the national
level, the. Vietnamese leaders announced
that, to this end, village and hamlet elections
would -be held. at the beginning of 1967.
They further announced that they are preparing.
a programme of national reconciliation.
They would, open all doors to
Vietnamese who had been misled or'coerced
into casting their lot with the Vietcong. They
would , be given . amnesty and assisted to
resume -a .: normal existence as to their
employment and community participation.
,. Further, the Vietnamese representatives
made it clear that they were not making
any demands on North Vietnam other than
that the aggression should cease. When it
is considered that the Republic of Vietnam 
is still subjected daily to military and terrorist
attack, with continuing infiltration
and eternal subversion, the attitude of the
Vietnamese representatives at the conference
must be regarded as most helpful and
forthcoming: The Vietnamese leaders stated
their intent to train and assign a substantial
portion of their forces to what are
termed " clear and hold actions in order
to provide a shield behind which a new
society can be built. The tactics of search
and destroy" so frequently employed by
the allied forces in the past have been
found by experience to be inadequate for
satisfactory follow up action of reconstruction,
civic action and pacification. This is
because the civilian Vietcong remain in the
area to commit acts' of terrorism and sabotage'
after the military forces have moved
on. Illustrations were given to us of the
construction of'schools in the wake of the
departure. of Communist military forces,
only td be followed by . the physical destruction
of school buildings by individual Vietcong
or small. marauding bands drawn from
the civilian element of the Vietcong. It is
now proposed. thai the clearing operation
should. be more thorough and that a military
component capable of securing the area
should be assigned to enable civic action
and rehabilitation operations to be carried
through with enduring benefit.
The Government of the Republic of Vietnam
wishes to forge what is described in
the communique as a social revolution of
hope and progress. Even as' the conflict
continues;, the effort goes forward to overcome
the tyranny of poverty, disease,
illiteracy arid'social injustice."
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-After 20 years.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.-The present
Prime Minister of Vietnam has been fighting
for more than half his lifetime to preserve
his ' coiuntry and he deserves something
better than the snees' of ; the honorable
member for ' Yarra. Top priority is to be
given to land reform and tenure provisions.
Agricultural credit is to be expanded; crops
will be' improved and diversified. The
leaders recognise that to build confidence
and co-operation amongst the people they
must be convinced that honesty, efficiency
and social justice form " solid cornerstones
of the Vietnamese Government's programme. The participating governments
applauded these. declarations, recognising
that they open' brighter prospects for the
people of Vietnam. Each undertook to give
its continuing assistance according to its
means, whether in funds, skilled technicians
or equipment. The Vietnamese appreciated
the help being given in non-military fields
by other countries and expressed the hope
that this help will be substantially increased.
The participants further agreed to appeal to
other nations and to international organisations
working for the full and free development
of all nations to give further assistance
to the Republic of Vietnam.
We devoted a good share of our discussions
to peace objectives, reviewing the
many efforts for peace -already undertaken.
What is sought ' is a just and reasonable
solution; but Hanoi has still shown no sign
of taking any step towards peace, either by
action or by entering into-discussions or
negotiations. I know that recently reference
has been made to rumours or to some feeble
peace signs that seem to be ' emerging. I
know of none that can be attributed directly
to Hanoi. We all agreed that the search for
peace must continue. The. Vietnamese
representatives pointed to the suffering they
had experienced from the ravages of war
for more than 20 years. They. declared
themselves to be' second ' to none in their
desire for peace and would welcome any
initiative-that would lead to an end to
hostilities while preserving the independence
of 3outh Vietnam and protecting. the right
of its people to choose their own way of
life. The detailed views of the Government of
the Republic of. Vietnam are set out in the
communique. The other participating
governments endorsed these as essential
elements of peace and agreed that they
would act on this basis in close consultation
together. We pointed out that Allied forces
are in Vietnam because that country is the
object of aggression and in response to the
support requested by its Government. We
agreed that our troops would be withdrawn,
after close consultation, as the other side
withdraws its forces to the north and ceases
infiltration and the level of violence
subsides. Our forces will be withdrawn as
soon as possible, not later than six months
after the conditions mentioned are fulfilled. 
My own contribution was designed to
indicate our sense of partnership with our
allies, our awareness of the great common
issues at stake and our determination with
our allies to.. see the issue through. I spoke,
of course, against the. background of the
views which had been offered by early
speakers-President Marcos and Chairman
Thieu at the public session, and Air Vice-
Ma'rshal Ky in private session. Separate
statements on particular aspects of the Vietnam
situation were made by members of
that coritry's delegation. There were
* military reviews by Gejieral Cao Van Vien,
Chief of the General Staff in Vietnam, and
General," Westmoreland,.. Commander,
United States Military Assistance Command,
Vietnam. Others spoke. on the civic action,
revolutionary development and rehabilitation
programmes.
I said at the time I had no need to go
over ground already covered, beyond confirming
the , Australian Government's clear
recognition of the military realities and the
vital issues at stake. I expressed our belief
that Vietnam is, unhappily for its people,
a battleground for not only its own national
security, freedom and integrity, but of even
wider issues-issues of freedom, security
and progress affecting generally the future
and stability of all free peoples in the Asian
and Pacific regions. I spoke of aggression
as an age old enemy of mankind-a challenge
to be taken up and defeated just as
poverty, disease and hunger, other age
old enemies, are to be taken up and
defeated. I expressed the view that it would
be useful to seek to build up world opinion
more widely against the aggression which
now manifests itself through tyranny and
oppression in Vietnam.
There are many countries throughout the
world which seem more indifferent than is
desirable or wise. This is not necessarily
a question of seeking military assistance by
other groups or individual countries. It is
important to secure a wider acceptance of
our narrow but essential objectives in Vietnam,
and also a widening of the economic
effort for the development of Vietnam, both
immediately, so far as this is practicable,
and after the fighting has terminated. I
assured the Conference of my Government's
determination that the Australian
Government would conduct itself as a
dependable ally, continuing its contribution
on both the military. and non-military sides. I mentioned specifically the. aid which . we
have been: giving on the medical, engineering
and education fronts.
, Plainly, while the fighting continues, it is
not practicable for' us. and others to give,
or for Vietnam to receive, more than the
level of assistance of a material kind that
albe abs'orbed.': But if peace could be
brought abolit, we and others would be in
a position to divert more resources to civil
rehabilitation and Vietnam would become
capable -of gaining rhore benefit from the
contributions that could be made.
* Mr. Speker, I have already said that
the, question of peace was given a great
deal of attention in the Conference itself
and, as honorable members will see, it
takes up quite. lengthy passages in the
Conference final documents. It was the view
of all of us that we not only stand ready
but, are, anxious to consider any possible
approaches to . a settlement, and in general
to enter into unconditional discussions at
any time provided that concessions prejudicial
to our basic objectives must not be
made. The peaceful settlement of the
Vietnam conflict must be just and enduring.
A settlement achieved at the cost of
freedom and security for the South
Vietnamese people would be unacceptable.
In the words of President Marcos, the
peace we want is not the peace of death or
the peace of betrayal. We want a purposeful
peace that will guarantee the option for
liberty and progress of the people of South
Vietnam and of all other peoples similarly
situated. This is why we have said in the
communique that we are united in our
determination that the South Vietnamese
people shall not be conquered by aggressive
force and shall enjoy the inherent right to
choose their own way of life and their own
form of government and that we shall
continue our military and all other efforts
as firmly and as long as may be necessary,
in close consultation among ourselves, until
the aggression is ended.
It was the view of all of us that only
when the other side realised that our countries
mean precisely what they say-that
there will be no weakening or flagging, that
all the necessary measures will be takenit
is only then that the other side will conclude
that the aggression will not succeed.
That conclusion on their part is the essential
requirement for. the bringing about of 
peace. Whether peace is to be reached
through discussion and negotiations or
whether through a dwindling away of the
conflict, serious efforts will be maintained
through all avenues to bring the other side
to peace. Part of the peace effort is convincing
them, through our teadiness of
purpose and our capacity and readiness to
meet force with force, that aggression will
not succeed.
The benefits I derived were not confined
to the results of. the Conference itself,
highly successful though, in my judgment,
they were. The venue, of the Conference
provided me with m' first visit to the
Philippines. I had not previously met
President Marcos nor had I previously met
President Park Chung Hee of the Republic
of Korea. It will be helpful in my future
contacts and discussions to have built these
new friendships and to have further consolidated
those already made with the other
Chiefs of State and Heads of Government. Let it be understood that we are not
engaged in Vietnam because we want to
roll back the fro'ntiers of Communism, but
because we do not want the frontiers of
Communism to roll back down over South
East, Asia.' But ' always we must see the
conflict in Vietnam in its greater context
as a battleground for human values of
freedom and dignity. All ' Asia looks today
at the future of free choice in South
Vietnfni. If it is preserved-and it will bethe
basic future and stability of all free
peoples-' in the ' Asian and Pacific regions
Wfill, I believe, be guaranteed. And this -is
a prospect equally important to us in
Australia, and indeed to the whole world.
I present the following paper-'
Manila Summit Conference-
Ministerial Statement, 27th October 1966-
and move-
That the House take note of the paper.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T.
i 



CITIZENS' DINNER
MELBOURNE
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
3RD NOVEMBER, 1966
Mr. Chairman, My Lord Mayor, Mr. Perrett, Organizing Genius Noel
Curphey, Distinguished Gentlemen I don't say " Guests" because I'm
not too sure about that
I suspect you've been mulcted as most of us have this sporting
week here in Melbourne. But thank you very warmly indeed for the way in
which you have not only greeted the toast, and if I may, Mr. Perrett, I
would like to say how much I thank you for your generous words and for
this scroll which I shall cherish as long as I shall live and which I believe
will be carried around as a reference for such employment as they may
need by the members of my family.
I am particularly appreciative of what you have had to say about
that remarkable woman, my wife. It is not generally known that her second
name is Kate not Kate for short, but Kate for long. And Kate is the
daughter of a Scots -born McDonald. So if I can't become a Knight of the
Thistle, at least I am keeping close to the Scots! She also happens to be
so we believe on her paternal side, a direct descendant of Charles Dickens,
and I only wish she had taken time off to write a speech for me tonight as
appropriate as that that Mr. Perrett has just employed. But having read
this rather lyrically-expressed description in the menu and having heard
that warm-hearted and somewhat ebullient tribute from Mr. Perrett, I feel
a bit like the company that has decided it hasn't quite lived up to its
prospectus. At least while the words are still in the prospectus it feels it
has got to keep on trying and declare a useful dividend sometime. Well
that is what I am hoping to do for this wonderful country which it is my
great honour and pride to lead as Prime Minister at this time.
A very great man in my judgment at any rate who served us
magnificently as Governor-General, wrote to me some little time ago on
a matter which had interested him, and he concluded what he had to say in
his letter to me with the sentence: " What a fascinating time to be Prime
Minister of Australia! And surely there is not one of you around this
room who wouldifr echo that sentence. There may be all the problems, all
the worries, all the tribulations I thought I'd reached the peak of these
when I was Treasurer. I used to look at my distinguished leader and think,
" tIt's all right for you, all this honour and glory, while I'm doing so much
of the work in the background here". I suppose Billy McMahon feels that
way about me now. But when I discovered that I was the goldfish in the
bowl, I realized how much one had foregone of some of the pleasanter
things that one found to do in earlier Ministerial representation. But it
is a well-accepted sacrifice that's not the word, because it is an honour
and a distinction which I treasure, and I hope that I can prove worthy of it.
You've been kind enough tonight to encourage me to believe that already
: in somewhat less than a year I have been able to project not only my own
individuality but something of the thrusting, eager, individualistic
adventurism of this wonderful country of ours to the rest of the world.
And I believe this is how the rest of the world is viewing us at this time. 
-2
It Is, as was so well said, a fascinating time, and I will say more about
that a little later.
I should warn you that Noel Curphey has organized everything so
magnificently that the band that you have heard playing so splendidly here
tonight actually comes from the heart of my electorate. You may have seen
me go along a little earlier and tell the boys how well they were doing. Well,
this is not entirely related to the events of the next few weeks, but I hadn't
seen much of them since January and one doesn't want to be overlooked In
these matters entirely. But he thought of everything, and as I look around
this room here tonight, I not only sense a friendly warmth but I can see so
many friendly faces of people who have known me from my earliest days
in politics, some even beyond, and people who are eminent in their own
class. Now Keith Rigg down here, he is known to you as a very capable
executive in his own area of activity. But If you had seen Keith Rigg leading
me on to the field in my shorts as the youngest member of his cricket team
at Wesley, you realize the awe in which I still hold Keith Rigg. At least he
got up close to Test standard and I worshipped him as a younger member of
his school. And I see other people who are leaders in their own sphere. Now
right down here In front of me is Graham Kennedy, the king of televisioni
and how often when I've been asked to do a stunt In front of this terrifying
medium have I thought, " I only wish I had this fellow's savoir faire and
technique for this particular operation". All around, you see, there are
the leaders. Now on my right here is the man I always believed brewed just
about the best beer to be found anywhere in the world, until Maurie Nathan
had the " courage" to take him on! I should tell you, giving me my guidelines
a little earlier, Noel Curphey said to me, " Now there are not going
to be any other politicians or public servants here tonight" and as you will
have discovered, both categories at times can prove difficult or embarrassing
to a Prime Minister. I saw two very distinguished members of the
Commonwealth Public Service of yore here tonight-, both carrying wellearned
knighthoods, in Sir Giles Chippindall and Sir John Jensen, and I
dips my lid to them figuratively. They are great men who have done great
work for Australia and may I say to them how delighted I am that they
should have come out tonight to honour me in this way.
But we do have a wonderful tradition in our Public Service which
we ourselves have inherited from the British Public Service, and I mention
this because I know there has been some controversy in relation to one
member of the Service in recent times. There is this well-founded
practice in England, firmly established and with very rare exceptions,
followed here, that the members of the Service do not enter into public
discussion or controversy. There are very good reasons for that because
there is a special relationship which exists between the Public Service in
this country and the Parliament and the Ministry.
Now, this is not universally the case In the United States. They
have a rather different system. The Secretary of a particular Department
is by practice the Minister of that Department. He is the policy-maker.
In our country, policy-making responsibility is carried by the Ministry and
the individual Minister of a particular Department. He brings his policy
recommendations to his colleagues in the Cabinet and they either accept
them or reject them, and what is then accepted becomes the policy of a 
-3
government, exclusively drawn from the Parliament and responsible to
that Parliament. It can only survive while it maintains a majority support
in that Parliament, and eventually when election time comes around,
responsible to the electorate which put the Members there in the first
place. And so under our system, the public servant is not the policymaker
In the sense that he takes the decis ions on policy. He is the
administrator, and he must be prepared to serve all parties who may
secure a majority vote with the same faithful service, the same objectivity
as he would any other. It is for him to carry out the policy which the
government, responsible to the Parliament a. nd to the electorate, has
decided upon. Now, it is quite clear that there are occasions when, with
the authority of the Minister concerned, explanations are publicly given by
members of the Service. During the introduction of decimal currency, I
asked my officers of the Treasury to go around explaining how this thing
was to work, and they did with objectivity and discretion, and that is the
way the system works and should work at all times.
Now, if there are departures from that tradition without the
authority of the Minister, then It is to be regretted, and I merely mention
the matter here tonight to a body of very responsible and experienced people
because I don't want any doubt either in Australia, or importantly for us
at this time, outside Australia. Whereas in the United States the Secretary
of the Department is also the policy-maker, I don't want anybody to have any
misunderstanding as to where we are. W7% e, as the Government, I as the
leader of that Government, we are responsible to the people who have the
democratic decision as to whether they approve or disapprove of the things
we are doing. The Public Service, very properly, is protected against
arbitrary Ministerial action or capriciousness, and they are protected
because their role as administrators is clearly recognized.
That doesn't mean that men of the calibre of Giles Chippindall or
John Jensen haven't in their time been respected and trusted advisers of
their respective Ministers, but they have known that the Minister has the
responsibility for the decisions which are subsequently taken and that
guided their own advice and their own actions accordingly. And they also
knew that at the turn of the political wheel, they had to give that same
objective advice to whoever succeeded them as the democratic choice.
Now, gentlemen, I don't want to dwell on purely political matters
heire tonight. A. very dear colleague of former times of mine, who I know
is a friend of many of you in this room, once describing a critic said of
him, " You know, this fellow would put politics into the Lord's Prayer".
Well I find that on the eve of an election, anything almost that is said
becomes political by whomever it is said close to the political scene. And
so if I appear to be political at any point in what I say, do have that reservation
in mind: Would I have thought this political if he had said it six months after
an election has occurred? I don't wish to be political in any party sense.
But I do wish to say something to you tonight about this marvellous
country of ours, its opportunities and its problems. When you consider
that we have an Australia approximately the size of the United States of
America in area if you leave Alaska out of the picture I always have to
make that reservation, otherwise it spoils the comparison. And even leaving
Alaska out puts me out of sorts perhaps wi-th people in that country, so rich
in promise but so cold in appearance. Therefore to makce the comparison 
-4
apt, and I think it is good enough, we talk about what I might loosely
term metropolitan United States and Australia. We have approximately the
same area of country to hold and administer here in Australia, and we like
to think of ourselves as a young country that is not doing too badly. We
are pushing on with our growth and our development, but whenever I get
a little too complacent on that score, I remind myself that when the United
States made Its declaration of Independence, in 1776, the total population
of that country was less than four million people. just twelve years later
our first settlement was established by the landing at Botany Bay. Well,
they are now moving up to their two hundred millions of people. They've
become the mightiest economic and military power in the world. They've
done It by giving expression to the spirit of enterprise, those principles of
individual freedom and personal liberty that I believe every man and woman
in this room cherishes in this country of ours. They've gone out, they've
taken their risks and finally they have come to a point where, having put
Europe back on Its feet after the ravages of war, they, under a leader who
has the courage and the imagination, the vision and the drive to see that if
those same prlncples and that same drive, that same generosity were to be
applied to the free countries of Asia, then the whole future of the world could
be transformed for the better and that is what he aims to do.
I have come, I think, to know this man very well and the longer I
know him the more I find to admire in him and, more, I am touched by his
sincerity and the earnestness of his determination to use the tremendous
unsurpassed power that rests in his hands for the betterment of the human
race and that was manifested through our recent Conference. It must have
emerged in his contacts with you all here in Australia, but in Manila we had
as successful a Conference as I ever hope to attend with as warm a cooperation
amongst the seven heads of government sitting round the table
there as I ever expect to experience. Not just as a " Council of War" as
opponents and critics tried to present It, but as a meeting of people who
wanted security, of course, for free people in Asia as indeed they would
want it for free people everywhere, but who wanted also to see a world in
which there was a prospect, some hope, some prospect of advancement for
the hundreds of millions of people who are living today in conditions which
we would regard as under-privileged, under -nourished, under-educated,
under-provided for in practically every way that we consider dear and
proper for ourselves.
Now we are a very fortunate people, not only in the country we
occupy but because of the standard that others who have gone before us, and
we In our turn, have been able to achieve. It is quite a remarkable thing
that this country, a small country in terms of numbers, should have built
up in not very hospitable territory, one of the highest living standards in
the world, that we should be able to point to the highest percentage of
home-ownership in the world, that among the amenities of life we should
rank third in that necessity as It has become the motor car that despite
the fact that we have to bring capital into this country for our own
development we rank amongst the first four or five countries in the world
in the aid that we give out to others per capita of our population; these are
all things that we can take some modest satisfaction about. We have just
come through a year, or two years, of great difficulty for this country,
not felt so much here in Victoria, but one of the most severe droughts in
Australian history. Our sheep population which normally climbs up by
several million a year dropped by 14 millions. In New South Wales they
lost 25T, of their cattle population and yet we maintained a level of
employment and activity which for this country was remarkable, facing 
conditions which not so many years ago would have spelled economic
disaster for us.
We have built in a lot of insurances around ourselves. We have
now the variety, the diversification of Industry and enterprise which
enables us to meet these shocks as they come along and I am sure most
of us who have had a fairly long experience of government were heartened
by the way in which Australia took, without scar cely a falter in its stride,
this severe handicap of the severe depression in New South Wales and
Queensland of the last couple of years. It involved us as a Government in
some quite unorthodox and unusual actions in the way of drought relief,
in fostering the sugar Industry, in providing the finance for those whose
stock had been affected to replace the stock, or at least provide the means
by which this could be done.
But this, I am glad to say, Is not only the modern approach. We
have all managed to learn something out of the more tragic experiences of
the past. I came into politics in the 1930' s. When I stood for Parliament
we had just come from a period which would be scarcely credible to the
young people of this generation when thirty out of a hun dred trade unionists
were registered as unemployed. These things pass quickly from our minds.
The Government today would probably be thrown out of office if it allowed
21to 3% O of unemployment to develop and stay there without being able to
take action effective action to remedy that position. When I came into
politics 8 or 10% 0 of unemployment was regarded as, well, not a bad state
of affairs. In 1937 the Trade Unions successfully applied for a prosperity
loading on the Basic Wage when the registrations were around 8 or
But we have learnt something and in the last twenty years full
employment hasn't been a visionary goal, It has been a reality almost
without exceptional months during that long period of time. Now I know
that occasionally those who have to carry on a business, who have to look
at their order books, look at the state of profitability of their industry,
they feel that things are by no means as good as they ought to be and that
there has been an experience of which many of you in this room I know have
shared. But when you consider the long haul, that virtually since the end
of the war, this country has never had, except for one month in that period,
more than 3% 7 of registered unemployment ( and that is in one of those
months which incorporates the registration of the school leavers who had
yet to be placed it didn't last for longer than a month), we can count
ourselves as pretty fortunate people.
Now I said something about savings and that brings me to the
point this is not merely a prosperous country, but that prosperity is
spread with justice, with equity, with fair dealing around the community
as a whole. I went to the trouble coming here to get the latest figures that
I could take out on how the Australian people are currently situated in
relation to their savings and I found that there are more than seven
million life assurance policies held in this country of eleven and a half
million people, that the cover taken out well it was in 1965 which is the
latest figure I have ( at the 31st December) and the later figure would be
considerably higher but then it was just 15 billion dollars of cover under
those policies. When we come to Australians' capacity to save I say
this because there is a disposition in some parts of the world or amongst
some people to think of us as a rather thriftless lot but in point of fact 
-6-
there is only one country recorded in the world that saves a bigger
proportion of its gross national product for fixed capital investment and
that is Japan. We save 2757, the United States 175%, the United Kingdom in
1965 18% O. I haven't got the 1966 figures. These are from the United
Nations Bulletin of Statistics. But that's a pretty remarkable thing to have
in this country. With the ravages which occur from time to time, the
drought and floods which eat up savings that people have accumulated against
such emergencies, It is remarkable that we should rank next to the
industrious, enterprising people of Japan as amongst the great savers of
their resources in the world.
So we don't just wait for capital to come flowing in from other parts
of the world; 90%. of our investment comes from our own resources. We
are very glad to have the extra spurt to our development that comes to us
from the capital which comes in from overseas and there have been many
useful, happy marriages between capital from overseas, from the United
Kingdom, from America or some other part of the world and an Australian
enterprise. That's the way we like to see it with a good Australian equity
participation in the enterprise that is developed here In this country. It is
one of the matters on which we have been working as a Government. But
we know that if we are to grow we have to bring in people. We bring in
people to an extent which in relation to our population is considerable.
We'd like to bring more. We've absorbed those people very successfully.
I don't know any country which could claim a more successful
absorption of the migrants who have come here than Australia can and
this is largely because I believe there Is that national characteristic of
mateship, that willingness to help the fellow who is battling to find his
way In life which Is so prominent a feature of our community life, and
that has helped to make It a success. When I was Minister I wondered how
we would get on with the unions about this business and how we'd get the
various crafts to take these people in with them; how the community would
absorb them; how generously would they treat them; how warm-hearted
would be their acceptance of them. What a tremendous success it has
been. On Saturday I greet here the Prime Minister of Malta and we have
in Australia the second largest community of Maltese in the world. It is
not a community in the sense that they're packed tight in some pocket and
living under themselves but spread around as the Italians have spread, the
Greeks and the Dutch and of course the largest influx of all at the present
time, I'm happy to say our kith and kin from the British Isles. And this
is how we would want it. But If we are going to bring people we have to find
the employment for them and we can't absorb them on the land because
although the rural industries have achieved miracles of performance by the
way in which they built up their productivity, they are doing it with fewer
people than they did probably before the Second World War. So, largely,
we have to look to the manufacturing industries and the service industries
in order to absorb our growing population. And I think when you see the
figures, the next lot of figures out on employment, you will realize how
successfully we are absorbing those who come in, the school leavers as
their time comes to go into the working community, the industrial and the
commercial community. What opportunities persist in this country of
ours! Now we are favoured in two other ways. One by a bountiful
providence, which although it has provided us with soil that takes labour 
-7
and skill and new techniques to master for complete success, has given
us a fabulous treasurehouse of mineral wealth which we are just beginning
to discover perhaps not even fully but we are discovering in great
abundance at this time. Who would have thought in the years when I
first came into politics that Australia would turn up the second largest
bauxite reserves in the world or rather the largest single reserve
of bauxite in the world.
In the 1950' s we had a policy of clamping down on the export of
iron ore. Our known reserves didn't amount to more than about 4CUC
million tons and now somebody has turned up successively, one after the
other, discoveries, quite remarkable discoveries In Western Australia,
and our present reserves are estimated at somewhere between 15, 000
and 18, 000 million tons of Iron ore of rich grade.
In recent weeks, phosphate rock, one of the great deficiencies
of this country, has been discovered, I hope in considerable quantities.
That has yet to be established or made known. But the nickel discoveries
of recent times, the manganese deposits which B. H. P. are working success
fully on Groote Eylandt; almost every month, or it seems to those of us
leading busy lives, every week, some great new discovery adding to our
natural wealth is turned up. Fortunately we have had the enterprise and
so far we have been able to marshal the capital either from overseas or
amongst our own resources to see that these things are brought to
fruition. But It's not that aspect of Australia that I turn to finally with you.
It is what Australia has discovered of Itself in relation to its own area of
the world that has suddenly become tremendously vital and exciting for us.
Again in the early years I spent in politics, governments, ministers and
the community as a whole had their gaze directed to the extent that it
went outside the Commonwealth of Australia to the British Isles, with
perhaps one journey In a lifetime to the Continent of Europe. This was
the sort of dream that people who were able to accumulate rather more
wealth or savings built up in their minds, to get back to what was then
described as " home", to the British Isles and then perhaps a few gay weeks
on the Continent. That was about as good as anybody would hope for. To
the North of us were countries barely known, certainly not thought of
great consequence to us. Those of us who In our schoolboy days kept a
stamp album would get the postage stamps and think they were very
picturesque. And that was about all that It meant to us. It took Pearl
Harbour, the events of the Second World War, to make us realize haw
close we are to our neighbours in the North. I went up to Vietnam earlier
this year. I left Canberra still answering questions up to the end of
Question Time at 11. 15. That evening I was talking in Singapore to
members of the Government there and the following morning I was talking
to Australian troops in Saigon. That's how close all of this is to us.
Saigon Is closer to Australia than Brisbane Is to Perth and when
we had a Conference of Commonwealth Prime Ministers In London quite
recently I had to remind some of our African colleagues at one stage
because they spent the first six days of an eight-day Conference talking
about Rhodesia and, admittedly, it is a difficult problem, the situation
there. But finally I had to come in when they proposed another adjournment
on this matter and say, " Well look, we've been talking for six days on this
one matter while we haven't mentioned the affairs of nine-tenths of the rest
of human kind". And to bring the point home I had to point out that Saigon
was very much closer to Darwin than Salisbury, the capital of Rhodesia,
was to Sierre Leone. It was the Prime Minister of that country who made 
-8
the longest speech of the Conference. " In fact", I said, " we are a thousand
miles closer to Salisbury where we are and It is time we started talking
about Vietnam and the problems of this area of the world.
But they are not only problems of danger, and we know at the
moment that we are involved in a great struggle there. When I say we
are playing a small and relatively modest part, I think we can take pride
in the fact that our part there is not seen as small as the numbers might
otherwise suggest because the skill and gallantry of our soldiers has made
its impression on the United States and all other peoples of the world and
certainly upon our allies In South Vietnam. We are all under debt to them,
and you made a passing reference, Mr. Perrett, to National Service. Let me
say that In Vietnam a National Serviceman Is at one in purpose in endurance
and In courage with the Regular Servicemen whom he has gone to join.
And while I am on this subject let me just say a word. VWe were
talking about migration, about the decison to call the aliens into National
Service. I know there have been complaints and criticisms about this in
some countries. Not all! I was very pleased to see what the Prime Minister
of Malta had to say on this subject. I thought it was full of good sense and
a sense of the fitness of the situation. And that is, we haven't thought to
call up any young man of the appropriate age group who doesn't declare
himself an " intending permanent resident of this country". And if he has
come here with the firm and declared intention of staying here permanently,
well we think it appropriate that he should take the same chance with the
native-born Australians in the defence of this country. And I say to any
who choose to criticise us from these other countries, we have in Australia
at this time a community of about 270, 000 italians, 130, 000 Greeks, 100, 000
Dutch, some of them of course naturalized, but these were their origins.
Does it seem unreasonable that some proportion and it is a small proportion
of their fellow countrymen of the appropriate age group should join in helping
to protect them, their families and their possessions? I think It is entirely
right and proper.
I said that the thing I was really wanting to draw attention to finally
was the Australian situation in this area of the world. We have come to
know something of the problems of the area, but also something of the
tremendous opportunities that will open up for us. Three-fifths of the
world's population live East of Suez and they're tending to increase more
rapidly than others to the West of Suez, not merely because they're a
prolific people and have normally a high birthrate ( partly induced by the
fact that in past centuries there has been a very high death rate and a
relatively short life expectancy) but because public health measures are
Improving and medicine and treatment are Improving, so that population
is growing more rapidly than popul ation West of Suez. And it is in all
probability that the population of the area will have doubled by the end of
this century. Now that presents in a sense some dangers for Australia but it
also presents tremendous opportunities for us. We are a natural supplier
of raw materials and foodstuffs with great scope for expansion In all these
directions. Here are the growing markets of Asia as consumers increase
and their standards of living increase. And in this context just imagine
what it could mean to Australia if President Johnson's dream of a better
Asia, better educated, better fed, better clothed, better housed, better
serviced by industry, building their own industry, what that can mean to
this young relatively under-populated country. 
9-
Perhaps that is the thought, Mr. Chairman, that I should leave
with you in your minds tonight. We are living in an exciting country, at
an exciting phase of its history. We are accepted in a way which would
not have seemed credible to us so many years ago. When I came into
office, thanks to the great personality and capacity of my predecessor,
I was Immediately offered by Prime Minister Harold Wilson, and by the
Pr esident of the United States, President Johnson ' t continue the same
intimate communications and correspondence that had been built up over
the years by Sir Robert Menzies with the leaders of these two great
democracies. From the outset I was welcomed as a trusted friend,
colleague and confidant and the influence that Australia is able to exert
by our own communications, the views to our two great friends in these
countries, is of tremendous consequence to us but also makes Australia
a very much larger figure in the opinion of the rest of the world. Don't
think that we are dragged along at the coat'-tails of either of them. We
are consulted, we are trusted, the views we put are respected and I have
reason to know that on occasion they have been in themselves quite decisive
in their interests. And so we face together a future of gr eat promise, not promise of
things which will come to us simply because we wish it so but because of
an energetic, friendly people, who find that the means are there if we have
the courage and the enterprise to take advantage of them. And It is my
fervent hope that I will have a few more years yet as your own political
leader in which to play some part in making of this Australia of ours the
land that all of us wish it to be.
Thank you for the way in which you h~ ve honoured me here
tonight. 



66/ 153
EMBARGO: NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 6 P. M.
SUNDAY, 6TH NOVEMBER
FOR PRESS: P M. No. 111/ 1966
MEETING BETWEEN THE PRIME MINISTER OF
AUSTRALIA AND THE PRIME MINISTER OF
MA LTA
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, and Dr. Borg Olivier, the
Prime Minister of Malta met in Melbourne on Saturday.
They were able to renew their friendly contacts and to discuss
together matters of common Interest in their countries. More than 65, CC
settlers from Malta have come to Australia since the second World War.
The Maltese living in Australia represent one-fifth of Malta's present
population and constitute the largest community of Maltese origin outside
Malta itself, Australia and Malta are both members of the Commonwealth
and have interests in trade and migration in particular. The two Prime
Mf-n isters discussed ways and means of ensuring closer co-operation between
the two countries and undertook to follow up their discussions on trade.
0 Mr. Holt informed Dr. Borg Olivier that the Australian
Government had decided to establish a High Commission in Malta and would
shortly be appointing a High Commissioner. Mr. Holt further informed
Dr. Borg Olivier that the requirement of re-entry permits for Maltese
settlers travelling outside Australia would be abolished as from a date to
be announced shortly.
They also discussed Commonwealth affairs in the light of
the Prime Ministers' Conference held in London in September and which
they both attended.
CANBERRA, 6th November, 1966. 



FOR P. RESS: P. M. No. 112/ 1966
PRIME MINISTER'S REPLY TO MR. BARTON
The Prime Minister this afternoon sent the following reply to
Mr. Gordon Barton in Sydney:
" I have your telegran; despatched on Sunday, which
reached me at my Melbourne office this morning. Frankly, I find
a~ n ' Alice in W/ onderland' quality about its timing and its terms which
makes it difficult for me to regard it as intended other than for
propaganda purposes. " It invites me personally to make fundamental changes
in my Government's firmly -established defence and external policies.
These go to the heart of Australia's security. You say, without
evidence or justification, that I entertaied doulrs about the Government's
intervention in Viet Nam from the outset and I tolerate what is being
done there against my private convictions and out of what I believe to
be sheer political necessity.
" All this so seriously mis-states my own fully-publici sed
attitude and the position I have consistently adopted on these matters
that it brings critically into question the bona f ides of your approach.
I have repeatedly stated my belief that the decisions the Government
has taken on Viet Nam and on the participation there of National
Servicemen are right.
" You can question, if that is your view and however
wrong-headed I may believe your view to be the wisdom of these
decisions, and if you disagree with them, stand in opposition to my
Government, but you have no cause to question my sincerity. Even
my opponents of the Labor Party have not done that. It is because
my colleagues and I believe these policies to be right that we accept
the challenge of the Labor Party to make them critical issues of this
campaign. If you feel so strongly hostile to these policies that
you and those associated with you are determined to contest individual
electorates, then it would be more honest and less mystifying to
the public if you were to offer yourselves either simply as Independents
or as Independent Labor candidates. To the best of my knowledge, very few if
any of you have been active members of the Liberal Party. By your
decision to support a socialist p arty which would run out on our allies
arid which, in so many other directions, is fundamentally opposed to the
policies of the party I lead, you have revealed yourselves as without
entitlement to include the word ' Liberal' in the description of your
group. " I have noted your denial that you are in any way a Labor
front organisation. There can be little difference in substance if you
masquerade as Liberals and recommend support for Labor in preference
to support of a Government which has led Australia to its present
strength, prosperity and international standing.
" I need hardly add that your offer of withdrawal is
rejected as are the terms on which you state it to have been based.
CANBERRA, 7th November, 1966. o t 



EMAGEEMAGEDEMBARGOED POLICY SPEECH
1966
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT
8th November, 1966
NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA UNTIL 8 P. M. TUESDAY, 8TH NOVEMBER
EMBARGOEDEMBARGOED
6" s 
S. POLICY SPEECH
This Policy Speech my first as your Prime Minister
outlines the course my Government will follow if you re-elect us on
November 26. Between now and polling day, our Australian democracy
will be involved in a great debate about many aspects of policy. You will
be taking part in a national stocktaking. The policies you support with
your vote will bear directly on your well-being and the welfare of the nation.
These will be critical years for Australia, but they hold great promise for
our advancement. They should be years of steady national progress
progress, fortifying our security, and strongthening the base of our economy.
As yiou view this forward prospect, you find Australia well
poised for progress. You must feel it in your bones, as I do, that the next
decade may rank as the greatest in our history.
The Government I lead, is, as you know, a coalition between
members of the Liberal Party and of the Country Party. Wie have worked well
and happily together as a team. That unity and teamwork will continue. It
stands in contrast to the disunity and disarray of the Australian Labor Party
which presents itself as the alternative government. It is indeed the only
alternative government within your chot ce.
You will be making this choice at a time when our country is
moving swiftly into a new and historic era. You have only to look at the map
to realise this. The new Parliament will face a challenging period, calling
for what is best in the Australian character. But it can be, we believe, an
era of great opportunity, and we are growing not only in strength but in
maturity. How we are to carry forward the development of this continent
and how best we can make the nation secure, forms the very core of this
election campaign. In asking you to return my Government, we are also asking you
to confirm principles and policies we believe are right for Australia at this
point of our history. They bear on our national integrity and self -respact,
our obligations to friends and allies, our standing in the free world and the
tempo and character of our own growth and development. Al 1 that we plan
and hope for Australia must not be put at risk so far as we Australians can
order events by what occurs outside Australia; and we have much to hold
fast to and build upon inside our country. We are building for tomorrow on
strong and stable foundations. We have squeezed into seventeen years what
some countries have taken one hundred and fifty years to do; what some
countries have never achieved.
11,1e Australians regard our personal freedom, liberty, and
opportunities for enterprise as essential to our way of life. Yet these things
are under constant challenge, chiefly by those, whether at home or abroad,
who believe in an all-powerful State. Our political creed places the highest
value upon human personality' to encourage it, not to suppress, to strengthen
it, riot to weaken. The Socialist basis of the Labor Party is reactionary, its
doctrines are musty and its vision blurred by lingering bitterness from
battles of the past. In recent years, the ALP has become divided into
embittered factions. The Labor Party is not only out of time, but out of tune
with the nation's thinking. In its present disorder it plainly can't give
effective leadership or competent government. / 2 
-2
You have only to look at the Labor Party's response to one of the
most critical challenges of our time. It refuses to ackn~ owledge, or it runs
away from, the great central fact of modern history the tremendous power
conflict between the Communist world and the free world. The foreign policy
of every country is affected incessantly by this conflict. It has been the cause
of personal tragedy, much bloodshed, much waste and much destruction. It
has brought tyranny to some countries and the fear of oppression to others.
Yet the Labor Party dismisses all this as a bogey. What a delusion!
On the one hand there is the desire of free people to win for
themselves a better way of life: On the other, the design of the Communists to
force their way of life on others.
During this campaign our political opponents will try to confuse,
or turn your minds from the central questions which the very history of our
time has raised. We are no longer a small, insular, protected country
sheltered from the storms and stresses of the world. Wie are not a large
power, but we do take pride in being a nation, and pride in what we have done
to build it and hold it. But that recognition of achievement carries with it
responsibilities. It is our belief that the Australian people are equal to those
respons ibilicies. Later I shall have more to say about what is happening in South-
East Asia and South Viet Nam, but the support we and others are giving in
South Viet Nam is not only helping the people of South Viet Nam to resist
Communist subversion and aggression. It is providing a shield behind which
a new Asia can emerge and grow stronger. The presence of ourselves and
othe~ r friendly forces there is not a commitment to war, it is a commitment to
peace and freedom. But it must be such that the Communists will learn that
free Asia, and the friends and allies of free Asia, will not lose heart, will
not be worn down, but have strength and staying power to defend the right
of every people to choose their own social and economic order. Together
we shall be helping to give the people in these countries the food, the skills,
the education and the strength to lead their nations to a better way of life.
That is the kind of involvement we look to with Asia. We all
want peace and a peaceful solution of problems and conflicts. We can even
be on friendly terms with countries that have fundamentally different ideologies
to our own, so long as they don't try to impose their ideas on us by force, by
subversion or any other means.
These are matters of great significance which I shall develop
later. But I move now from this broad introduction of the issues of the
campaign to some of the domestic proposals we have in mind for the next
three years.
DOMESTIC PROPOSALS
The economy, despite one of the most severe droughts in our
history, is in good shape. It has continued to expand. So has our trade.
Our own efforts and savings, aided by a continuing flow of capital
investment from overseas, are enabling us to maintain full employment with
a growing population. We have one of the highest standards of living in the world. We
have continuing policies, many of which require increasing annual expenditures.
But, in addition to these, we have a number of new proposals, which I will
outlIne. First I mention education. / 3 
-3-
This is important to every Australian and vital to the nation.
Our record in this field is proof of our sincerity.
Education is the responsibility of a number of authorities. Each
has its role to play.
For our part, we have assisted in meeting the needs of the
universities,' the establishment of advanced colleges of education; we have
helped technical education. WIe instituted grants for school science blocks.
To assist parents and students we have greatly enlarged the Commonwealth
scholarship scheme for university education. With the establishment of
colleges of advanced education we have provided a similar scholarship system
for them. Commonwealth scholarships are also available for the final two
years of secondary education and for technical education. We have given
special taxation allowances to parents for education expenses.
We now propose further assistance to education.
We will provide eight million dollars a year over the next three
financial years for the construction and equipment of new colleges for teacher
training throughout Australia.
This money will require no matching grants from the States. It
will be used by us to build colleges on sites selected by the States, on condition
that the State does not reduce its expenditure on teacher training, and on
condition that at least ten per cent, of the places at the new colleges are
reserved for teachers not bonded to State Education Departments.
Winners of advanced education scholarships will be able to apply
those scholarships to a teacher training course in any training college to which
they are admitted. These scholarships carry the same benefits as university scholarships
and will be available to unbonded students.
Our scheme to provide science laboratories and equipment to all
schools has been highly successful. We intend to do more.
In the next financial year and subsequently, we will double the
amount available to independent schools for these laboratories.
We believe this will ensure that in four years every science
teaching secondary school in Australia, whether Government or independent,
will have the science teaching laboratories and the equipment it needs
provided with the financial help of the Commonwealth Government.
We believe the time has come to establish a Commonwealth
Ministry of Education and Science and we will do this.
This Ministry will be responsible not only for education, but
also for certain areas of scientific activity. CSIRO will function within the
new . Ministry.
SOCIAL SERVICES I turn to social services. 
-4
All through the life of the Government we have carried out our
policy of giving to the needy the assistance we can afford as a government and
nation with many other obligations. It has been our practice to review all
aspeczts of our health and social service policies each year when we consider
the Budget. We have liberalised the means test progressively. We now
propose further liberalisation. I shall elaborate on this in a supplementary
statement. We will enlarge our social service programme on four fronts
We will raise by one hundred and fifty-six dollars the limits both of
property and income within which pensions will be payable to the
aged, the invalid, and the widows.
We will expand the scope of the Aged Persons Homes Act, particularly
in regard to housing the needy, by making local governing bodies
eligible for our subsidy.
We will1 further assist the disabled in the community by capital
assistance on a two dollars for one dollar basis to sheltered
workshops, and by a special allowance to disabled persons employed
in those workshops.
* We will make annual grants to certain national voluntary agencies
working in the field of social welfare.
HOUSING Australians want to own their own homes. This is an ambition
we have fostered. No country can point to a higher percentage of home ownership.
More than half the homes in Australia today have been constructed
since we came to office in 1949.
In the last Parliament we introduced the Home Savings Grant
Scheme which has already benefited sixty-four thousand young couples. We
also introduced the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation.
We will now give the Minister for Housing new discretionary
powers designed to meet cases of harship under the Home Savings Grant
Scheme. The discretionary powers will date back to the start of the scheme.
Details of these are set out in a supplementary statement.
Further, we will extend the scheme to benefit widowed persons
aged less than thirty-six years who have one or more dependent children.
The limitation on the value of the home, including land, will be
raised from fourteen thousand dollars to fifteen thousand dollars.
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT WATER CONSERVATION
Since 1949, we have consistently carried out our policy of
national development. For us this is a wide and embracing term. It means
people as well as physical resources.
One aspect of national development is vivid in our minds from
the recent drought. This is the conservation of that precious commodity
water. 
We believe a programme of water conservation related to
national needs should now be drawn up by us with State Governments.
We have in mind a national water resources development
programme. Its purpose would be to increase water conservation activity,
to reduce hazards of drought and expand primary production.
VWe envisage that the States will maintain at least their existing
levels of expenditure in this field, from their own financial resources. We
shall invite the States to put forward programmes of additional works they
woul. d propose for Commonwealth financing. We, in turn, will make a
contribution to enable additional works, selected on their merits, to be carried
out. One cannot, at this stage, be precise about the capital requirements
of our programme. We contemplate, however, that the contribution
to be made by the Commonwealth for selected additional works could amount
to fifty million dollars over the next five years.
WOOL_ A soundly-based research effort is essential to this important
industry's prosperity. So is an energetic, imaginative and well-directed
promrotion campaign. The Government is prepared to increase the scale of its
contributions for wool research and promotion when the present arrangements
expire next June. For the ensuing three years the Government would provide
funds on a dollar for dollar basis subject to a maximum annual contribution
of fourteen million dollars for a programme agreed upon by it and the wool
indus try.
DAIRY INDUSTRY The present five-year plan finishe-son 30th June, 1967, and my
Government would consult with industry bodies on the details of a further fiveyear
plan. We would discuss with the industry the level of the annual subsidy
allocation; the Commonwealth's underwriting of the equalisation arrangement
for butter and cheese; and plans for diversifying markets abroad.
SUG; AR We have shown our determination to maintain a strong and
prosperous sugar industry. Recently we have made loans available to canegrowers
and millers distressed by dmnught.
The nitrogenous fertiliser subsidy introduced in August will be
of particular help to this industry.
The 1966 season's production was affected by drought and
abnormally low export prices. 7./ Ie have bolstered the return by loaning the
induStry nineteen million dollars on concessional terms.
The Commonwealth/ Queens land Sugar Agreement is due to
expire on 1st August, 1967. We have assured the Queensland Government we
will consult fully with them and ascertain industry viewis on all matters
associated with the industry's position bef ore renewing it. This agreement
has provided valuable protection for the industry. ./ 6 
/ 7
-6
We are persisting vigorously with our efforts to negotiate an
international sugar agreement. Our aim is to ensure our producers
remunerative prices for satisfactory export quantities.
EXTENSION SERVICES
My Government has a programme which assists rural industries
considerably in research and extension. Some eighty million dollars has
been made available through joint industry/ Commonwealth schemes for
research by State and Commonwealth Departments, universities and the
CSLRO. The results must be passed on to the farmer. For this improved
agricultural extension services are necessary.
We have now embarked on a five-year programme. Under this
the Commonwealth's contribution to extension services will be increased by
four million dollars above the present level of one point four million dollars.
STABILISATION SCHEMES FOR WHEAT, COTTON AND DRIED VINE FRUITS
At the appropriate time, my Government will go into discussions
with the wheat, cotton and dried vine fruits industries for the re-negotiation
of stabilisation schemes having the obj ective of sustaining in respect of each
a stable industry.
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT
The development of the North. Commonwealth, State and
local governments, privae individuals and companies are all involved in the
whole pattern of northern development.
Apart from our own explorations, we have encouraged private
enterprise to undertake wide-ranging exploration of the resources of our
north. Mineral and oil discoveries have resulted.
Development has followed actively. New railways and ports,
and vast new processing plants, are being built.
Currently, capital projects totalling more than two thousand
million doIllars are in train. These works are giving new e mployment and
creating new communities.
Our great new resources some still being discovered must
be effectively utilised. It is desirable that there should be an Australian
participation in the ownership and control of those resources along with the
industries growing out of them. There are instances in which more capital
is needed to exploit these opportunities than existing Australian companies
cant marshal. New arrangements and facilities for the provision of capital
have to be devised. This is not an easy matter, but the Government has
been working actively and earnestly upon it, as have people and institutions
inthe world of finance. We are confident we shall find practical means of
meeting this objective. 
-7
BEEF ROADS S i n c e 19 61, we have provided almost thirty million dollars
to the Queensland and Western Australian Governments for construction of
beef roads. This has been money well spent. It has contributed to the
development of the beef industry in Northern Australia and to our export
earnings from beef.
We know the industry is capable of further substantial expansion
and that prospects for beef exports are bright. But a still further improved
road system is essential for any major expansion. This would promote the
development of our northern areas generally.
Current ani igiements for the financing of beef roads end in
June, 1967. We will discuss with the Governments of Queensland and Western
Australia a fifty million dollars programme of beef roads extending over a
period of seven years.
This would represent an even greater contribution to this wcr k
than in the past. Vie are doing more also in the Northern Territory.
The new programme ther4 extending over five or six years, will
begin early in 1967-68.
TOURISM W e s ee a n ex pa n d ing future for the tourist industry.
Our annual grants to the Australian National Travel Association have been
increasing substantially, and, in 1966-67, were eight hundred and sixty-two
thousand dollars. Increasing activity and expenditure providing growing
exchange earnings for us require the establishment of an Australian Tourist
Commission set ' up as a statutory body.
We believe this would have the support of ANTA, the tourist
industry generally, and the State Governments all of whom have a direct
Interest in this matter.
A GENERAL COMMENT ON OUR DOMESTIC PROGRAMME
What I have outlined by no means represents the limit of our
activities in the domestic field over the next three years. But it gives you the
trendl of our thinking.
FOREIGN POLICY
This brings me back to what I described earlier as the very core
of this election. Our domestic programme depends for its fulfilment on the
security of the nation. But the principles and objectives of our foreign policy
are at issue in this election. Our Labor opponents attack our assessment of
Austrcalia's external security. Domestic affairs cannot be separated from
foreign affairs. / 8 
8-
Our foreign policy is based on the beliefs we have and the plans
we have about the kind of Australia all of us want to see and about the kind
of society we want to build and preserve here. The security of those things
we think are good in Australia depends on the security of a kind of world that
also values what is precious both to the individual and the good society.
So we have joined with others in paying a price for the freedoms we hope to
retain. Unless there is security for all small nations there cannot be
security for any small nation. Unless principles of international conduct are
preserved in all international situations they are n~ ot likely to be preserved in
any. That is the essence of our foreign policy.
We have always seen Australia's security in tetms of world
seciir ity. To that end we have for long allied ourselves with Britain and the
United States. The basic principles and objectives of their policies are, for
the most part, shared by us. We have sought, above all things, to keep our
counrtry at peace; but to have some assurance that Australia will have strong
and reliable friends. That is why we played our part in the making of the SEATO and
ANZUS Treaties which carry with them responsibilities as well as benefits.
Because of those responsibilities, Australian soldiers are fighting
in South Viet Nam.
We know and share the genuine concern of responsible Australians
about what has been happening there.
But we believe our decisions have been right.
We seek a peaceful settlement of the conflict through negotiation.
But think of the consequences of abandoning our objectives and the people of
South Viet Nam. South Viet Nam would become a Communist state, and the lives
and Security of millions who have resisted Communism would be in jeopardy.
The impact of our complete withdrawal, as proposed by the
Labor Party, would be felt throughout South-East Asia.
We, too, would come under threat.
We have a vital interest in the effective presence and participation
of the United States as a major power in Asia and the Pacific. W~ e have obligations
arising from our treaty relationships, from our role as an ally, and from
the fact that our own international interests are directly involved in preserving
South-East Asia from aggression and from Communist domination.
It has been said that our policies in Viet Nam have damaged
Australia's standing in Asia.
This is absurd. Most Asian countries share our belief that
Communist aggression indeed, aggression of any kdid must be resisted.
Our close a,_-ociations with the free countries of Asia have undaib tedly
been strefig-aiened. t 
9-
DEFENCE I turn now to defence generally.
The centre of this problem, in global perspective, is in Asia
and hence in our own part of the world.
We must meet large expenditures for forces adequate to our
obligations, thoroughly trained and equipped with the best and most modern
conventional armaments. To finance defence on the scale required and with the necessary
personnel increases in all services, our defence expenditure has otrelady
more than doubled over the past four years.
We live in an unstable region. We see it as a basic responsibility
of the Government of a free people to be prepared for any eventuality.
NATIONAL SERVICE
One of the basic issues of this election is national military
training carrying the duty to serve abroad as well as at home.
If we are to meet our obligations, we must have trained men
immediately available to do the job. Our Army is to be built from twenty-two
thousand seven hundred and fifty to forty thousand as quickly as practicable.
Voluntary enlistment did not provide suitable men to the extent
needed. We and our advisers concluded there was no realistic alternative
to national service. The call-up has been devised so as to cause the smallest possible
disturbance to studies, employment and family commitments, and so as to
ensure thorough and effective training before a national serviceman is
required to serve overseas. The policy permits young men to make a choice
between service with the Regular Forces and service with the Qltizen Forces.
Withdrawal of national servicemen from Viet Nam as intended
by the Labor Party, would render our task force ineffective and seriously
disrupt the~ Army. It would inevitably mean loss of confidence in Australia
by its allies. Machines and money alone do not mak2-a defence establishment.
Our concept of highly-trained, mobile striking forces has been made effective
by the individualism, the intelligence, and cool gallantry of the men who
wear Australia's uniform.
National servicemen serving Australia abroad today are as one
with their Regular Army comrades in efficiency, purpose and courage.
CONCLUSION I have given a broad picture of our thinking on large questions
of policy. My supplementary statements issued tonight will give more
information on these and other aspects of policy. From experience you can
have confidence that we shall be doing all this and a good deal more. You
have seen us give prompt effect in the past to our election undertakings. We
have also taken further progressive and useful action to meet changing
conditions and new developments. I now draw all this together against the
political background. 
I 1 Or
The Liberal Party, In association with the Country Party, has
had the longest period of unbroken Federal rule in Australian history.
Our Government has remained vigorous and forward looking,
assisted by fresh talent from the ranks of our private members. The Deputy
Prime Minister and myself are the only two members remaining from the
Ministry formed when we were returned to office in 1949.
Today we are clearly more in tune with the aspirations and
outlook of Australians than our opponents. For the gimter period of our long
term of office, the Australian Labor Party has been ravaged by bitter faction
fights. Nowhere has this internal conflict been fiercer nor more destructive
than in the critical field of external security.
Even our American allies have been a target for the spleen of
the extremists in the Labor Party. Surely we Australians recognise who
are our true friends. The Labor Party, plagued for so long by the virus of
doctrinaire socialism, left-wing influence and class bitterness, seems to
have its will too paralysed to think clearly on great issues that affect our
safE. ty. The business of government and the conduct of our internal and
international affairs are not for men who cannot be of one mind, sometimes
for a week on end. Our national affairs are not merchandise for backroom
bargaining between leaders of factions.
Many times in recent years, the people of Australia have had
a sharp reminder that a Federal Labor Government would not be responsible
to the people, or even to its own judgment, but that it would be bound hand
and foot by the decisions of thirtysix people from the A. L. not, for the
most part, elected by the people of Australia and in no sense responsible
to them. This country deserves better than that. A party that cannot
lead. itself has no claim to lead a nation.
Your choice should be clear.
On the great questions of national security, my Government
is completely single-minded nited. Our opponents are confused and
divided. We believe our national policies look to Australia's future
and the national thinking of our opponents is Sndl bogged down in the past.
We offer the country strength, unity, and purpose as opposed
to disunity and confusion. Wie offer you a programme in domestic affairs
which advances national development, national security and social justice.
The choice for you is, we believe, clear-cut. My
colleagues and I have enough faith in the common sense and maturity of
the Australian people to be confident about your answer. 
SUPPLEMENTARY STATEMENTS
THE FOLLOWING STATEMENTS COULD NOT,
FOR REASONS OF TIME, BE INCLUDED IN A BROADCAST
AND TELEVISED POLICY SPEECH LIMITED TO
MINUTES. BUT THEY ARE ISSUED FOR PUBLICATION
CONJOINTLY WITH THE MAIN SPEECH.
I'-p t I " aw 
MEANS TEST
Since it came to office in December, 1949, the Government's
policy in Social Services has been to assist those with the greatest need.
In circumstances where resources are limited, the Government's policy
has been to continually improve the position of existing pensioners and to
progressively liberalise the means test in order to permit increasing
numbers in the lower income groups to obtain pensions. This policy
will be continued during the life of the present Government.
Very significant improvements have been brought about. In
1949, s single person with an income ( including income from property) of
$ 377 per annum, or a married couple with a totalI income of $ 7154 per
annumn, were not entitled to an age or invalid pension. Since then these
limits have been more than doubled, so that today, pension eligibility is
retained by a single person until income, ignoring any income from
property, reaches $ 1,040 per annum in the case of -a single person, and
950 per annum for a married couple ( nassuming that the val;, ue of
property does not affect the rate of pension payable",.
We now propose to increase these limits still further by $ 156
per annum for both single persons and married couples. The new
limits of income before eligibility for pension ceases will be respectively
196 per annum for single persons, and 106 per annum for married
couples. Full age or invalid pensions will be payable where a single
persons's income does not exceed $ 520 per annum, and a married
couple's combined income $ 884. These income limits are increased if
there are children. Expressed in terms of property, what we propose is equally'
liberal. In 1949, no age or invalid pension was payable if a single person
had property valued at 500 or 000O in the case of a married couple.
Because of the progressive easings of the means test, the corresponding
figures today for property, apart from the value of a home, motor vehicle
and certain personal effects, are $ 10, 80,0 for a single person and $ 20, 320
for a married couple. Under the further improvement now proposed, a single
person may have $ 12, 360 in value of property, and a married couple $ 21, 88C,
provided there is no income other than from property, before losing
eligibility for pension.
The means test on widows' pensions will be similarly eased.
For example, at present, a widow with one child may receive a full pension
if~ her income does not exceed $ 520 per annum, and she retains eligibility
for some pens-Lon until her income reaches 404. These limits will be
raised to $ 676 and 560 per annum respectively.
As in the case of age and invalid pensioners, a widow with
children may receive an extra $ 156 per annum for each child after the first
without affecting her pension, which is increased by a further $ 78 per annum
for each such child. Thus, the amount of income which renders her ineligible
for pension rises by $ 234 per annum for each child after the first.
If a widow with a child or children has no income other than from
property, she will receive some pension until the value of her property reaches
$ 16, 040. / 2 
-2-
HOMES FOR AGED PERSONS
During the twelve years the legislation has been in operation,
the response by the churches, charitable and other voluntary agencies and
the public to the Aged Persons Homes Act has been magnificent. We have
recently widened the policy under which grants are made on a $ 2 for $ 1
basis, to permit eligible organisations to give greater attention to the
aged who are frail and infirm.
We will widen the scope of assistance by including local
governing bodies in the organisations eligible under the Act and accepting
contributions by them towards Aged Persons Homes as qualifying for
Commonwealth matching subsidy.
It is our hope that local governing bodies will sponsor aged
persons homes in the areas of their administration and that particular
attention will be given by them to the housing needs of pensioners. / 3 
3
HELP FOR DISABLED
Another area in which we believe the greatest effectiveness
can be obtained only if there is a marriage of government and voluntary
effort is in relation to sheltered workshops.
Vie will forthwith begin consultation with both voluntary and
other agencies with a view to granting capital assistance on a $ 2 for $ 1
basis towards the expansion and establishment of sheltered workshops
conducted by voluntary agencies throughout the Commonwealth. We have
in mind that this aid should run not only to workshops that aim to restore
the disabled to outside employment but also to those that will provide
employment under sheltered conditions to those who have a permanent
residual disability. Vie will introduce a special allowance for employees in
sheltered workshops. The allowance will be reduced when earnings exceed
a certain limit but will be so arranged that employees will receive a net
increase in income for each increment of earnings.
The effect of these two measures should provide a strong
incentive to the development of sheltered workshops. / 4 
-4-
SOCIAL WELFARE
Government has a predominant role in the
field of social security, but there will always be large areas in which
the welfare services of our community must depend upon voluntary
effort. Accordingly, we have decided to make annual grants to the
Australian Council of Social Services and to the Australian Council for
Rehabilitation of Disabled.
The annual grant, over the next three years, to each of
the Councils will be $ 15, 000 of which $ 1C, OCC will be on the basis of
$ 1 for each $ 1 raised by the organisation.
These two grants will be additional to a grant of $ 60, 000
for each of the next two years that the Government has undertaken to
make to the National Old People's Welfare Council to assist it in
co-ordinating the work of voluntary agencies in the field of the welfare of
t ie elderly. 
HOME SAVINGS GRANT SCHEME
In the 1963 Policy Speech, we undertook to provide a
Commonwealth grant of II1 for every 3Z3 saved by a person under 36 years
of age to assist young married people to buy or build their own homes.
The maximum grant payable to any young couple is
To be eligible for the grant, the savings must have been
deposited over a pedod of at least three years in a Home Savings Account
with a bank, or with a building or housing society, or used for purposes of
acquiring a home. Our Home Savings Grant Scheme has been in operation for
nearly 2J2 years. some 64, 000 couples have received the grant and grants
totalling almost $ 29 million have been paid.
Because the Scheme is a novel one and is still in its early
years of operation, cases have arisen where, due to genuine misunderstanding
or lar.* of awareness of all the requirements, some applicants have
failed to qualify for the grant.
While we wish all applications to be lodged within twelve
months of buying or building a home, we propose to give the Secretary of
the Department of Housing certain discretionary powers so that cases may
be treated sympathetically on their individual merits. These discretionary
powers will apply to eligible persons who bought or commenced to build
their homes on or after December 2, 1963.
The matters in respect of which a discretion might be given
are To extend the time limit for the lodgment of applications from three
months to twelve months and to empower the Department to accept
applications lodged within a further period if circumstances suggest
that this is justified.
To empower the Department to disregard ownership of " another
dwelling house" where it is sctisfied that it would be unreasonable
to regard the dwelling house as the matrimonial home or suitable
for this purpose.
To empower the Department to determine that any interest in land
that it considers appropriate for the purposes of the Act be
accepted as an " approved interest".
To give the Department a discretionary power to accept savings made
in a period of three years ending on a date not more than fourteen
days before or after the prescribed date in circumstances it
considers reasonable. The definition of the prescribed date will
not be altered.
To permit the Department to pay a grant to a person who has been
widowed on or after the prescribed date of the amount of the
grant that would have been paid to one or both of the couple if
the spouse had not died.
To give the Department a discretionary power to permit an applicant's
savings period to be broken for a short period should there appear
to be good or sufficient reasons.
All these proposed new discretionary -rs are designed to meet
cases of hardship that have akreqdy arisen. . Tllid cre tionar v po%% ers will,
therefore, apply from the date of commencement of the Schemre. 4/ 6 
-6
PRIMARY I N D USITR Y
O ur r uralI industries have set records in expansion in
the past 17 years. Production in 1965-66 was 47 per cent, above that of
1948-1949 and some 60 per cent, above the level of the immediate pre-war
years. This has been achieved in spite of severe drought in extensive areas
of New South Wales and Queensland in 1965-1966.
A farm work force of less than half a million, smaller than
in the pre-war period, has produced this phenomenal result.
Our policy is to promote efficient and expanding primary
industries to meet the demands of a growing population and secondary
industries, and to provide a rising amount of export income.
Our constant objective is to ensure that returns for rural
commodities are maintained, and, if possible, improved, and that primary
producers are able to earn remunerative incomes.
Since our election in 1949, we have paid out approximately
$ 497 million in subsidy on the production of butter and cheese and the
export of processed milk products under the various five-year dairy
industry stabilisation plans.
The current plan ends next June. We will consult with the
industry bodies on the details of a further five-year plan to apply from
July 1, 1967. / 7 
-7-
HEALTH
Our National Health Scheme, which in many
parts of the world is regarded as a model of its kind, has been
progressively improved during the past three years.
It is estimated, for example, that a further 120, 000 age,
invalid, widow and service pensioners and 17, 00Q of their dependants
became eligible for enrolment in the Pensioner Medical Service following
relaxation of the Pensioner Medical Service means test.
Also, in 1964, we introduced a new schedule of Commonwealth
medical benefits. The general effect was to increase Commonwealth
benefits by 33 and 1/ 3rd per cent.
We have reviewed the list of pharmaceutical benefits from
time to time since 1963 to ensure that full advantage is taken of modern
developments in the availability of new and improved drugs.
We will continue to improve our National Health Scheme / 8 
8-
PAPUA_-AND _ NEW1 GUINEA
We propose to continue our vigorous programmes of balanced
development economic, social and political towards which we have
allotted a grant of $ 70 million this year, compared with $ 50 million three
years ago. To this end, we are prepared, on the basis of the co-operation
of the people of Papua and New Guinea and their elected representatives, to
continue to spend more over the next few years. The object will be to
shorten the time that must elapse before the Territory of Papua and New
bieacan finance its own basic need s from its own resources.
Without this, there can be no real freedom of choice when the
time comes for Papuans and New Guineans to decide what eventual political
status they want. The further expansion of primary and secondary industry and
increased export income will be vigorously pursued in harmony with the
broad policy of economic development based on the W~ orld B ank Missions
1964 Report. The newly -established Papua and New Guinea Development
Bank will play an important development role.
In political affairs the Government will not be slow to make
constitutional changes if the Papuans and New Guineans want them, nor will
the Government press changes upon the people if they do not want change.
In accordance with this approach, the membership of the House of Assembly,
which was set up in 1964 with a great majority of elected members, will be
increased in size for the next elections in 1968. Again if the people of
Papua and New Guinea indicate a desire for a limited system of ministerial
representation, appropriate arrangements will be worked out.
The new Institute of Higher Technical Education and the new
University of Papua and New Guinea have been established to help in the
training and education of Papuans and New Guineans. In political, social
and economic matters the advancement of the indigenous people of the
Territory will continue to be a basic objective.
I confirm once again that we will defend the Territory of
Papua and New Guinea as if it was part of the Australian mainland. / 9 
9.
ABORIGINES
In the field of aboriginal advancement, we will continue
to co-operate with the Governments of the States.
In the Northern Territory, where the Commonwealth
is specially responsible, no Territory laws discriminate against
aborigines. In employment we will continue to support equality of
wages and conditions for aborigines. The Govern ment supported this
principle in the pastoral industry where substantial interim increases are
being made and where complete equality under the award will apply not
later than 1968. Royalties on minerals in aboriginal reserves will be paid
into a Trust Fund for the benefit of the aboriginal people.
We will continue to improve the educational opportunities
for aboriginal children.
Proposals are being put before the Northern Territory
Legislative Council to make land on aboriginal reserves available for
leasing to aborigines on the advice of a special Board of which the
majority of the members will be aborigines. 
10
NORTHERN TERRITORY
WN e w ill continue policies that provide a climate of
opportunity and open up further prospects of growth for the mining,
pastoral and tourist industries in this Territory, which occupies one-sixth
of the continent and is an area of special Commonwealth responsibility.
We will go on encouraging th e development of the great mineral
potentialities of the Territory in such places as Cove, Groote Eylandt and
McArthur River. At these and other places investment could total more
than $ 40G million. The pastoral industry has been developing substantially with
the establishment of export abattoirs at Katherine and Darwin and with new
techniques for improved pastures and with the provision of more credit for
water and subsidies for imported stud stock. This development will be
stimulated still further by the continuation of the beef road programme for
the Territory. More than $ 3 million will be spent on this programme during
the current year and 900 miles of beef roads will then have been completed
in the Territory. Moreover, special loans and freight subsidies are helping
pastoralists in the Centre to recover from the most disastrous drought in the
region's history. Further expansion can be expected in the Northern Territory
tourist industry which, with improved roads and facilities, has been growing
rapidly. We will continue to give financial backing to the development
of the Territory which has a higher growth rate than almost any other part
of the Commonwealth. 



EMBAL OED UNTIL 7.15 P. M. 10TH NOVEMBER, 1966
NATIONAL BROADCAST NO. 1
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
Security is the theme of this broadcast security
not only for the nation, but for the individual.
Nationalsecurity is linked with the adequacy of
our defence forces and the strength of our alliances.
Security for the individual depends on how
successfully the economy is conducted and how justly the
national wealth is distributed.
As to national security. We have a small population
living in a vast continent. We cannot hope to
do by ourselves alone all that is necessary to preserve
that security. This is so even if we tried to turn
Australia into an isolated fortress and abandoned
vigorous development.
' We have fortified ourselves by joining with others
in building a mutual security system through treaties
such as SEATO and ANZUS.
The Labor Party says that Australia should withdraw its
forces from South Vietnam. They condemn the participation
there of national servicemen who are enabling
us to maintain our Regular Army Units in Australia and
overseas at the strengths recommended by our military
advisers. Under the ANZUS Treaty the United States, New
Zealand and ourselves have undertaken to resist aggression
directed against any one of us. You can form your own
judgment as to how much value would remain in this
Treaty if Australia were to walk out on these friends and
allies. They would never have the same confidence in
Australia again. I am sure the effect on America, in
particular would be most destructive. Even if the
Treaty continued in a formal sense, we could never again
place the same reliance on it for our safety.
These matters are sure to be discussed extensively
at my public meetings so I should like to deal now with
some aspects of domestic security which concern every
household. You have a vested interest in the strength
and welfare of Australia. An expanding Australia with
a strong, soundly-based economy, should be capable of
consistently giving full employment to its people. This
contributes greatly to your security.
Regular employment and good w. ages are basic to
the security of the family. Australia has a record in
this respect unsurnassed amonrst the free Deoples of
the world. There has been only one month in the seventeen
years in which we have been in office when
registrations for employment touched three per cent. 
-2-
For most of our period of office, the registrations have
hToe vehraeved asbuocucte ssofneu llpye r abcesnotr. b edw iatdhd ijtoio onvsa caton cithees wpolreknftoirfcuel.
from migration and our own natural increase. This has
helped us to become a nation of home ovmers with the
highest percentage of home ownership anywhere recorded.
Only the United States and Canada surpass us in
the percentage of motor vehicles to the population.
There are other important indicators of the solid
base to the security of the individual citizen. Our
people hold more than seven and a half million life
insurance policies, having a total value of more than
fifteen thousand million dollars. At the end of August
they held $ 5 356 million in the Savings Banks and had,
at the end of September, more than 5,000 million on
deposit with the Trading 3anks. These figures spell
continuing prosperity, and in no country is that
prosperity more widely shared.
It would be an act of national folly to hand over
to a socialist party a country so soundly conducted and
which has enjoyed these fruits of a free enterprise
philosophy; and to hand over to a socialist party so
demonstraiy incapable of governing itself that it is
clearly incapable of effectively governing the nation.
( This talk will be broadcast by the A. J. C.
Network at 7.15 Thursday, 10th November.
It is the first of six five minute broadcasts
to be made by ' Mr. Holt during the election
campaign. The broadcasts will be heard in
all States.) 



EMBARGOED UNTIL 7.15 P. M. 11TH NOVEMBER. 1966
NATIONAL JROADCAST NO. 2
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, mR. HAROLD HOLT
The Policy Speech made last night oy Mr. Calwell
exposes fundamental differences of attitude between the
Government and Opposition. The choice you will make is not
simply a choice between leaders of different personality
or etvween parties which would maintain the same steady course
for Australia, but differ on some significant points of detail.
The issues go much deeper than that.
Each side has stated its view of kustralia's external
security. Each has now stated what it would propose to do
in the field of domestic security.
-e of the Government Parties see the menace of
iggressive Asian-based Communism as the treatest threat to
the security of our part of the world and to the way of life
we wish to live.
M'e have joined with others in the S -TO and ANZUS
Ireaties for our mutual protection. The added strength we
obtain carries a price of oblization on our part. That is one
reason why we are in South Vietnam.
The Labor Party pays lip-service to treaty obligations
but it declares for a course which would undermine them.
It would withdraw all Australian troops from South Vietnam.
The damage this would do to our relations with the United
States the greatest free power in the world and the one
most capable of assuring our security cannot be measured
but undoubtedly this relationship would be gravely weakened.
.' hen it comes to internal security we also see the
forward prospect in fundamentally different terms.
The Government and its supporters believe that better
living standards will flow from a strengthenin-economy
soundly based and directed to the well-oeing of all sections.
Mr. Calwell thinks that improved standards will flow
from greatly increased expenditures on social welfare with
little, if any, regard to the way in which these are to be
financed. From an earlier carefully documented statement made
before the election campaign was launched, Ir. Calwell
estimated his election undertakings to cost ' 300 million.
. e can now see that this is only a fraction of the total
bill. It is more likely to be closer to treble to the
amount he stated.
He has offered a programme so comprehensive and
so costly that the general reaction has been one of derision.
This general reaction was well expressed in the " Sydney
. orning Herald" Leader it oegan " It must oe said at
once that Mr. Cal-. ell's Policy Speech is far, far worse than
anyone could have feared. It is a monument of irresponsibility,
an irresponsibility which applies almost equally to the 
-2-
whole range of his proposals."
After deglin, critically with the external aspects,
the paper commented under the heading " Fantastic Promises"
that economically speaking this isThe most irresponsible
Policy Speech Mr. Calwell -s ever made. The same paper's
Finance Editor wrote " ie have never seen a list of
promises like this. If Mr. Cal'cwell's previous election
platforms were extravagant, this one is delirious."
Fost thoughtful people will share that verdict.
It is unthinkable that a country progressing so well
and fortified by its alliances should now by its free
democratic vote, hand itself over to a political leader and
party so lacking in realism.
( This talk will oe broaidcast bI the A. B. C. Network
at 7.15 p. m. Friday, 11th Iovember, 1966.) 



PRESS CONFERENCE HELD IN ADELAIDE, 66/ 223
AT NOON, MONDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 1966
WITH
THE PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.
INTRODUCTION:
P. M. One thing I think I should clear up is the use the Labor Party,
including the Leader, is making of views allegedly expressed by the late
President Kennedy. They represent such a travesty and such a mis-statement
of his own position that I am not prepared to have this perpetrated
indefinitely. To deal first, though, with the cost of the Labor programme, I
must take you first back to the document which was put out by Mr. Calwell
on Sunday, October 30. Most of you will recall it quite clearly, but I
will give you just the opening references, which I think will establish the
grounds on which my criticism is to be made. He heads the document,
" How Labor Will Pay", and the opening heading is " Cost". " In my Policy
Speech on November 10, I will be announcing the full outline of Labor's
programme for the coming elections. It will contain proposals relating to
the Means Test, Social Services, Health, and other matters. Each item
[ presumably this includes ' other matters' 1 has been carefully costed.
The total cost of our programme in the first full year of office will be
0300m." That is the ground work on which we start.
I did earlier, in commenting on this document, point out that
however specious, it contained fallacies inherent in it. In the first
place it talked about natural growth and revenue as something which could
be relied upon to finance this sort of programme; it made no reference
whatever to natural growth and expenditure. The Treasurer has since
pointed out and it was my own experience as Treasurer that natural growth
and expenditure tended to outrun natural growth and revenue. If you are
going to rely upon natural growth and revenue, you cannot turn your back
on what expenditure increases are likely to be. Some of these are in-built.
There is the natural growth of our payments to the States. There is a
natural growth in our payments to roads as population grows; there are
increasing bills for social services. Population growth means more
hospital payments medicine and the like. You find that there is a
substantial growth based on existing policies. Unless you strike particularly
buoyant years of revenue, it tends to out-strip the revenue, and
this has been reflected in the increasing borrowings we have made up to
this year when with the Loan market less likely to provide the loan moneys
we needed, we have had to budget for a substantial deficit in the vicinity.
of 6270m. That deficit has been calculated after we have taken into
account the natural growth we could expect in the financial year 1966-67.
In the first place, we have a firm statement by Mr. Calwell before the
Policy Speech is introduced that it will contain various proposals. Each
has been carefully costed, and the total cost will be 0300m. in the first
full year of office.
When you come to the Policy Speech, on page 3, under Social
Services, a number of figures are given as estimates of the costs in a
full year. There are one or two of these which I suggest should be
further examined against what I shall put to you, but the first of these
was to establish a universal scheme of national welfare. Without going
through all the detail of it, he puts a figure of 6j73m. on that, and no-one
can check that figure precisely, but for my current purposes I am accepting
the figure which he gives.
The second item referred to is to provide a medical entitlement
card for all persons of pensionable age, irrespective of income, and we
believe he has under-stated this one. Even if you were to assume that the
doctors and hospitals would give the same concessional rates to people
regardless of income, and that would be a bold assumption in the face of the
known views of the medical profession, the cost would be about more
than his estimate of 014m. In other words, the minimum figure we would put 
0
* I.
,1 
2. 66/ 224
on it would be 019m. I have the Minister of Health here, and he tells me
that the realistic view to put on this is to be taken against the known
background of the attitude of the medical profession. On the face of it,
why should the medical profession give a concessional rate of treatment to
a very wealthy man who just happens to have reached pensionable age.
If we were to put a bill on that one, in the light of the current attitude
of the profession, we would get a figure of 033m., and not $ 14m. or 419m.
whiLch we would regard as the minimum. Mr. Calwell proposed to provide
half pensions for all persons over 70, and gives a figure of 072m. for that.
Liberalised deductions of permissible incomes by deducting only
one dollar on every two dollars earned above the permissible income for
full pension entitlement. He puts an estimated cost of $~ 20m. on this.
Social Services feel this cannot be checked precisely until the experience
of it is gained, but a very much higher figure is regarded as a more
realistic one. Increased payments for child endowment for the second and subsequent
children $ 52m., and we don't challenge that.
Double existing maternity allowances. He gives a figure of 07m.
which is accepted.
0Double funeral benefits. He has erred in the wrong direction
here. One wonders how it could have been arrived at. The cost he puts
at ve2Im.. The total cost last year was kl. 49m.
Increased grants under the Aged Persons Homes Act. Three
dollars for each dollar raised. He estimated the cost at 4152m. Again an
easy calculation could be made there, and it is difficult to see why he
should have been in error by under-estimating this one by ; 2j or 6~ 3m.
Estimated expenditure for 1966-67 for Aged Persons Homes is 9m on a two
for one basis. But it is not in the social services area that the failure to
calculate appears, because there he has set out each of the items, and
while anyone can query some of them as I have just done, it is significant
that he omits any costing figure against the other items except a few of
those that have been specified, e. g. he talks about establishing a joint
parliamentary committee to review repatriation and its administration,
particularly now that the value of repatriation benefits has in each
inst~ ance fallen to a very low level. " We will enable all World War I
returned men to be treated under repatriation whether their disabilities
were war caused or not. " 1 We have moved for this in Parliament several
times, and Government members have voted against it. " We will give the
benefit of the doubt to Servicemen when medical opinion differs as to the
origin of the disability. Wie will also grant medical benefits to the
wives of TPI pensioners."' Again, no reference to the cost.
The best stab the Treasurer has been able to make on that is
to 010m. When we come to education, there are two items to which he makes
specific reference. 920m. a year to State education departments, and a
payment of qp22m. a year to lay teachers in non-Government schools.
He talks of the adoption of the Martin committee's proposals for Commonwealth
assistance to teacher training, but does not itemise cost.
If the whole cost were to be met by the Commonwealth, this would require
a maxi~ mum amount of $~ 56m. If the States were willing to share the cost,
this figure would be reduced to $ 27m.
Free hospital services as part of its national health scheme.
Labor will, in the next three years, re-establish free hospital services.
He gives no figure, but the firm estimate on this is 0~ 90m.
He mentioned one particular tax matter. Country industry and
consumers to be free from the sales tax levied on the amount by which the
cost of goods and products is increased by certain charges. 015m. there. 
3 66/ 225
War Service Homes allocation to be restored to 075m. There is
another 17m. He also speaks of the loan limit being raised to 010,000,
and the rationing scheme to be ended. Either he means this to be done
inside the Y75m. in which case there would be fewer people who could
benefit or else this is additional to the 075.
Industrial matters. Equal pay. In the Commo nwealth Public
Service he talks about equal pay. If female employees' pay was brought
up to the males' in the same employment category, the estimated cost would
be 05m a year. If it means eliminating the difference between male and
female basic wage, with some necessary adjustment to marginal rates,
the estimated cost to the Commonwealth Public Service would be about 014m.
in a year. Large additions to the National wages bill could be expected
to follow because once the Government gives-this kind of lead, the tribunal
is not slow to apply this to other categories.
If four weeks' annual leave were given to the Public Service,
it would not be long before industry would be pressing for a change also.
Employment of additional workers to provide replacements would be necessary.
The cost would be about $ 13m.
Another big item he hasn't mentioned except as a policy intention
is that all the Federal Tax paid by road users is to be spent on roads.
There is 6~ 75m. a year extra in that.
One per cent of national income to be devoted to foreign aid.
Taking the difference between what we now spend and a full one percent,
there is an extra
On the items which the Treasury felt it could estimate with a
reasonable degree of certainty, they got a total of between % 00~ m and
6675m. a year, but this was exclusive of the following items which are
mentioned to you.
The policy on defence which Mr. Calwell mentions both in relation
to equipment made in Australia in comparatively small volume which would
certainly be much more costly than getting it from countries that are making
it in much greater amounts, the reliance on our own resources very largely
both of manpower and equipment. No-one can seriously imagine that these
policies would keep our treaty arrangements intact, nor could we place
anything like the same reliance upon them in the future. I have not
known him at any stage to say the defence vote should be reduced. On the
contr-ary, he rather suggests it should be increased. There is no provision
in his statement for any estimate of increased cost.
Rural matters. When that $ 600-946? 5m calculation was made, the
rural items had not been announced, and there are further costs involved
there. War on poverty has been declared, but there has been no figure
indicated as to what this will cost, not even in a general sense.
This has been put in as a nil factor, just as in the case of clhld endowment
payments to be capitalised for home purchase. If any number of people
were to take advantage of this, it becomes immediately a budgetary burden.
This leaves open the question as to whether this was the way child endowment
was to be employed. The whole basis was to make that payment direct
to the mother in aid of the maintenance of the child in her care. Whether
a lump sum payment could be used for the purchase of a house is a matter
which. I would argue.
Education. Items listed for which he suggests no cost.
Taxation. To ensure taxation is levied and deductions are
allowed in a more equitable manner. Some of the salient items of taxation
increase or relief are: a capital gains tax, from which they would hope
to secure some revenue, although I notice Mr. Calwell last night said
this would not apply to the little people. Just who the little people
are when a capital gain is involved, remains to be clearly defined. 
S
i I(-
recalled66/ 226
It will be realdby any Canberra regulars that one item which
is always pressed by the Labor Party when taxation legislation is under
discussion is the relief or deduct'ion for taxation purposes of the payment
of fares. That was not specifically mentioned, but it has been every
time they mentioned tax legislation over recent years. There would be a
cost of 653m. involved if that were adopted.
Economic development. " The Labor Government will under-write
provision of adequate capital and will improve existing administration."
There must be a cost involved there.
Housing. Adequate grants to the States to build homes at the
lowest possible interest rate. Subsidies for tenants or purchasers.
The homes finance division of the Commonwealth Bank to provide finance to
a limit of õ 10,000. The raising of these limits, both in the case of War
Service Homes and housing finance under the Homes Finance Division,
proposed to be set up, would inevitably have an effect on all other
government schemes where a limit applies. It applies to housing in
Canberra and in the Northern Territory and other places, and there would
be a general reaction from this which would add considerably to the cost.
These are not items, although they are set out in the Policy Speech, and
iere taken into account in the Treasury calculation. These were regarded
as being incapable of precise costing, but if given effect to would
undoubtedly involve very heavy additional costs.
I repeat that the original document which set out to say that
the total cost of the programme each item carefully costed and
covering Means Test, Social Services, Health, and other matters would
be 0300m. was quite misleading and indeed one might use a stronger word
than that to describe it.
Most of you will have seen the publication " Eight Famous
People Challenge you to Think". You will also have noted the reference
in Mr. Citlwell's Policy Speech to the view of the late President Kennedy
on Vietnram. " Labor views on Vietnam are supported by opinions expressed
by the late President Kennedy and by other distinguished Americans like
his two brothers, Senators Robert and Edward Kennedy and by Senators Fullbright
and Mansfield and 24 other outstanding Senators."
"~ The President and his two brothers voted against the appropriation
for policies to be carried out in Vietnam.' As I understand the
position, they supported the present President on that issue as their
brother in his term supported the general policy of President Eisenhower.
Source references are a letter that the late President Kennedy despatched
dated March 3 1963 to a Mrs. Prendergras who had lost a brother in Vietnam.
" Eight Famous People Challenge you to Think" contains a picture
of the late President and a quote attributed to him was not sympathetic
to the policies which were being followed in Vietnam. ' There was no
source reference and no date mentioned.
In the letter mentioned above, President Kennedy said " Americans
are in Vietnam because we have determined that this country must not fall
under Communist domination. Shortly after the division in Vietnam eight
years ago, it became evident that they could not successfully defend themselves
without extensive assistance from other nationa of the free world.
A book by Sorensen on the late President Kennedy is accepted
without challenge as an authoritative work, conveying the late President's
views. On 2.8.61 President Kennedy said: The United States is determined
that the Republic of Vietnam shall not be lost to the Communists.
President Johnson has said " We have learned that retreat does
not bring safety, and weakness does not bring peace." 
66/ 22 7
QESTION: P. M.
QUESTION: P. M.
QUESTION: P.
qUSTION: P. M.
QUESTION: P. M.
QUESTION: P. M.
QUESTION: P. M. Will you be making any statement on the South Australian
application for a loan to build a natural gas pipeline from
Gidgealpa to Adelaide?
I am seeing the Premier this afternoon, and cannot say
anything before then.
You said money could not be given before the next government
came in.
I said constitutional practice was that after Parliament had
been dissolved, governments did not take substantial decisions
on new matters of policy until the electiois had been determined
and the in-going government could look at it. I also
said this would be among the first business to be looked at.
It was not practical to deal with the matter just before the
dissolution of the parliament, and also the attitude of the
other States is involved.
Would you comment on the formation of the Basic Industries
Group? I read about it in the daily press. There has been no
mention made of it to me. I have tried to make my own
attitude to our coalition government abundantly clear by
public statement. Last week in Goulburn, the only electorate
so far where I have spoken where there have been both Liberal
and Country Party candidates seeking that seat which is not
held by either at the present time both candidates were on
the platform with me, and I said to the meeting that it was my
wish that the best man should win.
Does the Liberal Party accept the help that this group is
offering?
So far as the Liberal Party is concerned, our policies and
attitude are expressed in statements by our official candidates,
by the public advertisements, radio and telecasts, and under
the authority either of a named member of the Parliamentary
Party or the candidate or a specified official of the Party.
Do you regard this new bid by this group as aiding the
Liberal Party?
When there is not a clear alternative government offering in
the eyes of a great many people.
What consideration has the Commonwealth Government given to
Adelaide's request for a Festival Hall?
This is not just a Festival which services Adelaide, but
has a standing throughout the Commonwealth. I would look
on this matter not unhelpfully.
The Catholic Bishops recently sent you a letter pointing out
the needs of the Catholic Education System. Would you comment?
I have replied to that letter, pointing out what this government
and the previous one had done in this field.
We have done a great deal. 
00 
66/ 228
QESTION:
P. M.
QUESTION: P. M.
0 Has the Commonwealth any interest in determining the State
boundaries regarding natural gas, and has any State Premier
asked you to intervene in this?
This falls within the administration of the Minister for
National Development. I recall no particular request.
I did receive a visit from representatives of the oil and
gas interests who fe~ t that the contemplated legislation
was too restrictive and was unreasonable in their eyes.
There have been meetings between the appropriate State
Ministers and the Commonwealth Minister, and he feels good
progress has been made from these.
The Australian High Commissioner in England has criticised
the migration authorities there. Have you any comment?
The High Commissioner is much closer to the problem, and he
is a man who knows his own mind and is accustomed to speak in
a very responsible way. I take his comments as being
valuable comments from the Australian point of view.
I do not involve myself in action at this stage.
0 .6 



EMBARGOED UNTIL 7.15 P. M. 15TH ILOVEMBER, 1966
NATIONAL BROADCAST NO.
3Y THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
Education is important to every Australian and
vital to the nation. Under the Federal Constitution education
is listed as a responsibility of the States, but, a share
of responsibility has been t'aken by a number of authorities
and each has its part to play.
In recent years the Commonwealth jovernment has
come into the picture in a more direct fashion. It has,
for a much longer time, helped the States by the growing
size of the -eneral grants made from Commonwealth revenues.
These are male available to the States each year, without
any strings attached. They are the largest source of
State revenue. In the last Budget introduced by a Labor Jovernment,
the . rant was 141 million. Last year it was ; 757 millions,
and This year it will be ' 817 millions. A factor in
determining the size of the grant to each State is the
growth in that State's population. Since most of the
population increase consists of children, the States
automatically gain more finance each year for education.
The States have substantially increased their
own expenditure on education. This has risen from
.92 millions in 1950-51 to .: 594 millions in 1965-66
more than a six-fold increase.
Education is the biggest item in the Budget of
any State, and accounts for approximately one-third of
that State's expenditure.
But the Commonwealth in addition to providing
increasing general revenue for the States, has greatly
increased its own expenditure on specific forms of
education. In 1960-61, we soent "' 49.7 millions. Last year
this had grown to -125.2 millions. This year it will be
':, 155.8 millions. Included in this total are grants to the States
for universities which take un about one-third of the
total. Nearly -20 millions will go to the Australian
National University and more than .25 millions for
assistance to Australian students, mainly through
Commonwealth Scholarships. The remainder is made up
with such items as grants for technical schools, grants
for science facilities, research projects, colleges of
advanced education and international aid, which enable
many students from overseas to have the benefit of
education in Australia.
WThen we came into office there were 30,000 stadents
at our universities and university colleges. Today there
are 92,000 the number has trebled in seventeen years 
-2-
while the population has increased by less than half.
In our first year, full-time teachin and research staff
at the universities was 1,296 one or every t;, enty-four
students. Today there are 5.600 or one for every
sixteen students. Ours the first Government to
introduce special tax allowances to parents for education
expenses. This impressive record is surely proof of our
sincere desire to do what we can in this field.
jie now -vropose further assistance to education.
Here are some highlights
8 million a year over the next three
financial years for the construction mand
equipment of new colleges for teacher
training throughout Australia. At least
ten per cent of the places at these
colleges are to be reserved for teachers not
bonded to State Education Departments.
intend to double the amount available to
independent schools for science laboratories.
So important has the Commonwealth's provision for
education become and so highly do we desire an education
system adequate lor the strenth and welfare of the nation,
that we will establish for the first time in Federal
history, a Commonwealth Ministry of Education and Science.
( This talk will be broadcast by the A. J. C.
inter-state network at 7.15 Tuesday,
November, 1966) 



E3AiRGOED 4p
NOT FOR RELEASE BY PlY LDIA EFORE 7.30 P. M. ;:. EDYNESDAY, 16TH
" AUSTRALIA' S SECURITY"
Transcript of Election Telecast by the Prime Minister,
Mr. Harold Holt
Throughout this year there has been a great national
debate in Australia auout South Vietnam. This has been so
widely discussed that most people now know where they stand.
The side issues have been eliminated. The great
question ofsecurity that has emerged may be stated simply:
Are we right in joining with our allies to stop aggression
before it spills over into all South East Asia. re we
right in joining with our friends to stop aggression before
it comes near to our shores? , Je think we are right and
we believe that the majority of Australians support us.
Let me put this to you simply: Our fighting in
South Vietnam is buying time for a new and stronger Asia.
This is not a commitment to war; it is a commitment to
peace and freedom.
The whole world, with the exception it would seem,
of Communist North Vietnam and Communist China, wants peace
in Vietnam, as it wants peace everywhere. The olive branch
has been extended time akter time out has been rejected by
Hanoi and Peking.
Communists in Vietnam and China do not want peaceful
negotiations which could guarantee the right of the people
of South Vietnam to choose their own way of life. They
demand a surrender a withdrawal by the friends and allies
of South Vietnam so that South Vietnam may be taken over
by Communism. There are, of course, people in Australia who disagree
with our policy and with America's policy. They have
produced no practical alternative out their views seem to
be, when reduced to hard, realistic terms that we should
make peace with the Communists by giving them what they
want. Peace is not a one-way traffic. Vie and our allies
are ready and willing to talk peace when Peking and Hanoi
are ready. 3ut vie are not willing to surrender to them.
There is too much at stake for South Vietnam,
for South East Asia, for Australia, for the whole Free World.
The Communists must learn that South Vietnam and the
allies of South Vietnam will not lose heart, will not be worn
down, but have the strength and staying power to defend the 
-2-
right of every people to choose their own political institutions
and their own social and economic order.
:. hen that day arrives we shall be found amongst
those helping our Asian neighbours to acquire the food, the
wealth, the skills, the education and the strength they
need. This is the kind of involvement we want with the
new Asia. Most Australians understand by now that we can't
separate our domestic affairs from our foreign affairs.
e can't have prosperity and security at home unless we
have security abroad.
So we have joined with others in paying a price
for our freedoms.
We have accepted responsibilities and obligations.
1Ke believe that unless there is security for all
small nations there cannot ue security for any small nation.
That is why we played our part in the making of the
SEATO and ANZUS treaties.
That is why I have welcomed the fruitful talks I've
had with Prime Minister Harold Wilson and his Defence
Minister, Denis Healey, on security problems East of Suez.
That is why we believe strongly in our American
alliance. You have only to look at the map of this part of
the world to see we have a vital interest in the effective
presence and participation of the United States. There
are unfortunately some people in Australia who would like
to see our American alliance weakened. I wonder why.
Our international interests are directly involved
in preserving South East Asia from aggression and from
Communist domination. That is how three successive
American Presidents have measured the situation. Surely
that is how all people who believe in freedom and rejecT
tyranny should see it.
What alternative is offered by our political
opponents? They offer this country a retreat to
isolationism and a walk-out on our friends. The Australian
people will not accept that alternative.
( This Telecast will be programmed by the A. B. C. Network at
7.30 p. m. 1 th November, 1966) 



S EM3ARJOED UNTIL 7,15 P. M. 18TH NOVEMBER, 1966
NATIONAL JROADCAST fO. 4
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
Much has been said in this election campaign about
Australia's security. You know there is a wide gulf of
difference uetween the policies of the Government on defence
and those of the Opposition. Mr. Calwell leads a Party which
so reduced Australia's defence expenditure in the post-war
years that its last Budget that of 1949/ 50 provided only
1,116 million for our total defence bill. The vote for defence
had been slashed year by year from 1945/ 46 onwards.
Our Budget provision this year is $ 1,000 million,
six times that of the last year of Labor rule. We don't
regard even this substantial expenditure as making Australia
self-sufficient in defence nor has that been our intention.
We have known we would have little scope for other desirable
objectives if the Defence bill were to go too high. Ve have
wished to maintain a vigorous development policy while, at the
same time, acting to keep the nation secure.
' e have strengthened Australia's security by joining
under the SEATO and ANZUS Treaties with allies who have the
same determination to resist communist aggression as ourselves.
In recent years geography and circumstance have made
Australia part of the Asian scene. Our trade with Asia has
grown rapidly. It now takes more than 30 per cent of our
exports against half that percentage a few years ago. Our
exports to Asia in 1958/ 59 were $ 368 million. In 1965/ 66
they were 8856 million.
Ve signed a trade treaty with Japan in 1957 this
treaty incidentally was strongly opposed by the Labor Party
in the Parliament. In the followin-year we exported $ 204
million worth of goods to that country. This had risen to
471 million in 1965/ 66.
Australia has joined in the group of nine Asian and
South Pacific countries known as ASPIC, formed to further
each other's interests. We rank among the largest contributors
to the capital of the Asian Development Bank.
Recently I led the Australian delegation to the
Conference in anila of the seven nations who have joined
in resisting Communist aggression in South Vietnam. This
historic meeting was not a council of war, it was a council
for peace and freedom. It devoted itself to ways and means
of achieving a just and enduring settlement of the conflict
in embattled Vietnam. 7e adopted Joals of Freedom expressed
in the following terms:-
" WIe the seven nations gathered in Manila,
declare our unity, our resolve and our purpose
in seeking together the goals of freedom in
Vietnam and in the Asian and Pacific areas.
They are:
1. To be free from aggression.
2. To conquer hunger, illiteracy and disease. 
-2-
To build a region of security, order
and progress.
4. To seek reconciliation and peace
throughout Asia and the Pacific."
These are our goals. They are the goals of peacemakers,
not warmongers, and those who Yathered in Manila
with us are the allies that the Labor Party proposes we
should walk out on.
I believe Australia has an important contribution
to make to the security and prosperity of the free countries
of Asia. W" e have great benefits to gain from our friendly
trade and association with them.
We would destroy that bright prospect, perhaps beyond
repair if Australia was to follow the course recommended to
us by the Australian Labor Party.
( This talk will be broadcast by the A. B. C. National
Network at 7.15 p. m. Friday, 18th November, 1966) 



Go LU* MAN
W WLT
0. a L-. HMAN
W. 0 OLT O~ tk Thk fAS5T fti Ykhk4 Thki HAS &amp; JW UbmM4LU4 DVL* MWN
K A NATIONAL . CAlfi IN V4R OF JJ4WLiM~ j 4o'-ThE
AWMKA I-L" T# COAL VIEBA-tMT A. i m iLrL EUNIw. EI&amp;' A TH14
RIi4CG M.% V ISA A Th~ kMkAU~ I* AIK ( A ThEM.
LLECTRIFZICATIOI* fO0OS fiTCe 4J OVUM T L LAt4 fEi AMr. tts ThSEi
Hl 1i4Lf N A NU42EJK OF W. K T1CL Th, 4 tU~ kA1, fiALTH 1~ Fl4U--! 51I LD
BE MAO&amp; ^ VAIL'WU FPM Th1, DVE. LOPWU1IT 4i'% T SM* T Of UL, WON-0
~ OUL A U LUb$ T OMWMOEALTH FUK* i GMT
IS ThIS IN 4 ION TO C~ MOK4ATH FI 3JLV-TS, FCPE I XMfL
IN iof -MLLE # IE HAVE A hidLITARY F-iT-aLX. 4, Ml NT COZ'( 4Ck 4vLL
NO DWST BE XAI9G HEAVY DMkIW!; 0 C V. WLh$ LPl I
UWAZk4TAND THafl AR ! i DIS J. JM C4C' 1IE ( M bUTWfrM Thk ARMWY
AUTitOITILS AN) HJUlCUPAL AUTHcMI7ILS THE~ i I ZM. 1INL WOA
. ik ThIiWIG IN TISIM Of IPIVATE EDL4 AVEL49EMLti THE
fi UIb'WhTi Thil HAiVks
IN FA4RTICJLAk Thk ALUMINA FL4T AT GLiD4TvNL 14 J Pkmt&amp; H~ nVY
LV~ M~ h) S f~ X&amp; K) 4% A 16 CWOWA) v A TPhki t AL i: LLMCITY
HICL 14 Va) Y iiO? OF PIUS4 PiA M) h-k l4koll: 3, Jt th
CO. Nib ARE$ WIFLUIN IN A WJERI OF ikYS WM) ANG42E
T. JxZfn* i Ir F" THL CCWC) S. Wr 1W TO Thi AID
WTHL SO0* 0* AFTk ALL$ ThL CCN" iE Ltt ILL i'l-kNFIT 4 IaJH
AS Mdk bTh.~
OM~ THE Yl-ki%; THI~ t Wt BEE* A COW~ DAL Of 1bZ ON
PINAIGIAL. kL4CSiChl Of LOCAL Ai 0 STME 00Oa-NTh? 6 V HAS baEk
AlGrA4TW BY 4M OF THE LOCAL 0OVEPINING 1) WI~ i Ttf,, T Th~ t W* ULU
BL~ A C4WOWI* LH ZNWA~ IGATZC* E OF THF3E &amp; EJh.. M-NrT Aw&amp; Thli
LIL&amp; % H H. Vh T4*. Et Th JT % Z~ i i 4 PFL. * iW TO J-. I-K 1i. h Tilk
4TATE CLVSVkff , ibW " AL (. AVLhNU~ NT INRME't ldL WMJ~ AN 11i$ JlbYo
RJT FJ TH T 1I1404L Wv, " 99iE UE. tiaTi LY THL tJVHI'INT.
PiE * sftJ TIm IT aAwi WmikJL myT owCaT1. ; JuiIi&amp; my l. kw ; 14
Thkrt kR Thr. , TATL &amp; MI1J* TU, filt LWA; L W" WOVLKN J10 Hilo
BUE* N lMtLTI. fl HL IW!~ L~ kJ TtiI.. U TMhR ON TKUI " 14) NH
UN.-. NIbW4Y lEJLGTLD IT* 1 00 iJ OM Ir Thifrii lh' 4' 
0 61/ 199
RUN AY 010M OF XNIC WT6H1M*. N QALLY ThE-LO". LL
LOCL., TO roil 4 G0VUX4VC* THE STT GOVENT IN TURN L( XZS
TO THEF . m~ A~ GOOtElf MO I CAN GIVE VW t UDEA IN THE
AAY 0JIk tiMISIOX FCC STAUh V4J3* 5 HAS EXPAM" I OVih iICET~ M YLAES,
AND If I P Ii s ATH THh AA41 IJ41W Of UFFlch OF Tha. L." I
I* ARTY IN 10A ALTWA' PAUEM To Thi 4T46 IVWII114 PIN-4CIAL
AUSL. TAXE WIANTS, AID IFM WADU ALLATJO Of~ LOAN6 PAYMkM? 6 1( 1
NW. t;, j~ ft NM' Alb HW41N6C 2= 4hINO ( TH15 14 A WIf4TAU UkM) Thl
TOTAL IPAYMBNTS FM hL. qPAT"~ BY ThL CCW" 41ALTH aAU * 202OU060
4k THAT TIM# 9 AW IN OWJ LAz. T XX1GLTAE L. IAT1D Du1' TOThL 1+ 040H*
ivAS ONEl THW: SAM TOO IWMID AND THIRTY KJ~ MILLION 0= 45I~ AiI1H
IS JJ.. OVM3 SIX TIMES THE TOTAL Of 1949 W* RALLY DIEN YWV HAV
MD) T ( iLY ThEC f41,3IUN OF TtiC ST4TE GOVa6h?. T TO 1; A -KW AT F TH4'' IR~
iitSWK9~ ES NUT THE SEMI-GCVNWNTAL PhC( 3AMiE 4 0* 1K CUT? AITH THE
STA'Z! -T 4 To~ iZAE NEARD AS A R~ EAA) WARLE WP1iS~ OP DI4G
VCR 4sz. cvaim ur 1% tJPEst AND Ltis 14, hEN UX) LhATmhTE a
FL* 34IL,% C* 01iI ON -Ad) s TKYE ArAEE AT ThEi WAN 0. AlU1. IL MHINJG
AWJt$ UhL , TkThSo No~ ToAT IS ihEk M% TW: STAN i4T T1, JE.*# EkT
TIUU. IT MA~ Y bE tiI T IN " k~ i PARTICULRi 0~ 1JWiTA* CE TU:. A~ 41LL
Aik 4 TO THS G1U%*"-L Lh TO AS4S5T IN Thl-1 FiROVZ. 40N OF i* VICES
FRk CO1W(* ALTH UhAhT* ING AM) I IRLLAn! i THJ'%' A~ 4ING RU: 46Di TO
LOMZ AT THOSE 06,0941 * Elih To~ tE WAS i EEN AN ASNUkMAL D&amp;) EN I-L2CW
W 4TA; T&amp; Mt AMCIiAL ' LfrP. VlCk$ BY ThE COWNON4ALTH GOVPIWT. ThLKM
Akh Mhk~ CAMES * Ml~ 4.11AXlJQ Thth W* ONELTh DOIN'T CE NtOIM T
Thd &amp; WEXII TURIL 16 Of WMJQ AN 43WAL UMJWAPJ MULI TH ) T RE. ILTS
JtE U" A, TO To ( OM" 44TH I( AR ! AA DI1Z.~ A$ 51: AQCEs -A01 VS lIN
THE AMX1ZISAnCN OF YOWlt PCI?, WJAIWI FACILITIES; GLADSTOW
EXMWLEs 01, THE NEP A4O~) HLOUPAWdE. 1RTiMb OF Thii? ! O* T 144VE TO
UE LO( ED AT ON THEIP U! PIT BY The. COMMOWEVALTh GOVERaSiTo rth~ 1'
CWWL ! E As I iMY SCNE PIVi~% TE UMP-lSS AW) EVu.( ThEf .4401 tCS
HEWV A WUJN ON TilE STATE AND iAft4ICIfZL AVkI TY Th tT TO DO THE
JOB FCTIVELY OR SKiUWD GIVE 5CM~ HELI BUT TikT 1Z NC* MALLY DONE
MY Th STATE OV&amp; IOsENT AFILYINGM) A SPECIJAL ALL( Y~, TIC* W4) Eh THE
THE 4DM* IGOVk&amp;* NTAL K1~ X1( AASE.
1% g ALL* J EXPLAN4ATION A4 t STAiTUS GIVE IN -ECTH3M A H-OL
kypb6y S, 
0ls l
A
":.: PNTNG BULJY. TI sILL I " t1 ThEY MAD Mh LOAL COVU. NIC B( D. IE AS = C3ING
0114= yL 4IThIN THEiIR J1JRTSDIVITT( 17 UE C j". 91LTH I~ ABUL
TC DO ANY " S IT giCULD M OCIZ IT FMi ThL STAT159 THL. STAM~.
CA K L? T0004NA Q. 1T04T EDwP
ThIE Lo" L~ GovraNMj bDiu, AMo Th. tT is UNWiuwaM) AL I now*
Thl CC* OMOMALT. If IT # MBE A PRINCIPAL IN ThiE MATT11 CMW
P3MAPS At %&amp; ING LL( CAYIC14 IN A MAY THAT Phik : a-AT&amp; KNoeI Th*
MU1TTMY OF THAT PAMTICJL4R AREA MAY BEG40 IT Dash( L* TIokM4E
TO ITS M~ EWS*
AS YOU WAVE VISITED OJ" T04 P&amp; iW4S YOU 4M M AMILIAR 4Mh ORAT
4 CAL Thl GAP SMDW9 DAWIN05 Tl NMOA f 1VER FOR IRRiIGATION
ame I CAMSIU SAY I A" MSMCALLY MMJ I wTH TM Cl OMSTAWKSV OF
Mr DOi 4www CUM NxMIN THE PwOVINc Of THE MIM PM
KATOM DMWLCWf NT AMD ftIV( NIC* FME NTHEPM DEVEM~ I4T
THS NARM OP AMICULTWME AMO NOC" ZCS RM) A REPTf ON THIS
1S * M; k AM AM Thk MIPOS õ tEPCSTW V. I AS œ BEINM
UMICONMNCAL* THIS IAM-T M4A NT Yl WEN lIERfAiWo RAVI YOU
AM INDICATIC~ lM IT MONhT SE PRLF4S= E?
4UL I CAPIT GIVE IT NUT I MOILL MAKA. EMM2M3L MDl iLE 11 1 CAN
b" Ly T ml XV0m" IOW TOo Nk IAV* lN1) k IN THIS
PtC SP5WK FM AN E~ XTRA A" MJN TO ME b~ ttf OVER A fdICO~ I
ThlN 4W# 000# 000# iwU 11 AMOUNT Kl~ lkl To 1II THL POLICY MKMC3
AND THIS li TO UE IN ADDITION TO ATEVER THE~ 5TATES AR~ E CUIRRENT4LY
SMI4M CN aATE9 Coll" iVATIONe AR151NO OUT Of -WI EMILIM PC4ICY
$ PEQIW K AVI SET UP A INATS CONWVT1ONl C0UNL AND TRUSE AkE
CA IE LARGOE P00JECTS 0010 ON TI0JG THE STATZ5 AT THlE PI4ESMN
TIME* WE DO) HAVE A M OF REJRTS IN M5CM THE 4UUkLANOD
GOVRh~ FMS VMIiCAS NtATER -IRVJ CTS Tlt: E NEE CMJRENTLY
UNDER INT0,09OPARTMMAL M~ JY MT? I AILL SiEE IF I CAN C-ST V00HIMM
sIECIFIC PC~ YCU ON IT&amp;
HIWL VOU iq~ lhlE A TELIEiAhl CM THE ILlki4 ( COUNCIL 00 THIti KATa.
NUT VhT I W AA t hCf r, aluT li -, Vi GCtf tu CAAMA kW * W
04"~ T UlJ 111I, yET. 
" If. QFNING BULLETIN"
mb, IW a
mizis GXER lswl* lb
1115 &amp;&amp; W t Rall
u uu " I
0 ThEY MYVISW U~ i VAT IT U* ENT rviWc~ h AWC THAT ? HWY 4vJLD
MS YOU TO M* E A STAMM NT0 THIS 10iILSY YW O E WIEP.
THIS HAS WOT MN ARGUQI TC MY NOTIC~. ME CAM CKMi
M4AT HAS MUK IN N~ OR CANBEIWA AM) 4L MAY 89 ABU&amp; TO W~
SWK INPORMTIOK CW IT THIS EwernGo -4 -MLL B3E ThYIWZ
TO oo THIS AFTIM THIS WTING*
VOU 10E At THEt MIO&amp; Ow ULS( 4M
ND*
AS YOU KINM 4 NOT ONLY NNtW PJ* APD THhET ab Ria gCELY
0KWV Of A XM L4W ARSA LWINMiVELWo.
( A T* V* LAOT hILHT YOU SAID IF~ ThE A UPWC* IN
VIIYKAM 0SA FSCALATED W! Th4LIA SUBJXT TO ITS OMhX
WWTWXuS AM ASOUIRcES 4OUwD CMTRIB: a lJNHslTATItZLY*
is TH~ B M 4" EASON To BELhLVE TH1314is GoMt To BE -* y
INMASE IRF'SCALATION THIJlK.
00 Y~ V ALL AIMM, 8 Th'T IT . iAWNT 50 MUCH A sTATfmEKt
sy kum AS A REPLY TO A ' 4JWbTION FY Tri Me As A
HYMIhkTIZAL P( OPOSITIOK IF TuRE ! AS AM INMVASE IR THE
51VISION MADE 1Y U LES " LD WJUhALIa ALSO MKE
I aEASE. o ANDINhNK ITUATION IH\ D TO GIVE MY
A4' 44 IN IkATHE* S10 ) D T8W SWW I I TINK W D) EALT
isllh OVER THIR~ TY 4" 10WQ IN 41 MINUTES. .*, bTt WS
ANA~ MSAICHIN lTi HEOUSE OF RMESINT41VES STANDANtDS
IS MALY WA) MATTIlO. I ' 4S DELIBERIATELY TRYING TO
KWTlA6U SW lA QL U O L 1Ar
THAT ON THf. GR~ IUAL 444114-h ON4 THE ATTITMi) A 4 II01 A;* T
I THINK IMD A FAILY LENM Y C* XONMY
MANIL~ o* IO IS CIN MCCMD# AM) * AT I is4 5AYXMC, INi œ ZFFULAtoT
N1QIWT# aA THAT# IF CIRCJMIS-ANCE DEV~ LQatf PME
CALLED I A SJGM1fCANr 39CFEASE IN r--OVISC* E BY
CUR ALLIES21HM I MET IT PR~ OPER Th T * JUTIALIA %= UW
LOCK TO ITS 00WWTITON SMEC TO T11Z CCMIDIMATIO4Z I
MENTIOW9 x" Jx ONTS mmfIO4T 1w IN m0H On~ FcTImrS
AM CUR :, AFPIYY TO HUXLF Efi'Llkl ON IXIN FIC 
MR4 Mb A MAL
4ITHk-MI TkALIAU4 MAKILA M" M " nKW TU SE0M" Wk ) AWt 1~ Ff. XrICtW I" ASIX
WI EM6C55 I 3A1D IhAT M INE TO TI" E 4 OID REVIEW Thl
III1IMC IN INS LION? OF 44ATEVE DAMED W THE DECISIM 1114~
400; tolk T*. M 44A THE DECISIONS OF THF ^ ZABIME Ak0 TWKE AnTIk THE
ADVICE OF US lXPMfl ADMERS9 ThAT 7X= i f1E THE i= l DECISION
STHE UATTS0M? T W RHAU U0lh ND IfSENINO OF THE~ S11T4ATICM
TO A4101 I COUWD CURRNKLY POINT# 1 THINK THE MILITARYT OPE. PATICNS
ARA GO1NS 4MC 4UL AND 14 W98R OF DEFDCTIUNS APPEAR~ TC BL
HAVE YOU MN PAR~ TICULAR K4A6 FOR VISITING lI014, AMPT0Ns W(
1W IND&amp; THAT CA1PICcMICA IS AGAZN, l MW
I 00K'? A5M" MY 1TlWARI1hl THK STATE M6IISTII ABEAM"
V" xk AND I AM TM M. IEJ1LW MUWN OF IJ50AL DEMCMCY FMR
ThgK ? M s4*" w $ u. M
I THINK 1 44 IN~ lic~ k* ThZ 5I O T ~ ME A SHM. IEEFLa
YEAAMK O4 I WA$ IN MXY* RM BMWI~ A LOhWS1 TIME IN ODNMTC
wmT THE if. ILICTIm DtHE mo I? ma 1Cm REAsL7* 4 411Q I a1.1
Ai9UCIATSO MhINALK THAT I 9M2W NOT COWIlS MY.-W&amp; TO
UMR( LITAN CUAhES IN VICTORIAS XoS*. AND IN THIS STATt. I
THINK I0 WT WE MARTH IN WEST AUMTALIAt OUT TVISE WAS A TIME
1ACTCR TH91 AM I HA-V1 OM1 RSINT YEARS MANE A 1AIRLY IXTUIVEY
TOM tF IMUVVNT MAEAS OF wT ATIALIA9 I THINK ITcjoa
THAT 04 3UJLD GOT QMTIDI T1HE CAPITAL4i AsiAl ThAT IS RTCAL
AM I HAD A VERY SAMR ROMPTION IN A0 A~ lfl ( NAFX IN Thk ZZOm
Of 3EM RAIMLY) * E I CAM rMUsGH DILCE 30 1 AS GLAD 4HEX
1IS TMHT rsiIS HAD ULM IMM. W U Thk ITI* MY.~
NI** L. ATN 4iAL IN MMY~ YWiTLSAY ? kTh,% T Hg zAL" i AJCA L1-170
CKALL4WM1 VW TO A t. Vo Fhk( AMi* DID VW kbCLIVL THIS LLkTTh~ l
WUL ' G4N IT HAVE ONE TO CAMMUIA. I " O* 4TJ Mhr Th~ r HEa
DW IDS M AXi A LLThIA Us DIA IT 010 COI4AIN AMC AN INVIT. iMl'. 4
I CAX AEU WIME THAT IG9 &amp; TL* H4 1 To -4AE OF THE
DEY1CZ4 IN LJDU TOOJIE 1LAP W LIC INMEAJ IN A GROUP * ICH* SO F,%
Dostut SEM To * HL AMfICTED MLtJlM I9ta-il XO PAR Ai I HWL LEN 
is-L M~ M IW IM MWONka 4LL HAV T LN Thi&amp; 4WAY A$( VT
QINi " 1 01* A0111CES. I XAVh UREN IN KUIiCUi W~ I
I" THTY ASW.~ kI CUGET ThzPMODOfQVJ . FliIA N
W( M OWT1if9 I ONT SU1 1Y HE sKiJLr GuT reI! M jils~ jZkib
AITThMPI aThcT W~ fM A&amp; A CA) 0IDATEs NINE E~ i * MhIND To
41~ W VAX WINU1~ NIS VX104 IUM. ZGLY THAT I &amp; AT COAI
HAVA TO 00#
APE YOJ ABlE TO TAKE YCWO REMlIEWS TO TH JLAMI AW ? URTHtI
YCU SAID TKAILAW 4AN1 GOIND TO PLAY AX INCRINGW P PAT IN VISTNAMO
I PANIT THINKIhNi OF VWWTA aO MUM As Mig FP# T THAT THAILAWO
USCO OF T&amp; IE PRUIFO4E otUCo " Avg Mimavlopi I~ UTOhAPIPLNA I)
XVLO HAVI PLAY AN ZNUhEA4NO1 PART IM ihLATIoa TO C() OJMI$ T
G(* ILLA ACTIVITIES, MI) Tna mmS uMt. n Va5y MJGW to ThWN NMK4
ALL ALM DIAT DAhilk dS ThdPS. YOU MAY IEMIXM ThAT AT AN
WAILikli~ PART OF Tbtl Wit~ i I WUI~ ThAr 10. i A# BVOE .4= 4JL IN
l&amp; lRhhATM1 LM&amp; KI AL MILITARY OPJ4ATI( NS IN VIETNAM I TMMXMT
VW 4JLO RIND THE t4Ikl C AhTIM TO THL # ME TYPICAL OVWILLA
N TL7VITI&amp; S AND I hAVE AL405Y FELT TO MAAL oolth THKS MATTES
SATl4FCT(* LY ThNIRL HiAD TO KS A POWIICAL MIATION AND SCWTICSI
DDIVID MOMs THAT MBOOT1TOE 01HI$ I* 2 V; IN4 IALA a. ? PJM
By IRININO THE SIIUATZC* UJMN~ CONhOL BY MILZT* JY EMS TH 4T 4
MWO DUAL OF 41lWII VXJ; DAMM3IIC ACMMETIS tISTSD JY CfL. LA
ThWOC~ i A CCWiPAIiVELY SMALL NUAWI OF fI-EMLE HE
A41 A ISA THICN ICH I wILL WE MDMTINC TONICHT * 41H I HWP
wILL ADA P WE MTWO TO THIS AAANmO. I VIW IT
F~ tW~ 1LETo DEAL jieIl IT AT A PUBLIC MWINC THAN flUIM XT THIs
HAS KP( I= t A# OPPOIT1UNITY TO CLEAN UIP SC&amp; OF Th UCiliITi
THIRE % AS ONE POINT A41,: H I THINK NIGHT IF. MSS~ ED o W4&amp;. ALfKL. S
ALLEGMTIH NME AMR ThAN CiCE THAT 1.1 BELIMiV6 THmAT THERE * As $ Cak
UM&amp; Ik AMhAKAWAT MtWi INTO AT NAKU as m WTICN OF TROM. J
THISR NO MWATION F4R THAT diATEWR.
Mho W4EWIN Ili kVOITE) AS $ AYIW 1N MALfWKNE KWAROICU THR L14KhAL
P IITY C4W&amp; AliGM IN WES~ T AMj'iTtAULA TiAT HEM lb OMMZ2RNO"* V1 To ti,
WIN. SAC1 A SECUND TIME. o YVWhPOD CAL 0=, M-5 TO) MAKii WBJT
THE MASIC IVJSTILS ( KUP ;; f1C1 TO HiS. i V HE~ 5RL IN TWCHk f' 4Th
yoW A&amp; Utv THIS*
0
0 
so i H; 4J NoT I THINK I MADE INY MITXION ( CX4 A&amp; UT ThE
" A~ IC INDUS1J5hib ( jjOW4 I HAVE MU W: J CMCNVC M C JWIC14IW
wiT~ m A ,4 TH n~ sr I l Of THEWA LICE A4S .44 1
READ 1 THE KW 1 00IM W4 4 TY AE A T HL~ Ii
MOTIVES AM MW THAN ilHAT I HAVE AW IN THE 1I~ EASU W
* Wf U PSAWADW IN INS NTT RENIT THAT * IAT THOY Wi IND~
M UO k PICS AW THAN MbOIX AS 10I THL MXIsTIC* IN
TN&amp; 9W55 I THIML I VIENTIO0 SCM-iIIW&amp; AWVT THIS MAN# I idAS
aViv masp YAT Pig cWNTY IPART AND thl LIuISAL" HwVi ACTIM~ Y
CCIETU 00h NITN RAW OTHOI AT RLETON TIME~ AM XTH THUSE
SEATS THAT PI U) 3 DIS0JS5I%* H4AVE AT ONE POW~ OF TflUE IN
NICINT MaITZCAL HIASOAY MEN NEW BY riE Ll8EWL PAR1Y9 ' JL YcJ
N~~~ UAmaYIN I A LRADZ namsP z# THi c2JNR P* 1Ty lrow As Am
IMXPMI H-WINM MMIWS HIS 10405141HP Of THE cWNrr. Y P.* TY
APP* UMrY A~ TN4 A( Pt " 04QENO~ KA IOTf NY VIN1SIJRAL C" t. JEi
00W OF THE MINISTM0 I ThIN AT THE LA,, T W. zrS4N W* iVkkl
TUkJP 14 A PAUL% dELL E" TAUNL 19AD3ITIW* Of "'~ LTICK = 4N1TAS
DMTAUEI Th PAP Ms TU ZT ftk. H 14 A COALIT1o# wYa.* tK tI
Th 4146. TLA.* A OW~ F#* J AL Q3ALITION'rTis PUIT.* N1Ia
Itb,, J%" WlYUAt* o"~ A AIf' 4ktI4ITIVUi Of VkI N~ th* f~ iJl-A* iM! s .. U
MiaX TO THU,. IN THE HWAJ Of Imhli" rJIW~ i a* ith lWiQ) M ll IAL
'-plamIs Oil THE ADJWUEN MjnTZ* W 4 101 AS I i A IMAM
AT ThE ONLY MURTW I HAVE ADQPES$ i IN Ali AREA AWS DV4OE L L
TW" A CMANE$ T A LIIaAL AND ONPY 5PA)' Y CANDIDATE
SUM 4ME ON MH PLAIFAM dO MY lJ4MIUC* X( Tht AMJDIk 4A, PAY
THI, " Thra big# 


EMBARJOED UNTIL 7.15 P. M. 21ST NOVEMBER, 1966.NATIONAL BROADCAST NO.BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLTIn the course of this campaign 11r. Calwell hassaid our system of selective compulsory National Serviceis immoral, unjust and undemocratic. He was saying thesame thing nearly half a century ago.TPhen the whole world was in arms in . Jorld ' ar IMr. Calwell opposed conscription.V7: hen his own leader, Mr. Curtin, decided in " lorldWar II to bring in conscription for service outside AustraliaMr. Calwell then a Member of the Labor Party in the Houseof Representatives opposed Labor's Prime Mihisterstubbornly and bitterly. Presumably in Mr. Calwell's viewMr. Curtin's policy was immoral, unjust and undemocratic.But Australia and the Labor Party rejected Mr.Calwell's view in 1942.Australia will reject his view today.hat are the facts?First there is nothing unusual about NationalService. All but a handful oœ the more significantcountries of the world have some system of National Service.Our form of National Service is selective. Only asmall proportion of our young men reaching the age of twentyis required to serve.We introduced National Service when it became clearthat under our voluntary system we could maintain an armyof only about 24,000 men.Our military advisers and the Cabinet's own assessmenttold us that we needed an army of at least 40,000 tomeet treaty commitments and our security needs.Y2e want an army of 40,000 because planning with ourallies is so ordered That a quick response can be providedfor various security situations that could arise.We require forces that can be instantly available,among other things, to prevent a conflict growing todangerous proportions.3efore we introduced the present system of NationalService we examined alternatives. ' We found them allimpractical or unrealistic from a military viewpoint.For example, under a system recommended by someof calling for volunteers from national servicemen foroverseas duty, our service planners would never know howmany volunteers might come ? orward. Units trainedtogether would have to be broken up and re-formed. Ourresponse to an emergency would be weakened and delayed.
-2-The suggestion that we should call for volunteersfrom the Citizen Military Forces is based on a misunderstandingof the purpose and the role of the C. M. F. Thisis two-f old: to provide back-up forces in a situation ofdefence emergency and to provide for expansion in the armyin the event of general , var.Young men reaching the age of twenty have thealternative of serving with the C. M. F. if hey wish toavoid havi ng their names go forward for the NationalService ballot.Integration of the National Servicemen into theregular army units has gone very well indeed. There is ahealthy respect and comradeship between the NationalServicemen and the regular soldiers. They have pride intheir units. They know the importance of their tasks.They know that they are well-trained for their tasks.In Vietnam National Servicemen have been as one withtheir regular army colleagues in efficiency, in resolutionand in courage.Where the security of Australia is involved, thegovernment must make the decisions to provide the forcesthe nation requires. That has been our responsibility.We have accepted it. We are confident that knowing thenation's needs you will support us.( This talk will be broadcast by the A. B. C. NationalNetwork at 7.15 Monday, 21st November, 1966.)



66/ 152
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 113/ 1966
BARBADOS INDEPENDENCE CELEBRATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, announced today that Sir
Keith Wilson would represent the Australian Government on the occasion
of the independence of Barbados.
Barbados, which has been a British Colony since the
seventeenth century, Will achieve irid~ pendence on 30th November.
Celebrations to mark the event will be held in the capital, BridgetoWft,
between 28th November and 3rd December.
Barbados has expressed a wish to become a membe r of the
Commonwealth, and Australia, along with other Commonwealth nations,
has agreed to welcome it into the Commonwealth association and to
sponsor its application for membership of the United Nations. Barbados
S will become the 26th member of the Commonwealth.
Mr. Holt said that Sir Keith Wilson would carry with him
a congratulatory message conveying the very warm wishes of the
Government and people of Australia. Sir Keith would present the
Government of Barbados with an Australian landscape and library of
Australian books, and the Barbados Legislature with a desk set from the
Australian Parliament. Sir Keith V~ llson is a distinguished former member of the
Australian Parliament. He was elected to the Senate in 1937 and, after
serving in the Middle East theatre in the AIF, was elected in 1949 to the
House of Representatives as the Member for Sturt, which he has
represented continuously since 1955. Sir Keith was a member of the
Australian delegation to the United Nations in 1964.
CANBERRA. 21st November, 1966. 



EM3ARCGOED NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA 3J-EFORE 7.50 P. M. MOIDAY, 21ST
" THE JROTH OF A NATION"
Transcript of Election Telecast by the Prime Minister,
Mr. Harold Holt
I want to say something to you in the iroad about
our domestic programme for the next three years. You have
no douot read much of the detail; jut before I talk about
our programme, let me remind you that how we are to carry
on with the development of this continent and how best we
can make our country secure is the very core of this election
campaign. How we do these things is the great issue of this
election. ( Film Sequence on Security)
It is not possible, in the space of a few minutes
to talk fully about the growth of this nation of ours. But
the truth, of course, is that you can't grasp the story of
Australian achievement in recent years through statistics
alone. The real discovery is to feel in your bones what
is happening in a country oursting into rich, adult
nationhood with its greater tomorrows ahead.
Seventeen years ago, when we came to office, we
resolved to do one thing above all else to produce our way
to prosperity. This plan, quickly realized, evolved into
our long-term objective of national development with
national stability. I'ithin that time more than half the
homes in Australia today have been built.
An expanding economy, full employment, a rapidly
growing population all these things have helped to give
us one of the highest living standards in the world.
All this is worth preserving.
, fie oelieve that our domestic and foreign policies
are right for Australia at this point of time; we are
certain they are more in tune with the national outlook
than the policies of our Labor Party opponents.
Naturally, we give our constant attention to our
national security in a changing and dangerous part of the
world. But our primary aim is to push on with our development
at home, to make Australia not only a bigger and
stronger country but a good country for men and women and
their children to live in, to prosper in, to be happy in.
Back in 1963 we oroke new ground, particularly on 
education and housing. Education is of vital importance
to every parent and child and to the nation itself. Ours
is not a uig country in numbers, so we must be big in quality.
And that's why education looms so large. Under our Federal
Constitution education is one of the subject matters reserved
to the States but we as a Federal Government are willingly
doing more and more to help.
In my Policy Speech I have proposed new and important
Commonwealth assistance to education. Our decision
to appoint a Commonwealth Minister for Education is further
evidence of our good intentions.
We made notable advances in the housing policies
we announced in 1965. The Home Savings Grant Scheme and
the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation have played their
part in making Australia a great home-owning democracy.
lready we have the highest percentage of home-ownership
in the world. But ours is a continuing programme. We
now propose a special effort to give more help and comfort
to our older citizens.
In the field of social justice we have looked again
at the means test and gone further along the road of
liberalisation. There isn't time to go into detail tonight about
the plans we have for the further development of our great
primary industries and the development of our vast northern
areas. The central government of our country has become
both demanding and complex. There are great and farreaching
matters constantly before us. The business of
government is certainly not for our Labor Party opponents
in their present condition. They have frequently shown
they can't ue of the same mind for one week on end.
On the larger questions of national security and on
the equally important questions of national progress,
economic stability and the well-being of the individual,
we have put before you principles and a programme which
we firmly believe are in the oest interests of our country
and of you, its people.
You have a clear-cut choice on Novemoer 26. Cast
it wisely for yourself and for Australia.
( This Telecast will be programmed by the A. B. C. Network at
7.50 21st November, 1966.) 


The domestic programme we have put before you is the subject of this broadcast.
This programme has veen designed not only to help the individual citizen, but also as an investment for the future.
The contrast between what we have undertaken to do and what the Labor Party recklessly promises has been under the spotlight during this campaign. The Labor Party thinks only in terms of spending. it wants to buy your votes with your money jecause you as a taxpayer would have to foot the bill for the Labor Party's irresponsible promises.
Our own domestic policies continue year in year out and are tied to what we can reasonably afford as a nation. But we have put new proposals to  you on this occasion.
First, we looked at the individual and his needs. That is why we have proposed further assistance to education. We believe  - as you do  - that education is important to every Australian and to the nation.
We have looked constructively at social services and propose a further liberalisation of the means test. This is consistent with our settled policy of enlarging our Social Services programme as circumstances permit. We've not waited for another election to do these things.
We propose to do more this time to help young couples eager to buy their own homes oecause we are proud of the fact that nearly half the homes in Australia today have been constructed since we came to office in 1949.
But our domestic programme, as well as giving direct help is also an investment for the future. 4e propose to spend money in an investment which will return to Australia and Australians richer dividends in rising incomes and higher standards of living.
This we will do through spending on development.Much of our domestic programme is directed to national development which, for us, means people as well as physical resources.
I give you an example. We've undertaken to draw up a programme of water conservation related to national needs. This would not only reduce the hazards of drought; it would expand primary production and this will mean higher farm incomes, more export; more money all round.
We will also discuss with State Governments a million dollar programme extending over a period of seven years expanding what we have been doing on beef roads. his may seem remote to an Australian city-dweller out beef is a solid export earner, and the more we sell abroad the better off are all of us, whether we live in town or country.
As well as basing our domestic programme on both individual and national needs, we believe our home policies must be looked at in conjunction with our foreign policies. You can't plan with any confidence for sustained growth at home without also lookirog to national defence and security. We see our progress inside Australia tied to our security outside Australia. That is the only sensible and responsible way of looking at policy as a wihole. And that is where we and the Labor Party are so far apart in our outlook our beliefs and our basic policies. Reduced to one sentence your choice on polling day is between responsibility and irresponsibility for the nation.
( This talk will be broadcast by the A. B. C. National Network at 7.15 p. m. Tuesday, 22nd November, 1966).


Well gentlemn, I an sorry to have kept you waiting. We haven't been dallying I assure you, but there has been much to be done, and rather than hold you up whil I make a lengthy statement  an anything, I intend to give the discussion over to you for questions first  - answers by me if I can provide them.
But there is one matter which I would like to open up with you,  and you will be aware right through this campaign that there Is very little coming from the A. L. P. leaidership, or for that matter spokesman for the ALP about the detail of their Defence, policy. Mr. Calwell did include some very brief passages in the Policy Speech but there's been no attempt at definition of their proposals in the course of the campaign until we  find that in this last week of the campaign, we have the Deputy Leader, Mr Whitlam, putting an interpretation on their policy which I feel sure will come as surprise to Mr. Calvell and certainly is entirely inconsistent with the general view that Mr. Calwell has been putting thoughout the campaign.
He has made it clear that his intention is to bring Anstralian forces In Vietnam back to Australia - the National Servicemen or consscripts - immediately . isediatelys or as oon as practicable, andthe remainder after cossultation with our allies. in onespeech I think It will be agreed that he made it evident thatthe consultation Itself was not a consultation likely to leadto a retestioa of Australian forces In Vietnaim: it wouldmezely relate to the seams of their withdrawal, and the timingof their withdrawal. Andi indeed, it might very wall be thecase that seeing tha. Australia has been allotted an area ofresponsibility related to the strength of the task force thatones the National Service component which in some musteriavswould be a very substantial proportion of the total, had beenwithdrawn, those that remained might find themselves incapable*not merely of carrying oujt the responsibilities of the area,but of even defending their ova position In the area, and consultationcould In the result relate to the security withallied assistance, of our oa remainder of regulax forces leftthere.
66/ 120 6PIgBss ( cont.)That is oe aspect of the matter which I think should bementioned. The other is this interpretation which Mr. Vkktlanvapparently without consultation of his Liert and certainlywithout any prior Indication from any policy-naking source ofthe Labor Party has put on the policy that they would pursuebut I an particularly referring to this evening those othermatters are of Importances they havem't quite the sam noveltyas one report attributed to Mr. Cainell ' Viicb I have onlywon In ona 2iaper,, but it : is a paper which I an sure Mr. Fitchattwould accept as an authoritative source, and that Is the SydneyMorning Herald. I vould gatber from it that It proceeds fromthe representative of the paper accompanying Mr:. Calwall. It0 appeared in my edition anyhow,, of the Sydney Morning Heraldthisa morning.It is headed " CALWMLL PLANl FOR W1 ' LIKS HAflI4L~ GLUM41and headed " 2ownsvilles Mondayt" or at least under thatheading appears " Tosville ) tonay. A Citizen Military Forceof between 120,000 and 1401,000 mm ms suggested tonight bythe Opposition Leader, Mr. A. A. Calvall. This force would bein addition to regular forcesi at about the present level.Mr. Cal" 6ll" ( and I am qjuoting from the repori., of course)' vwasijivin3 his first defimitica' ( I stress that -his firstfefiniiion. of his Defence proposals since his J'olicy Speech11 days agO and itts because of this categorical statmuietby the writer that I asszume be's somebody vftovs been ac ; nipaayingMr. Calwall on his tour. I don't vouch for thatv but that's areasonable assuaptiou to make from the text. He said'tieAustralia&amp; Cliizn Forces would need between 120,000 and 140,000men in all services If I'm sorry, " The Australian ClixizenForce would need b~ eten 120,000 and 140,000 men In all servicesif It were to be given ' Ireal teeth" like the A.', rican NatioxalGjard," land again I give what Is put in the quotation invortedcomas therefore, attributable ' to him, " The American NationialGi'ard files supersonic aircraft and contains Armoured divisions"He said ' t is a fallacy to ' think of the part-timer as unskilled.The Citixen Forces should surely be given a chance to show theirpaces. The should be given special bonuses ( just tellne if Iv'a going too f ast a n this, you can have the textlater) the 04? should be given special bonuses such ashousing loam. ad education grants to assist recruiting.",
66/ 207mrlssS ( cant.)CaluVll Said a Lbbor Goverznent would reintro duc* the CitixmAirforce, the Cbvernentfs Defence Policy bed, failed toattract sufficient volunteers yet vast numbers of those vho didvol unteer for service ithin Australia mare turned away oneducational grounds. Mr.* Clell said the Goerets*Military adviser* should examixe the practicability of bringingtbese am si to a Ilassable standard of educadon. during; thefirst 12 months of their training. This would give then anattractive Armed Jervices Career in which they could take apride. have no sympathy for a Government which Shouts aboutthreats to Australia and the admits it cannot get enoughO volunteers r Mr. Colwell sad.*110ur Armed Forces ame is such a pathetic condition that if thewhiole lot war* thrown into s&amp; me overseas action they could makeso significant contribution. ws really have nothing with whichto dend our country. The Halt Governent to Defence establishme.is a abobless that's viby we ame lsarning so heavily onAmericas policy."'W&amp; el1, there's comment that could be mad* on all the latterpart but the significant aslict I think for Immediate purposesis that here is a = w line of policy stateet which appears Inthe IasM. week of the campaign. There Is no indication that Ithas proceeded from any of the official policy-making sourcesof the Labor Party. itsm going to give you in a noment theactual, militia figures in the three services so that you'llse what kind of an undortakin Ur. Calvell Is Putloing. Ihave here the Defence Repor t for 1966g and you mill gather fromthis tha neither of the two regular services of the Navy andthe Airforce rely to any substantial extent upon citissa forcecomponents. The Navy at Jume 1966 had just under 3800, that is 3,717.The Airforce at that points June 1966# had 665&amp; and the Armyhad 32,702. The total in the CUitius Forces In three servicesusn 36,708. Now there axe a few points to be made aboutthat.One. Is, of course, that the Army strength has been greatlyIncreased In the O43 as a result of the choice * 2ich Is nowavailable for those who would peefier to join the OWI totaking the risk of being ballotted Into National Service underthe National Service Schm arrangementes and if you look at th C
66/ 208PVR3 _( cont.)figjur&amp; for June 1965 wheup as~ I understand it, the NationalService Scw bocame effective# the figure then VMS 38,146,1&amp; Wd the year befare 27,500, the year before that 27,300 -soIt** pretty clear that this Sharp lift of just on 4,000 betwen1965 and 1960 was attributable to the Incentive that -Jiewdstae of the National 5ervice, ; de. provided.Consequently, if you abandon Nationa" Services then I thinkO'ie realistic tIjjx* to be looking at in relation to Xr.Calwall's 320,000 to 140,000 is the figure of the total ofZitizen Formes at j~ m 1965 ol 322632. Now a few pointsimmediately.. DO YOU MIND) IF? I HAVE A QtESIOff ? SR&amp; SIR? ARR VW AMIUING3Y THIS nMA tVX1I GMF IS A FAILURB, OM R&amp; CRWIWS PR001IMUSA FAILMS FOR THS W4 VDLB3.3 YOU HAVE T18 TM4E&amp; r OF H&amp; l'IOMtLZIWICM?No. Jhaf.-w're saying is ' that the target for tbt CXrP is atarget of 35,000 at~ the present tim# e aid on the latestfigureS the dtizea FOce OXPectatica is ' that we Will have9 reached that target by 1967.DiO YXT7 S~ O ZM 4M Z R~ OUD BZ AT. 11BUUr TroPATRI01I, 14 OR " OM MOTIV . IiW M". T ARISING OU? 0W 21E FAC?VIAT TUCE I~ rNa-MMONAL S: I= fLJXCON HAZ D3TIOa~ a0 l CaDi.Wel, that ajl be so, bus, It vwant all that good4 in 1964for example. o It no t Il'a saying that. undoubtea7~ the factthat there mas a Natilaal Siervice Scheme has assisted in producingthe higher 460-tal and I doon' arguem by any means that theschme has proved or the recruiting has proved failure,because as at 1962 for example, it was less than. 21,000.ittsi been moving up year by year until it has reachedthis fiqj'r* of I'ma sorry, 1963: 27,000. It was Sairlyea-4-ic around ' 63, ' 64, $ 65, youi aust have in mind that tlareis a time period of service in the CKI, ad you have to replacetherefore, those that. are moving out* so whiat has kmppened inthe period from June ' 65 to ' 66 is, theaw's not really been areplacamnt, of the normal wastage, but quite a significaut liftin the strength of the forces, but what I ' a really wanting toget at in this comet is that again you have Labor Partypolicy undertaking which has mo relation to the realism ofour Current situation.
66/ 209To train 120,000 to 140,000 people in Citixen mlilitary Forces,particularly wbn you ' d removed from the Resgular Force thatNational Service element aind therefore reduced your RegularForce to betwen 24,000 &amp; Wd 25# 000 you'd need a very largeproportioa of your rgt4. ar force fox the trainin, of yourCitizen Military Force. Woi w" om of the liniting factorsw found when So set out to increase oa own Qegular Amy.The number of %; he regular -omore experienced regular service-.men sho had to b. allocated to trainiagg limited the contributionwe Mgrt able to Rake in respect of our Various Camitments andif you're to have 120,000 to 140# 000# mail first of all thereare the various munitions and supplies, usiforms and equipmentrequired for such a vastly expanded force# and tham the draw amthe sklled persanil of the " gular Forces for their traningfir. Calwall talks about training them in the use of supersonicaircrafts and the otber arsoured divisions and so Sorthin the Amrican Hational ( Garxd wall what sort of draw thiswould make on Australiats comaratively limited resources ofa-uipmwnt of this kind# it it can be Anagined, although no.* ocould put a precise estimate on it.ATcen clso I think, has to bedawn row Wrvv is thatby the criticisms, and analyses of their policies that on theong hand th Dputy Leader has sought to rationalise theirsituatlun by adopting ini~ erprotatiuas which certainly have not0: 00 * Q the south of the leader of the Party. On the otherhand, the Loader of the Party has coat up with a scheme whichIla sure vill have struck Mr. * Whitlam with a* smuch su. rpriseas Mr. .4iitlants interpretation brought surprise to his Leader.There's moLhing in ihat has been said, so far as Ila are,,by any Labr spokesman earlier to suqggest that they had in corntemplationa hiome force program* e of the order cf 120,000 o140,000 man, so once agaia you get %, he vagueness of Labor'sproposals which T&amp; en spelled out by them reveal '-hemselves ascompletely unrealisic. They sees to have bees panicbsd inomaking theso ruttift~ these proposals or these explanationsforward, and I think the public wifl treat them both siththe reservation that they deserve and aem in theme agjain anindicatios that the Labor Party basalt bought through its policysufficiently clearly to he Justified in giving being giventhe responsibility for implasenting them.
66/ 210PRSS ( coat.)4IY PANIC, t. PRIMW MINTST1R? YOU MNIOND ? HB D " PANIC."' W PAM C,'Because they can feel that the tide of public support is rumingagainst them, and this is where they believe themaselves to bemost vulnerable. They know that the public has been troubledby the prospect of Australian Porces being withdraw by theconcept of fortress Australias in which Australia would b'looking to its om resources.Mr. lItlm tried to answer this by pointiLg out that theirpolicy doesn't necessarily mean withdrawal of our regular forces,Mr. alell on the other hand, who clearly intends that it should,is driven to finding sm satisfactory anasmwr and be comes up9 with a greatly expanded home guard. How, he kept saying thathe wouldn't reort to conscription for his purposes. e havemployed all the methods that occurred to us including Laprove.pay and conditions, various benefits for the militia and untilthe introduction of National errvice it had produced a otalof 28,000 as at June 1965, so what methods be proposes -to adoptto get 120,000 to 140,000 are still wrapped in the mists ofmystery. YOU PIND I 140,000 IMPOSSIL. B. AS I UDRfTAND) IU?I find it am impracticable target in relation having regardto the training requiresmoute, the provisioning, the draw itwould male oan the economy at a time iban the econmy is fullyemployed. It would be putting the country on well If noton a war footLg", it would make very heavy drains on thenational resources at a time * tn his other policy proposalssuggests that he would be drawing heavily on resources to giveeffect to them.I ' 11 probably be saying something about this tonight as ell.but thought I' 4 give you in am atmosphere where + he mattercould be put without iaterruption the fiLures as I havethem.Now, over to amy genmeral questions:
66/ 211PRS ( cont.)MR.* PRIMS MINISTER: 00 4CNALTH OF'PICS AiRS PLA-? WD FOR WflMI0OT0 8ktI ALL DaPAa1m48IW now sc&amp;?? SR ro ( ms HAaflIAmsRCDMLD ' oU sAY tWiEX ThW alILDINS3 WILL aS SUECMD'bNo, Itm afraid I cocldn't. It# s nlot mtter * dCh fallSwithin Uy ova province, but hbae You sou~ ht that aswer fromtbe Minister directly concermieNO SIR.I cot~ d t.-y to Ujet It for yoA Wan 10W caapaijn conClud*$in fact, w'll y aW~ A~ t it X-r you tomorrow.SOCOID. Y M4R. PiWU3 MIHI1BR: USI 0304WWRALH OGWINMiCS3BBNDXOO tA'UU) A l4AJOA aLLJU'i. dAW1 I~ i TWL~ oTPAIflG 00,1 11-1 FACM0iY; aLL IT ' RaWN AT X~ i PRES16NT 4) RKFORCE OR 4d LL as$ o a) IVL. 0imwI as aYSM ukt ATI ~ i ni w1 mXoNALD6UM ? LANI; f1l, valve 0one to som trouble over the years in order tokeep the factory Voing. I~ ve regaded it as valuable bothto the irAfttrial development of Bewdi~ o œ taelfp &amp; Wl themploysumt uhich i~ c ;, ves, but also been ret.. ardsid as auseful * lewent in the Qamoawealtb's munition. uaking capacityand I mul~ d vithout having technical asuers, with net thinkit reasonable assime that It mould bav* a&amp; * xpaLodingrather than a dinisbing role. 14a speaking without retfoenceto the Minister concerned. The Minister -% cor ziipply would bethe Minliter directly involved in this.


A SUMMING UP BY THE PRIME MINISTER. MR. HAROLD HOLT
Most of you no doubt have already made up your minds about this election. But, with the campaign nearly at an end, I put quite briefly and simply what I see as the great issues on which your decision and support should be given.
In my Policy Speech I said that how we are to carry forward thedevelopment of this continent and how best we can make the nationsecure forms the very core of this campaign.As the campaign has proceeded this has emerged, even morestrongly. You will not only be electing a Government on November 26.One way or another you will be writing a new chapter in our history.I say this because so much is at stake. This, like the election of1949, is truly a crossroads election. The choice we Australians makewill be a critical and decisive choice. There is no common meetingground between us and the Labor Party on profoundly important mattersaffecting the safety of this country and its people.Today we have a shield behind which we can press on with thetask of building the nation to a bigger future a future with excitingopportunities for yourselves and for your children.Our alliance with the United States is the centre piece of thisshield. It strengthens our close defensive association with GreatBritain and other allies.
With this shield, it has been, and is, our purpose to keep far from our own shores the sinsiter aggression that has made a battleground of South Vietnam.
That is why I say you will be writing a new chapter of Australian history on Saturday.
The Labor Party would pull down this shield of security. Defenceand foreign policies if they can be described as policies announcedin the Labor Party's Policy Speech would not only abandon our alliesand South Vietnam; they would undermine our whole system of alliances,they would gravely imperil American friendship, they would wreck ourhome-front plans and our defence arrangements.Our reputation abroad would be damaged, perhaps beyond repair.Indeed, the Labor Party has not only reaffirmed its disastrousisolationism; it would now destroy almost everything we have sopainstakingly built up over our years of office.And what would they put in its place? They are hopelesslyvague on this and divided in their views. They would leave us withvirtually nothing~. Our alliances would lie in ruins our defencearrangements would be gravely weakened. On all that Mr. Calwell hastold us, a Labor Government would wait for an aggressor to strike at
-2this country and then-call on Australians to go it alone.To-. propose such a course is an insult to the good sense ofthe Australian electorate.I now ask you to look closely at the programme outlined inthe Labor Party's Policy Speech.In recent months, Mr. Calwell has been very vocal aboutour external policies. He has said many times that his Party wouldsink or swim on the question of Vietnam. But when he came to puttingall this on the line in a Policy Speech, Vietnam, National Service,defence and foreign policy were brushed off in a few sentences.He persists in declaring that what is happening in SouthVietnam is a civil war. There are certainly South Vietnamese amongstthe Viet Cong, but he Ignores the fact that the Viet Cong do not controlor administer any one of the many cities or towns. By processes ofterror, plunder and harassment, they are able to exercise influenceover some of the thousands of villages and hamlets. He ignores theparticipation of some eighty per cent of South Vietnamese voters inthe recent election for those who are to draft the creation of aconstituent assembly. He ignores the evidence accepted by detachedobservers from other free countries that it was aggression from NorthVietnam directed by the Communist Government of Hanoi under Ho ChiMinh which touched off the current hostilities. He ignores the growinginfiltration by regular North Vietnamese forces recently estimated byGeneral Westmoreland to be proceeding at a rate of up to 7,000 a month.He ignores the continuing supply of arms, munitions, food and equipmentfrom the North. He sees no connection between what is happening inSouth Vietnam and the declared philosophy of Communist expansionthrough South East Asia and, indeed, Asia generally so clearly andrepeatedly expressed by the present Communist leaders of China.To him all this is just a civil war. Three American Presidentsand the governments of free countries in South East Asia, includingAustralia and New Zealand, have taken a very different view of whatis occur-ring in South Vietnam. When you turn to his Policy Speechproposals there is the same evident lack of realism. He criticisesour Government for spending and I cruote him " Too much money onexpensive, sophisticated defence equipment purchased overseas"He clearly has in mind such items as the FlllI Bombers and the guidedmissile destroyers, purchased from the United States of America. P Orhapsalso the submarines purchased from Great Britain. But Australia, wVithcomparatively small regular forces, must see that they are thoroughlytrained, mobile and as well equipped as we can assure. His policywould not only be ye ry much more costly. It would involve intolerabledelays. It would leave our forces inadequately equippad for severalyears. The effect of Mr. Calwell's proposals for the army need to beclearly understood. He claims there is no difficulty in sprtnconscripts from members of the regular army. This is nonsense' IfNational Servicemen were withdrawn from integrated units in Vietnamthe fighting capability of the task force would be destroyed. If youtake a substantial number of men out of a battalion, it would not remain
-3a fighting unit. You can't put two bits of two battalions together andimmediately have a fighting unit capable of engaging the enemy. It isnecessary for-: the me-n to work together and to exercise together to bringthe unit to battle efficiency. Mr. Caiwell's proposal would leave thetask force inoperative and ineffective. It could leave it incapable ofdefending itself within the airea of its responsibility.He has stated his Party's intention of consulting with theUnited States before bringing out the rest of the force. This could wellbecome a plea for United Stated protection for our force pending fullwithdrawal. But even on this matter of consultation he is out of sortswith Mr. Whitlam his Deputy Leader.The end of National Service would reduce the regular armystrength to something between twenty-four thousand and twenty-fivethousand. We would not be able with this number to fulfil our agreementswith our allies nor our commitments. Our capacity to contributetowards the security of South East Asia would be graively weakened bothin terms of the numbers available for this purpose and our standing withour allies and friends.One effect of the National Service scheme has been to increasethe strength of the Citizen Military Forces from tho addition of thoseyoung men who have chosen service with the C. M. F. as an alternativeto the possibility of call-up into National Service. If the NationalService scheme was abandoned then the incentive to join the C. M. F. goeswith it. Yet Mr. Calwell is relying on a large militia force to safeguardAustralia. He says he will rely entirely upon volunteers.In 1964 the pay and conditions of service of an Australian privatewere so improved that he is more highly paid in his early years of servicethan his counterparts in the United Kingdom, Canada and the UnitedStates. How is Mr. Calwell going to get volunteers of the numbers anddesired standard when our best efforts did not succeed.The Labor Party's policy would destroy the unity and the moraleof the army. Australia has great hopes of making a significant place for itselfin the future of the free countries of Asia. For us now to run out on ourallies in Vietnam would be to destroy, at one stroke, much of thegoodwill we now possess. It is doubtful if we would ever regain theirtrust in us and respect for us.Mr. Caiwell is the first Australian political loader I can recallto advocate desertion of our allies as a national policy. I refuse tobelieve he will find support in Australia for such a course.When he turned to domestic policy, like a salesman at the Show,the Leader of the Labor Party opened a bag full of promises that werereally right out of this world.I am sure all of you who heard him quickly lost count of themillions upon millions of dollar q he proclaimed himself ready to spend.
-4He talked about money as if it were confetti Apparently It didn'tcross his minc-thathe was talking to people who have to pay taxes.I am sure that as you listened you began instinctively to estimatewhat all this was likely to cost you.Your instinct was right. On top of a Budget deficit this yearof 270 million dollars, the Labor Party would impose a programmewhich could cost up to another 1,000 million dollars. What fantasy'.If a Labor Government went about doing what it has promised to do,taxation and charges would go sky-high. Our economic stabilitywould be wrecked.So it is fair to say that the Labor Party offers Australia adestructive deal on the two fronts that are vital to us our foreignrelations and our home affairs.If, as I've said, Australia's growth and development, and itssecurity, make up the core of this campaign, the Labor Party hasfailed the nation. On both counts it must be rejected by responsibleopinion. We shall, with your support, put into effect a realistic,forward-looking domestic programme. We have always regarded ourbroad policies as continuing policies and we have always done morethan we have undertaken to do.We shall hold fast to our alliances and our defence arrangements.We shall make stronger the shield of our security. We are determinedto pursue with our friends the Goals of Freedom we proclaimed togetherat the Manila Conference only a few weeks ago.Here are those goals:* To be free from aggression* To conquer hunger, illiteracy and diseaseTo build a region of security, o-rder andprogress To seek reconciliation and peace throughoutAsia and the PacificWe are determined to grow strong ourselves and we want to seefree Asia grow strong also.Here is a partnership in a common de&amp;) nce of freedom. Here isa common aspiration for progress. Here is a prospect for that betterworld order that lies within man's grasp. The alternative offered toyou is isolationism and a walkout on our friends.My Government is accused by the Labor Party Leader ofso * uandering the lives of Australia's sons. Who is it would squanderthem? My answer is it would be the Government which first allowedour alliances to be reduced to pieces of paper by falling to givesubstance to them: the Government which stood passively by whileone after another of our neighbours was conquered by aggressivecommunism: the Government that would leave us standing alone:the Government which would fail to provide our armed forces with themost effective arms and equipment available in the world today. Sucha Government would truly be putting the lives of young Australiansat risk and at risk also the way of life and liberties of allAustralians.
SurelyAustralia will reject this alternative. As your PrimeMinister, I ask you to support my Government and my Party. We offeryou strength, unity and purpose. We offer this as opposed to disunityand confusion. Your support for us on Saturday will promote your ownwell-being, will sustain Australia's national interest and will preserveour high standing throughout the world.
( Text of broadcast and telecast over A. B. C. National Network 7.30 Wednesday, 23rd November, 1966)


 P. M. No. 113/ 1966
Among the many letters and telegrams of congratulation received by the Prime Minister is the following message from President Johnson:
"The world has taken note of the great vote of confidence given you by your countrymen yesterday. Your gallant men and ours are grateful for the courageous and far-sighted leadership that you are providing in the Pacific and in Asia.  
With steadfast devotion we will stand by your side as long as freedom is being challenged and peace is being threatened. We know we stand with a man of conviction, integrity and wisdom. We know we stand with a friend.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON."
CANBERRA,28th November, 1966.


P. M. No. 114/1966 
 Mr. McEwen rang me yesterday morning to give me his congratulations on the election result. I then suggested to him that we meet at my home in the late afternoon.
We had a long talk in which we reviewed the outcome of the election and we discussed arrangements which we could recommend to our respective parties for continuance of the Coalition Government.
We had each made it clear to our Cabinet colleagues that it was intended that the coalition would continue in the event of the Government being returned.
The first formal business will be for each to meet his party as soon as the result in all electorates is sufficiently clear to ensure a full attendance of members.
The Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Ley, has advised that final results in all House of Representative seats are unlikely to be known until towards the end of next week.
The party meeting will be held in Canberra as soon as practicable.
CANBERRA,29th November, 1966


P. M. No. 115/1966
I regret Mr. Calwell's statement.
I am sure that most Australians have welcomed as I did the President's friendly message with its warm assurance of continuing American association with us as we face challenges to peace and freedom in Asia and the Pacific.
It is customary not unusual as Mr. Calwell would suggest for Heads of Government to send messages of good wishes to other Heads of Government as they are newly-elected or confirmed in office.
Australians will not be unmindful of the fact that the message came from an ally with whom we are actively associated both in military operations and in our common pursuit of the Goals of Freedom as defined at the recent Manila Conference.
The message came from a man who so short a time ago was in Australia as an honoured guest, and reflects his high regard for this country and his personal friendship with me.
CANBERRA,29th November, 1966


P. M. No. 116/ 1966
Commonwealth and State officials met in Canberra today to discuss progress made in the work of a technical sub-committee of the Commonwealth/&amp; State Officials' Committee on Decentralisation.
The representatives of the States at the Conference were:New South ' WalesVictoria Queens landSouth AustraliaWestern AustraliaTasmania -Mr. W A. Butterfield,Director,Department of Dacentralis ation andDevelopment-Mr. J. Davies, Treasury.-Mr. N. T. Howard,Director, Division of State Development,Premier's Department.-Sir James Holt,Co-ordinator -General of Public WorksE. J. Carey,A ssistant Under -Treasurer,Treasury Department.-Mr. K. C. Belchamber,Industries Promotions *, 1SearchPremier's DepartmentMr. G. Cooper,Director, Department of Industrial Development.Mr. R. F. BoylenDepartment of Industrial DevelopmentMr. J. E. Henshelwood,Director, Industrial Development Branch,Premier's and Chief Secretary's DepartmentThe Commonwealth Departments participating were Treasury,Trade and Industry, National Development, Labour and National Service,Primary Industry and Prime Minister's Department.Wlhile much useful work has been done to clarify many of theimportant issues involved in a subject as complex as decentralisation, theofficials agreed that it would be necessary to collect and analyse furtherinformation before conclusions of value could be reached. These steps arenow being taken.
CANBERRA, November, 1966



66/ 137
FOR PRESS: CONGRATULATORY MESSAGES
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt; has received many
hundreds of congratulatory messages from all parts of Australia and
overseas since his Government's success in last Saturday's election.
The congratulations within Australia have come from
people, young and old alike, in all walks of life. They range from
students and those who have described themselves as " ordinary
housewives" to diplomatic and government representatives.
Messages have been received from many prominent
people overseas, and already there are congratulatory cables and letters
from eleven heads of government.
The heads of government who have sent their good wishes
are the Presidents of the Philippines and the United States, and the Prime
Ministers of Canada, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Malta, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Viet Nam and Western Samoa. In addition, there have been
messages from other senior members of national administrations.
T. EGGLETON
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister
CANBERRA, ! st December, 1966.
Texts of messages are available from my office in Canberra. 



FOR PRESS: FURTHER CONGRATULATORY-MESSAGES
Late this afternoon, two further congratulatory messagcs
were received from heads of government, the Prime Ministers of
Ceylon and Greece. This brings to 13 the number of messages received
so far from heads of government.
Texts of these messages are
Prime Minister of Ceylon, Mr. Dudley Senanayake
" 1 have heard with great pleasure the good news that
you have led your Party to victory at the General Elections.
Please accept my warmest congratulations and sincere good wishes
for your personal well being and that of your country. I would like to
take this opportunity of also saying that I look forward to continued
co-operation between our two countries during t-eiure of office.
Message received from the Prime Minister of Greece through the
Greek Ambassador in Australia, Mr. Bas! l IL. Tsamissis
" On the occasion of your re-election to the Prime Ministership
of the Commonwealth of Australia, I am instructed to convey to
you, Sir, and through you to the members of your Government the
warmest congratulations and best wishes of the Prime Minister and the
Royal Greek Government.
Mr. Stefanopoulos and his Government look forward to a
fruitful co-operation with you and your Government in the years ahead,
with a view to further strengthening the close and friendly relations
existing between our two countries." T. EGGLETON
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister
CA NBERRA.
1st December, 1966. 


FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 117/ 1966
An announcement has been made from Buckingham Palace in the following terms:
" The Duke of Edinburgh will visit Australia next year from March 2 to March 9 in connection with preliminary arrangements for his Study Conference which is to be held there in May, 1968."
All Australians will warmly welcome this announcement that the Duke of Edinburgh is to visit Australia next year. The Duke of Edinburgh's Third Commonwealth Study Conference which will be held in Australia in 1968, will be a stimulating event and one which will attract world-wide attention. In the course of his preliminary visit next year, the Duke of Edinburgh will meet the organisers of the 1968 Study Conference and discuss plans with them.
A future announcement will be made when the details of His Royal Highness' itinerary are known.
CANBERRA,8th December, 1966.
BACKGROUND 
The Duke of Edinburgh's Third Study Conference will open in Sydney on 13th May, 1968 and close in Melbourne on the 3rd June.
The Duke of Edinburgh will be President of the Conference and the Chief justice, the Rt. Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick will be Chairman. The theme of the Conference will be " The Human Problems of IndustrialDevelopment and Redevelopment in Commonwealth Countries". Members of the Conference, who will come from most Commonwealth countries, will be people who hold or are likely to assume senior responsibility in industry, commerce, employer oirganisations and trade un i ons. The Conference is being supported by Australian industry, commerce, employer organisations, trade unions and governmental organisations.
The Conference will be the third in the series of study conferences presided over by the Duke of Edinburgh. The first conference was held in England in 1956 and the second in Canada in 1962. Teams of about 30 Australians attended these two conferences.


EMBARGO FOR PRESS NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA6..-15 PM TUESDAY, 13 DECEMBER, UNTIL 1966.P. M. No. 119/ 1966THE MINISTRYStatement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold HoltThe Ministry will be sworn tomorrow. With the authority ofHis Excellency the Governor-General, I release the following details aboutthe new Cabinet and Ministry.The Ministers of State Act limits the total number of Ministers toI propose to ask Parliament when it meets to amend the Act, so as topermit the appointment of one additional Minister. When this has been done,the full list and portfolios of Ministers will be as follows1. Prime Minister2. Deputy Prime Minister andMinister for Trade andIndustryTreasurer4. Minister for ExternalAff airsMinister for Defence6. Minister for the Interior7. Minister for Supply andLeader of the Governmentin the Senate8. Minister for PrimaryIndustry9. Postmaster -General andVice-President of theExecutive CouncilMinister for NationalDevelopment11. Minister for Education andScience12. Minister for Labour andNational Service13. Minister for Shipping andTransport14. Minister for TerritoriesMinister for Civil Aviation THE RT. HON. H. E. HOLT, NE.THE RT. HON. J. McEWEN,. MP.THE RT. HON. W. McMAHON, MPTHE RT. HON. PAUL HASLUCK, MP.THE HON. ALLEN FAIRHALL, WP.THE HON. J. D. ANTHONY, MP.SENATOR THE HON. N. H. D. HENTYTHE RT. HON. C. F. ADERMANN, MP.THE HON. A. S. HULME, MP.THE HON. DAVID FAIRBAIRN, DFC, MP.SENATOR THE HON. J. G. GORTONTHE HON. L. H. E. BURY, MW.THE HON. GORDON FREETH, MP.THE HON. C. E. BARNES, WP.THE HON. R. W. C. SWARTZ, MBE,ED, MP. ./ 2
-216. Minister for Immigration. and-L.. eader of the House17. Minister for Health18. Minister for Air andassisting the Treasurer19. Minister for Customs andExciseMinister for Repatriation THE HON. B. M. SNEDDEN, QC, MP.THE HON. A. J. FORBES, MC, MP.THE HON. PETER HOWSON, MPSENATOR THE HON. KEN ANDERSONSENATOR THE HON. G. COLINMcKELLAR21. Minister for Social Services THE HON. IAN SINCLAIR, MP.and assisting theMinister for Trade andIndustry22. Minister for Housing23. Minister for the Army24. Minister for WorksAttorney -General26. Minister for the Navy andunder the Minister forTrade and IndustryMinister -in -Charge ofTourist Activities SENATOR THE HON. DAME ANNABELLERANKIN, DBE.THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, MP.THE HON. C. R. KELLY, MP.THE HON. N. H. BOVJEN, MP.THE HON. D. L. CHIPP, MPThe first twelve Ministers named will comprise the Cabinet.Until the Ministers of State Act has been amended, Senator Gortonwill be Minister for Works as well as Minister for Education and Science.The appointment of Mr. Kelly as Minister for Works will be deferred untilthe Parliament passes and assent is given to the necessary amendments tothe Ministers of State Act.I have proposed that tomorrow Mr. Kelly be sworn as ExecutiveCouncillor. CANBERRA,13th December, 19,66.


P. M. No. 120/ 1966
Her Majesty The Queen has bestowed posthumously the award of the Victoria Gross upon the late Warrant Officer Class 2 Kevin Arthur Wheatley.
Warrant Officer Wheatley, who came from Sydney, was a member of the Australian Army Training Team Viet Nam from February, 1965 until his death on 13th November, 1965. 
Warrant Officer Wheatley displayed magnificent courage in attempting to rescue a wounded comrade, Warrant Officer R. J. Swanton of Brisbane, in the face of an overwhelming Viet Gong force estimated atmore than a company. 
On 13th November, 1965, a Vietnamese Civil Irregular Defence Group Gompany commenced a search and destroy operation in the Tra Bong Valley, Quang Nhai Province. Warrant Officers Wheatley and Swantonaccompanied the force with the right-hand platoon. Warrant Officer Wheatley sent a radio message to the centre platoon to report contact with Viet Gong elements. The Viet Gong resistance increased in strengthuntil finally W-, arrant Officer Wheatley asked for. assistance.
While the centre platoon was working towards the action area, Warrant Officer Wheatley reported that VWarrant Officer Swanton had been hit in the chest, and requested an air strike and an aircraft for the evacuationof casualties.
Warrant Officer Wheatley refused to abandon his dying comrade when the company was forced to retreat. Under heavy machine gun and automatic rifle fire, he managed to half drag, half carry Warrant OfficerSwanton from the open rice paddies to a wooded area some 200 yards away.
During this time he was assisted by Private Dinh Do, a member of the company who, when the Viet Gong were only some ten yards away, urged Warrant Officer VWheatley to leave his dying comrade. Again he refused, and was seen to pull the pins from two grenades and calmly await the Viet Gong holding one grenade in each hand. Shortly afterwards, two grenade explosions were heard, followed by several bursts of fire.
The two bodies were found at first light next morning after the fighting had ceased, with Warrant Officer Wheatley lying beside Warrant Officer Swanton. Both had died of gunshot wounds.
Warrant Off icer Wheatley showed outstanding heroism, determination and unflinching devotion to a wounded comrade in the face of imminent threat to his own life. His example takes a place of pride in the story ofAustralia's fighting men.
CANBERRA,14th December, 1966. 
The Prime Minister today sent the following telegram to the late Warrant Officer Wheatley's widow: 
"On behalf of the Commonwealth Government, my colleagues and I offer you our most sincere commendation of the award of the Victoria Cross bestowed by Her Majesty The Queen upon your late husband. His heroism and unflinching devotion to a wounded comrade should be a source of inspiration and pride to all Australians."
BACKGROUND 
Warrant Officer Wheatley, who was born on the 13th March, 1937, enlisted in the Regular Army in 1956. He served in Malaya with the 3rd Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment from 1957 to 1959 and then with the 2nd and 1st Battalions of the Regiment until February, 1965, when he was posted to the Australian Army Training Team Viet Nam. Warrant Officer Wheatley's posting in this area had been distinguished bymeritorious and gallant service.
Warrant Officer Wheatley's award is the 93rd V. C. awarded to an Australian and the first since World War 11.
The last award was made on 22nd January, 1946, to the late Private Frank John Partridge for action at Bougainville on 24th July, 1945


P. M. No. 122/ 1966  
The Minister for Repatriation, Senator McKellar, will visit Australian Forces in South-East Asia later this month.
He will see our servicemen in Viet Nam, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore, and will spend Christmas Day with Australian troops in South Viet Nam. Both the Minister for Defence and the Minister for the Army have recently visited Australian troops in Viet Nam.
During his brief tour, Senator McKellar will be able to meet personally many of those for whose welfare he is responsible on their discharge.
Senator McKellar will be accompanied by the Chairman of the Repatriation Commission, Brigadier F. O. Chilton. They are due to leave Sydney next Thursday, returning to Australia on 31st December.
CANBERRA6th December, 1966.


P. M. No. 121/ 1966
The Hon. Hubert Opperman, OBE., MP., will be Australia's First High Commissioner to Malta. The formal agreement of the Government of Malta to his appointment has now been received. Maltais an independent country and a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. 
The decision of the Commonwealth Government to establish a High Commission in Valetta was announced by me at the time of the recent visit to this country of the Prime Minister of Malta, the Hon. Dr. GorgioBorg Olivier. Australia and Malta have close links from their Commonwealth membership and the steady flow of migrants from Malta to this country.
There is in Australia at this time the largest number of persons of Maltese descent outside Malta itself.
I am sure Mr. Opperman will give the same able and devoted public service to Australia in this important new sphere as he has always revealed in his Parliamentary and Ministerial capacities.
CANBERRA,15 December, 1966 I


FOR PRESS:~ PM. No. 123/ 1966
THE RHODESIAN SITUATION
Comment by the -Prime Minister, Mr. Harold HoltFromthe outset, the Australian Government has held theview that the resolving of the problems which have arisen between the UnitedKingdom and Rhodesia was primarily the responsibility of the Government ofthe United Kingdom. Although constitutionally Rhodesia has been andremains at law a colony of the United Kingdom, there had been a specialrelationship between them. Rhodesia had, in practice, enjoyed a largemeasure of self-government in the conduct of its affairs. Indeed, for manyyears the then Prime Minister of Rhodesia had attended regularly conferencesof Prime Ministers. It is understandable, therefore, that Rhodesia shouldhave sought independence in a period when many parts of the British Empirewith much less experience of handling their own affairs had moved into thatstatus. The crucial difference between Rhodesia and most otherAfrican territories is the racial composition of the population. As is wellknown, Rhodesia is composed of a comparatively small white minority ofabout 225, CCC a considerable number of whom are of British stock andsome four million Africans, many of whom are not native to Rhodesia but havebeen attracted to residence there by the employment opportunities offered bya growing and prospering economy.Protracted negotiations for a mutually acceptable basis forindependence were unsuccessful. An outcome was the declaration by the thenGovernment of Rhodesia, led by Mr. Smith as Prime Minister, of the UDI( Unilateral Declaration of Independence). This action was agreed by theUnited Kingdom and other Commonwealth Governments to be illegal, and theSmith regime has since been regarded as an illegal regime with noconstitutional status recognised by the United Kingdom, and the course ofaction followed by that regime from that time onwards has been branded bythe Government of the United Kingdom as a rebellion. No Commonwealthcountry has " recognised" the Smith regime; indeed no country in the worldhas recognised it. When the United Kingdom Government, in an attempt torestore a situation of legality, imposed economic sanctions on Rhodesia andrequested other Commonwealth countries to do so also, they unanimouslyjoined in that process. Successive Conferences of Prime Ministers have condemnedthe illegality and have considered courses of action which would assure thedemocratic rights and opportunities of the African majority in the country.At the most recent of these Conferences, held in September of this year, itwas agreed that should further negotiations fail to produce an acceptablesolution, an approach should be made by the United Kingdom to the UnitedNations for the application of selected mandatory sanctions.The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Mr. Wilson madea final attempt at negotiation when at his invitation Mr. Smith met him onboard HMS " Tiger". A document embodying a basis of settlement whichMr. Smith initialled was taken by Mr. Smith and Mr. W.-ilson to theirrespective colleagues for their consideration. The United Kingdom Governmentgave prompt approval, but the terms were rejected by the Smith regime. / 2
2-As I understand the -position. from public-statements made byMr. Smith, the-Rhodes ian regim-e was prepared to accept constitutionalarrangements which embodied the " six principles".The United Kingdom Government has consistently and firmlyasserted that acceptance of these principles is essential and fundamentalto a grant of independence by the Parliament of the United Kingdom. OnMr. Smith's assertion, what proved unacceptable were the terms proposedfor what has been described as " the return to legality" But these, in the eyesof the British Government, are critically import ant in themselves owing tothe need for a free and fair test of Rhodesian opinion about the futureconstitution. The Australan G overnment was deeply disappointed that thenegotiations did not produce a mutually acceptable solution, but acceptanceibtys eblof. t h sMidre. s Wofl ials ocno, nswtihtou thioanda ol ubtlaisreis d wthoeu ldc obned iat iosnusb sotaf nat iraelt uarcnh ietov elmegeanlti tyi. nto Commonwealth Prime Ministers, felt bound, of course, to adhere to thesubstance of these. Any significant departure from them would represent,in his eyes, a breach of his Ludertakings to his Commonwealth colleagues.He could only do so, In good faith, with their concurrence.The United Kingdom Government, understandably, as part ofthe process of return to legality, requires the Rhodesian regime to submitto the Governor and makes conditi ons regarding the legal basis for controlof the armed forces. It requires also a broadening of the representationin any Government subsequently appointed. Mr. Smith is reported as findinggrave objections of principle in these courses.Faced with the tragic consequences which must flow from acontinuing and rigorous application of sanctions by members of the UnitedNations, we would still hope that solutions could be found as to the proceduresto apply over an interim period. The whole future of Rhodesia and its peopleis at stake. The welfare, the happiness and prosperity of nearly four anda half million people are directly involvwd. If the economy of Rhodesia isshatt ered, over four million Africans suffer grave hardship as well as thewhite minority. The burden of economic rec-onstruction will fall heavily onthe United Kingdom, in particular, and, in varying degree, on those Commonwealthcountries willing and able to lend assistance. No one can foretell thedisastrous extent of the consequences nor the ramifications, poisoning andembittering African relations and damaging indefinitely as to time and degree,the future of the whole of Southern Africa.The Australian Government has been gravely troubled by thesedevelopments. Wie have given our support to the United Kirqdom Governmentin its determined efforts to find a just solution. Restrictions operate overvirtually all of our imports from Rhodesia, and our trade with that countryis currently limited almost entirely to foodstuffs necessary for the Africanmajority as well as the largely European minority. We have already beenapplying voluntarily the sanctions now made mandatory by the SecurityCouncil, Nie have been kept fully informed by the United Kingdom Governmentof the various developments as they have occurred. / 3
-3-ro11owlnghe rejection of proposal-s emanating from the HMS" Tiger" discussions, 1I-meceived ashort-cable purporting to come from Mr.Howman, who is described by-the-Smith regime as " Minister for Information,in which he made an explanation from the Rhodesian side of the failure of the" Tiger" talks and went on to say that Mr. Smith would be ready to meet me atany time and any place for discussiLon. In keeping with the consistent attitudeof non-recognition which the Australian Government has maintained during therelevant period of office of my predecessor, Sir Robert Menzies, and throughoit.my own time as Prime Minister, I made no acknowledgment of this message.There were, however, references to it in a section of the Australian presswhich appear to have been dervied from the self-styled " Rhodesian InformationService" in Australia. I made the contents of this cable known to the BritishHigh Commissioner in Australia for transmission to his Prime Minister.On 14th December, I received a cable in code purporting to comefrom Mr. Smith himself, in which he invited me to send a fact-finding missionto Rhodesia to report to me on the position in that country. The substance ofthis was also conveyed by me to the British High Commissioner after considerationhad been given to both cables by the Australian Cabinet.Press reports emanating from Salisbury over the weekend are tothe effect that Mr. Smith has cabled the Australian and New Zealand PrimeMinisters inviting them to nominate members to a commission to test Rhodesianpublic opinion on constitutional proposals. The same reports state that Mr.Smith's Cabinet had announced it could accept the proposed changes, but notthe British demands for the manner of implementing them.At the Prime Ministers' Conference, I had stated my resErvationon the proposal than an application should be made to the United Nations. Ithen expressed the view that this matter should be capable of solution inside theCommonwealth of Nations, and that we should pursue means of achieving this.However, in the event of failure of negotiations, I concurred on behalf ofAustralia in supporting a move to the Security Council for mandatory selectivesanctions. My Government regards the proposal that Australia and New Zealandshould join in a commission which, on the face of it, is confined to those twocountries, as disturbingly unrealistic. Any finding from such a restrictedCommonwealth representation would be most unlikely to find acceptance fromthe Commonwealth as a whole, and, in any event, we could not contemplace sucha course without the full knowledge and approval of the Government of the UnitedKingdom. The terms of reference of any commission would also need carefulthought. But we must not lose sight of the fact that sanctions are not an endin themselves. They have been imposed with a purpose, and that purpose isto lead the Rhodesians to come to terms with the United Kingdom so as to openthe way to constitutional advance towards majority rule with full guaranteefor both the majority and minority communites.Australia will remain in constant touch with the Governments of theUnited Kingdom and other Commonwealth co-intries in the hope that a solutioncan still be found.CANBERRA, 2Cth December, 1966


 P. M. No. 125/1966
Her Majesty the Queen has approved a new Ensign for the Royal Australian Navy. It will be flown by Australian Naval ships and establishments as soon as the necessary flags have been manufactured.
The new Ensign will replace the White Ensign, which is the present flag of the Royal Navy, and has been flown by the Royal Australian Navy since it was formed In 1910. It will be called the Australian White Ensign.
Australians have been proud to serve under the same Ensign as the Royal Navy for more than half a century. But we have come to feel that it is now appropriate to adopt a flag which, while indicating our allegiance to the Grown, is distinctively the flag of the Royal Australian Navy. 
The new flag will be white and will continue to show the Union Flag in the upper canton at the hoist. In place of the Red Cross of St. George, the new Ensign will display the six blue Australian stars on the white ground, placed in the same way as the stars on the National Flag.
I am confident that the high and honourable traditions associated with the White Ensign will be maintained by the Royal Australian Navy under its new flag.
Canberra23rd December, 1966.


FOR PRESS P. M. No. 126/1966
PRIME MINISTER'S CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO AUSTRALIAN FORCES
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt has sent the following message to Australian servicemen and women at home and overseas: " To all Australian servicemen and women I convey, as Prime Minister, the thanks and appreciation of the Australian people, and their warmest good wishes for your well-being and happinessthrough the time of Christmas and throughout the coming year.Australia is grateful to you for the personal contribution you aremaking to the security of the nation. Behind the shield of protectionwhich members of our fighting services and our allies provide, this nationis able to advance steadily in strength and prosperity." Some of you are actively engaged in operations of war.We have followed with pride the story of your exploits, a story brightenedby the gallantry and devotion to duty you have demonstrated. Those ofyou who are absent from Australia, whether on military operations, onother active duty or joining in the tasks that enable us to honour ourinternational obligations, all have a special place in our regard. Thisis true at all times, but you are much in our thoughts at that time ofyear when most of your fellow -Australians can happily enjoy the loveand companionship of their families. We hope this deprivation will besoftened in some degree for you by the knowledge that you have ourheartfelt gratitude. " May the coming year bring a just, honourable and enduringpeace enabling many of you to be united with your families again in1967." 1 HAROLD HOLT,
PRIME MINISTER.Canberra, 23rd December, 1966.


FOR PL1ESS P. M. No. 124/ 1966
ADDITIONAL AUSTRAiLIAN VOCSFOR VIETNAM
On Tuesday I promised to release further details of the proposed increase in Australia's forces assisting the allied effort in Vietnam. Followiing the discussions then in train with our allies, to which I then referred, I am now in a position toannounce detailed arrangements for the deployment of theadditional Australian units which will shortly move to Vietnam.As I indicated in statements before the elections, it isthe policy of the Government to review from time to time theAustralian contribution to the security of Vietnam. I have alsosaid on behalf of the Government on several occasions thatAustralia is determined to make wuith others a fitting andresponsible contribution, in the light of our capacity and othercommitments, to the winning of peace and stability in Vietnam.Assistance in the economic and social fields is anessential part of our contribution to the peace and stability ofSouth East Asia. The Departments concerned are at presentpreparinE material wYh, i ch will enable the Government to review atan early date its existing prograrm~ ie of economic aid and w-. elfarefor South Vietnam. The purpose of our review will be to seecan usefully be done for the development of Australia'sefforts in these fields.The Government's policy takes into account the agreementsreached by all the participating countries at the 1knila Heads ofGovernmient Conference, held at the end of October last, in . whichthe Ifinisters for External Affairs and Defence also took part.At Manila, the seven nations ( Australia, Korea, New Zealand,Philippines, Thailand, United States and Vietnwn) firmlydeclared -Ithat the freedom of South Vietnam should be securedthat their military and all other efforts would becontinued as firmly and as long as miay be necessarythat such imilitary action and support must depend forits size and duration on the intensity and durationof the coiunist aggression itself.The Government had before it assessments of the militarysituation in South Vietnam and. of the intentions of North Vietnam., Jhile the military picture is encouraging, it is clear that abalanced and sustained effort is vital if further success is tobe won. As yet, we have seen no indication that North Vietnamis slackening in its attempt to bring about a conmnunist victoryin South Vietnam by force. The cormmitment of regular NorthVietnam combat units continues at a substantial rate, infiltrationbeing estimated at between 5,500 and 6,000 a month.The numerous soundings and exploratory moves on thepossibilities of peace have as yet produced nothing fruitful.The search for peace will continue. In the moantime, ourmilitary efforts are directed towrards reaching a position wherethe othor side will become convinced that aggression will notsucceed, and that South Vietnam and its allies have the resourcesand the w--ill to prevent it from succeeding.
The Government's view is that Australia's military effortin Vietnam should be a substantial and measured response,deriving from our capacity to contribute and with regard to ourobligations as a whole.
Our existing conmitment is an important one which has beenand is bein discharged to the greatest credit of the commandersand men of the Australia Force Vietnam. Their efforts havealready clearly demonstrated that the Australian contribution ismeaningful and effective. W. 4e intend that the commitment shallcontinue to be honoured fully, and that we play our part as areliable ally.
After considering papers brought for Cabinet considerationby the { Iinister for Defence in which he reviewoed the position, thefollowiing detailed arrangements for additional forces for Vietnamwere decided upon.Early in the New Year, additional ground and air forces andtwo units of the RAiN will be deployed to South Vietnam. Thetotal effect of these neT. deployments will be to increase thenumber of our personnel by more than one third from the presentlevel of 4,600 to approximately 6,300. With these additions theAustralian Force aill be significantly strengthened and balanced.These additional comnitments will require no increase in thepresent level of the National Service intake. All three Australianrmed Services are ready for combat operations under the particularcircumstances of the present conflict. With the South Vietnamesethemselves and with the United States, Australia will then bemaking a contribution in the air and at sea, as well as on theground. The existing Army strength of over 4,300 men is to beincreased to about 5,200. Both combat and logistic support unitswill receive increases in personnel and this will provide allunits with greater capacity to meet their tasks. This expandedArmy contribution to Vietnam of some 900 officers and other rankswill improve the operational effectiveness of the Australian TaskForce. There will be no change in the operational relationshipsbetween our ovn and other allied ground forces.The additional men being provided vwill also enable a greatercontribution to be made, through military civic acbion, to thewelfare of the civilian population in our area of responsibilityin Phuoc Tuy Province.
The Government has also decided to make available for service in the area, TIiS HOBART, a well-equipped modern destroyerwhich joined our fleet a few months ago. HOBART wiill operate asan integral part of the American Naval Forces, with similar rolesand tabk. For a considerable period American and South Vietnameseforces have conducted sea and air patrols with a viewi to theinterdiction of coastal traffic and in order to counter the supplyby coastal shipping of comiunist forces in South Vietnam. Formaximuin effectiveness, these operations must be continuous andrequire many ships and consuant vigilance. HOBART will also beavailable to operate as required in general support of naval forcesat sea. A small under-water Naval Clearance Diving Team of " frogmen"vwill also be attached to American mine and obstacle clearanceteams.
3.In addition to its existing contribution of two squadronsof Caribou and Iroquois aircraft, the PiAAF is to deploy to SouthVietnam a squadron of 8 Canberra bomber aircraft. These aircraftwill be positioned to operate in support of our own ground forces.They rmay be employed as part of the allied combat air contributionin support of other allied ground forces, and against enemymovements and concentrations.It is expected that the additional forces will move toVietnam during the early months of the New Year.22nd December, 1966:


FOR PRESS P. M. No. 127 / 66
DEVELOPMENT OF GAS AND OIL DISCOVERIES IN BASS STRAITSTATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER MR. HAROLD HOLTThe Commonwealth has reached an agreement with theVictorian Government designed to allow production of gas and oil from theBarracouta and Marlin fields of the BHP/ Esso Companies to be achievedat the earliest possible date.This agreement provides that production leases will begranted immediately to the companies under Victorian law, andsubsequently replaced by tit les granted by the State and the Commonwealthunder the proposed joint legislation.From its discussions with the State and on the adviceavailable to it from its own authorities, the Commonwealth has concludedthat in the national interest the development of these two fields both theproduction of natural gas to meet requirements in Victoria andexploitation of the very substantial oil find in the Marlin field shouldproceed without delay. This development will involve a very largeinvestment of the order of $ 150 m. The availability of natural gas ona large scale to industries and households in Melbourne and surroundingareas represents a major innovation which will bring great benefits.The effect upon Australia's balance of payments will also be substantialbecause of savings of foreign exchange through the use of oil and gasproduced from an Australian field for the Australian market.The Commo~ awealth has over a period been working outwith the States a common code for the exploitation of off -shore oil andgas. Commonwealth Ministers have recently been discussing withState Ministers the possibility of additional provisions within the commoncode which would offer to a company making a discovery an alternativeto the requirement that it would have to relinquish part of its area.These alternative arrangements would allow a company to retain thewhole of a location in return for the payment of an additional royalty( known as an override royalty' over and above the standard ten per centroyalty previously agreed between the Commonwealth and the States.
The arrangements which have now been agreed with theVictorian Government will give effect to this type of alternative in thecase of the BHP/ Esso discoveries at Barracouta and Marlin. An overrideroyalty of one per cent has been imposed by Victoria and is payable to theState. The Commonwealth has also accepted as part of thearrangements covering these BEP/ Esso discoveries that the standard tenper cent royalty should be divided on the basis that Victoria would receivesix per cent and the Commonwealth four per cent instead of the equaldivision as previously agreed between the Commonwealth and the States.The Premiers of the other States have been informed of theagreement entered into with Victoria in rce spect of these BHP/ Essa discoveries.The Commonwealth wil be continuing its discussions with the Statesin order to reach finality on the provisions of the common code on a basiswhich will allow the most effective development of Australia' s off -shoreresources of oil and gas.
CANBERRA29th December 1966.


FOR PRESS* PM No. 128/1966
NEW YEAR MESSAGE
FROM THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT.This is the first time it has been my privilege, tooffer as Prime Minister, New Year good wishes to the people of Australia.I do so now confident that 1967 will prove to be a year of happiness andprosperity for the great majority of my fellow Australians.We find our country well placed for prosperousexpansion. In the coming years we should be reaping, to a growingextent, the rewards of recent discoveries and of technological advance.A rising world population will call increasingly on our capacity to producefoodstuffs and other raw materilals. Improving efficiency will enable usto place Australian products on a widening range of world markets.We are a small nation measured by population but thevigour and quality of our people our strength of national character, ourpolitical and economic stability all enhance our significance as a nation inthe eyes of others. The darkest cloud on our scene is the conflict in Vietnam.but even here the year just closing has brought notable improvement in thesituation. We have been stirred by the gallantry and devotion of ourfighting men. We shall all fervently hope that 1967 will bring a just andhonourable peace. We look forward to continuing our Australian contributionto the Councils of the United Nations and the Commonwealth of Nations. Weare resolved to play a growing part in the affairs of Asia and the Pacific.The good wishes I express from myself and my Governmentare more than words. They are themselves a declaration of our dedicationand determination to apply ourselves successfully to those tasks which willassure the security, the happiness and the prosperity of our people.CANBERRA December 1966.



a 0 " THE JOB AHEAD OF US IN ASIA"
Extracts from Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt,
at Opening of M. R. A. Conference, Monash University, Melbourne
6th January, 1967.
One of the reasons I was attracted to speak to you
today was the theme of your Conference " It's Our Job Australia".
I share your view that the job ahead for us in world affairs
and particularly in the affairs of this region in which we
live is not only tremendously important but for Australia it
is a challenge of comparatively recent emergence.
Three-fifths of the population of the world live East
of Suez and as I've said when I've been travelling overseas,
we can't turn our backs, nor can Europe turn its back, upon
the problems of the people who live in Asia. What was our
Far East in the literature of my early time in public life
has become very much the Near I'orth oT this country.
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
I would like to tell you something, since we are
speaking of our responsibilities internationally, of the way
in which Australia has grown both in influence and action in
this field. For a very long time in the history of our
Federation external relationships had a very limited interest
to the Parliament. It was hard to Let the Parliament to accept
a debate on external matters. You ad some industrial issue
that the whole Parliament would be wanting to speak on, some
domestic industrial issue the arbitration system, the social
services and matters of that kind. In my earlier years in
the Parliament it was a rarity to have a debate on foreign
affairs. Now there is no more popular vehicle for Parliamentary
speech at the present time than a debate on foreign affairs.
In the earliest period we looked to the United Kingdom.
The people who quip me because they say I am all the way with
America, at that time were quipping the Government of the day
because they said we were cIinging to the skirts of Downing
Street if Downing Street could have skirts. You follow
the idea. And people, for their own political purposes,
choose to take a statement made in one context and apply it
far more generally and widely than the facts would justify.
I don't think when Andrew Fisher saidito the last man and
the last shilling", that people interpreted that as meaning
that Australia had surrendered any independence of judgment
and action that it might otherwise possess. And when I say
that we are all the way with America in resisting aggression
in Vietnam, that doesn't im ly that we don't have an independent
mind and judgment on some o these great international questions.
I don't think, if you were to searcA his heart on the matter,
there is one of my political opponents in the National
Parliament who seriously believes that Australia has surrendered 
2
that independence which a government should possess.
You may be interested to know just how the Australian
activity has grown. In 1901 the Department of External Affairs
was established as one of the original Departments of State;
but there was so little interest in this work in the Parliament
that by 1916 the Department had been abolished. And the function
of the Department was taken over by the Prime Minister. Would
I be correct in thinking it was William Morris Hughes at that
time? He took over most of the functions of that period.
He was said to have ruled Australia with his pen. Jell, as
far as he was concerned, what little there was for External
Affairs to do was going to be done inside his own Department.
And it wasn't until 1935 that it was re-established as a
separate Department of Jovernment. I could give you the
figures on staff which I think are quite revealing, and I
am not going back to the early years of Federation. 3ut in
June, 1946 we had a total staff" in the External Affairs
Deuartment, including those overseas and those in Australia
and certain people locally engaged in quite minor positions
410. By June 1966 twenty years later the 410 had grown
to 1,570. So that you will see that Australia's growing interest
was reflected in the growth of the Department of External Affairs.
When I examined the table on this I thought it might
be of some interest to you. I was glad to find that when
you look at the geographical spread of these posts the largest
number is to be found in Asia and South Asia. There are 19
there 18 in Europe, 7 in North and South America, 7 in Africa,
3 in the South Pacific; and in addition to those diplomatic
Dosts we have trade posts growing, too, quite steadily around
the world, and there are some separate immigration posts which
help us with that programme.
REVOLUTION OF RISING EXPECTATIONS
Now what makes the task in Asia, and indeed in the
under-developed world generally, so exciting at this time is,
if I may quote the words of Arnold Toynbee, well expressed
in this passage. " Our age will be remembered not for its
terrifying crimes or its astonishing inventions, but because
it is the first generation in history in which mankind dared
to believe it practical to make the benefits of civilization
available to the whole human race." And that is not just a
belief held by the more affluent countries, what are inown
in the jargon of the day as the developed countries, by which
we usually mean the highly industrialized countries, but it
is certainly held amongst those countries which are learning
for the first time in history that mankind's age-old enemies
of sickness, disease, illiterac poverty, the lack of
adequate shelter, hunger, that these things can be conquered,
that other countries have conquered them and are going on
to even higher standards.
So there has built up what has been aptly described
as the revolution of rising expectations. And the expectations
are certainly there, and they are complicating international
life tremendously because it is one thing to stage a revolution 
-3-
for your reed6m, to establish a separate national entity;
but-it-is a-veVy much more difficult thing to go about te
more mundane an-humdrum task of supplying the needs of your
people. We are-seein' this all around the under-developed
world at this time, whether it is in Africa, in Asia, or some
other part of the globe, that the victory has been won by the
politician. He has secured his freedom, he has secured his
independence. He has a nation to lead. But the people in
that nation are able, through the various modern communications
inedia to see the more affluent and well-supplied
world around them and they want these things. They don't want
them as the end product, as is the case in most of the
developed countries, of centuries of politic al and industrial
evolution. They want them preferably in the next year and
certainly in the next five or ten years. Because it is
humanly impossible to do all these things in that time, the
discontents build up and these discontents provide the
infection for disorder, for challenge, and a threat to the
more stable and orderly forms of society which otherwise
could be maintained in the country concerned. This is part
of the challenge which all of us have to face because we
must recognize the needs, we must recognize tAe consciousness
which exists on the part of the under-supplied people that
their needs can be met, or at least they hope, as Toynbee
says, for the first time in history people dare to hope the
things which they have accepted philosophically perhaps or
with despair in centuries past, that these things are capable
of solution, and there are men, statesmen around the world,
who believe that also in countries which can make a major
contribution. The present President of the United States is
one such man who has a vision, not only of a good society at
home, but a vision of a better world order around the world
as a whole, and is prepared to contribute the wealth, the
technical skill, the co-operation, the assistance of this
country of 190 odd million people to assisting in those tasks.
This year has seen, I believe, a notable progress forward in
the thinking of the people of the United States, and certainly
of the United States administration, in relation to the
possibilities which exist in Asia..
AUSTRALIA'S INFLUENCE
Now Australia, you say there is a job ahead of us and
that might seem on the face of it to be rather large a claim
for a comparatively small country measured in terms of
population to make. but there is force in this, because
Providence has placed Australia in a situation where it can
exercise an influence out of all relationship to the numbers
of our people. In the first place there's our historic
relationship with the United Kingdom. Virtually a family
relationship, and when I go to conferences in London, as my
predecessor and leaders of governments from Australia of
other political persuasions, we are greeted as members of the
same family, and that's the atmosphere in the United Kingdom.
They have always been interested to hear what we've
had to say willing to take our views into their own
consideration, and it was typical that although I was a 
4
fledgljng Prime-Minister-when Sir Robert retired, in the
first wee4 of my own administration I had personal letters,
or messages,-from Harold Wilson and from President Johnson
asking me to continue the same intimate correspondence that
they had developed with Sir Robert Menzies. Now this doesn't
happen to every country. It happens to this country because
our views are respected. ie are known as people who express
ourselves quite robustly at times, but sincerely and with a
desire to help. And so we do have some influence on the
thinking of these two great powers, more influence I believe
even in my limited experience of just under twelve months,
than most Australians would imagine.
Then there are other reasons why we have a capacity
for influence in the region of Asia. ' e don't carry any
background of colonial power past. I think it's true that
leaders in these countries speak more frankly and freely to
us than they do to the representatives of -' reter powers.
They know that we have no territorial ambitions so far as
they are concerned. We have no aspiration to exploit their
wealth, although the charge on this, I think has been grossly
exaggerated over the years. But we have, and this again is
a bond of sympathy with us, problems of a development kind
which they face themselves and fortunately for us we've shown
a capacity to meet those problems successfully, to build
in a not highly Promising terrain and climate a civilisation
and a standard of living which ranks amongst the highest to
be found around the world. They want to know how we've done
it. They are glad to have from us some indication of the way
we go about things. They welcome the technical assistance
that we can bring to them.
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
There are at present somewhere in the neighbourhood
of 15 000 students from the Asian region studying in Australia.
Some 10% of the full-time students enrolled in our universities
are from overseas. Over the past few years, some 50 000
students from Asia have passed through our various eaucational
establishments and they can become, as so many of them do,
good ambassadors for Australia.
Perhaps our most enduring gift to Asia is in the
education opportunities we offer. Asia desperately needs
skilled tradesmen and technicians and better educated farmers
as well as graduates. Blue-collar work does not have the respect
it enjoys in Western countries and training in manipulative
skills still lags far behind needs. And here we are helping
with gifts of technical equipment to colleges with books and
with teachers. Kuching in Sarawak, is only one of the multitude of
examples which could be given. Australian gifts of earthmoving
equipment are being used to train local labour. In
Singapore we are setting out to equip a second technical
school. In Vietnam and Thailand Australian equipment and
inspectors are at work on trade training. And the whole 
r range of Colombo. Plan activities from our point of view is
largely connected to the technical assistance aspect or
equipment which can help the countries concerned to help
themselves. FOREIGN AID
It is not only by our own direct foreign aid expenditure
that we can help the developing countries of Asia and
the Pacific. We can help also by bringing their problems to
the notice of other aid giving countries which recognize we
have a good deal of first hand knowledge and contact with
our geographical neighbours.
We have been involved in the aid field in Asia longer
than most. The Colombo Plan set up in 1951 was largely a
product of an Australian initiative, and Sir Percy Spender,
now the President of the International Board of Justice at
The Hague, was the prime mover in getting the programme
established. Early in 1966 we joined the development assistance
committee of the OECD. This committee comprises the major
Western European aid donors, the United States, Japan, and
now includes Australia.
The activities of the Australian Council for Overseas
Aid, established in 1965, has the aim of co-ordinating the
activities of voluntary organizations whose projects-in devcloping
countries supplement in a valuable way the Government's
official aid programmes. Some of you will be aware of the
organizations represented on that council. They include the
Australian Council of Churches Community Aid Abroad and
the Overseas Service Bureau. There is of course a crisis of
people in Asia, and it is one of the harsh ironies or
paradoxes that as we improve health standards where everybody
wants to see them improved, and the expectancy of life in
some countries, we merely add to their problems of supplying
the growing population.
India is a case in point where quite dramatic advances
in the public health field substantially increased The
expectancy of life.
We shouldn't and we mustn't go into Asia seli-righteously
selling ' Western concepts and ways of doing things as -he best
and only course for these countries who have a history and
tradition hundreds of years, perhaps thousands of years,
older than that from which we draw our beliefs. And w9
mustn't assume that ours are the only answers and that they
must change fundamentally all the things on which they hove
built up their beliefs. 
6
ECONOMIC BACK3ROUND
I came across a table the other day which gave some
facts about Asian nations area, population, gross national
product and average output per person. And it is quite a
fascinating table, if I just run down a column and pick a
few of the countries out of average output per person. You
will see the gap which exists at the present time between
the more affluent and the less affluent peoples of the world.
Australia has an average output per person and in this table
which is taken from an official U. S. Department of Commerce
source we have the highest average output in the region of
1967 dollars per person per annum. That is spread over the
whole population. Burma
Cambodia $ i150
Communist China $ 105
India Indonesia
Japan ( which of course has made tremendous strides
industrially in the years since the First World War, and more
particularly since the Second World War) 4,878. But even at
that most people would, I think, be rather surprised to find
that their average output per person is rather less than half
in value of money than that of the Australian.
Malaysia $ 520 a low figure by our standards, but
a high figure by the standards of
most, nearly three times the output
of people of some of these other
countries.
New Zealand, as might be expected, ranking very close
to Australia, and in earlier years was ahead of us, 1B62,
to our .1967. North Korea
North Vietnam
Pakistan Philippines $ 160
Singapore q$ 450
S. Korea $ 100
S. Vietnam 115
Formosa &gt; 225
Thailand $ 120
Now, if I were to occupy your time by giving you
figures of population as well, and gross national product
figures, you would find some very interesting points emerge.
But I will just give you two illustrations from them. If you
look at this table you will see that India has a population
about 42 times that of Australia, but it has 1' ess than double
the value of Australia's gross national product and on average
output per person in money value approximately 1/ 20th that
of Australia. Indonesia, with more than nine times our population,
has a gross na. tional product only one-third that of Australia, 
with an average output per person only -/ 28th that of this
country. Now this doesr't of course reflecthe_ energy and
the industry of people in the countries concerned. There
are hard workers in every country and I suppose there are
some drones in every country. But it does reflect the degree
of industrial development, echnical skill technological
advance that one country is able to generate by comparison
with another And it is one of the reasons why Australia,
with only 111 million people, still counts as a factor,
particularly in the economic life of the world. We rank
amongst the first ten or twelve traders to be found around
the world. The countries of Asia, with the exception of Japan,
have not yet truly reached the take-off point. 3ut despite
this, there are real grounds for hope, particularly if the
area can be kept free of the senseless costs of war, and aid
can be kept flowing into sund and self-generating projects.
There is a transfer in resources from Australia for our own
aid effort. It currently takes place in a number of ways,
through contributions to the World dank and other international
bodies through membership of the Asian Development Bank,
through the Colombo Plan. and through bi-lateral programmes
such as food aid for India.
A major effort from Australia necessarily is made in
the territory of Papua/ New Guinea but our other international
economic aid contributions are substantial. The annual rate
now runs at well over one hundred million dollars, and we
are moving fairly steadily towards what has been stated as
a desired goal of one per cent of gross national product.
At the moment it has moved up to I think 0.64 per cent and
leaves us among st the first four or five nations of the world
in per capita terms in the srant of aid. But the size of
our effort of course is limited by our own vast development
needs. We have a continent the size of the United States to
develop. Our reliance on a fairly substantial inflow of
overseas capital, which accounts Tor about 10% of our total
investment in fixed assets. And our need to greatly expand
the defensive capacity of Australia, both for our own security
and to assist in the joint security programmes aimed at
producing stability in this area of the world.
In the trade field we have taken several steps
specifically designed to create greater market opportunities
for the products of the less developed countries and hence
to encourage their economic development. Imports into
Australia of a range of products of particular export interest
to developing countries are liable to substantially lower
rates of duty than are payable on corresponding products from
developed countries. In addition we have removed or are in
process of removing, tariffs on a large range of handcraft
products produced in developing countries as a means of
assistance to the traditional industries to be found there.
And, as our own industrial base grows, more capital and skills
accumulate, not only for our national or personal benefit,
but for the volume of international assistance we are able to
give. 
8
POLITICAL BACKROUND
We have to recognize the facts oflife in Asia and
appreciate that were it not for the firm determination of
the United States in South Vietnam and the.. role Britain
played in Malaysia and is continuing to play in the area, the
shape of Asia would be very different from that which exists
today and the promise of the future would be very different
from that we look forward to today. The generous commitment
of these two countries has provided stability and a real
measure of freedom. It has made it possible for many of the
countries of Asia to participate in their own ways in the
political social and economic revolution so necessary for
the well-being of their peoples and so important to us as
their near neighbours.
ASPAC is one example of growing co-operation between
the countries of Asia and we are proud to be included. There
are signs of other forms of co-operation growing the visits
of political leaders, such gathering s the Manila Conference.
We certainly hope this process will continue and that the
work of these organizations already established will strengthen.
Among the more encouraging of recent political developments
I think the following deserve special mention:-
Settlement of the long-standing dispute between
Japan and Korea. These two countries have established normal
relations and committed themselves to closer co-operation.
The close relations now existing between Australia
and Japan two countries quite recently at war with each
other. It is certainly a welcome change. Japan has become
now the biggest purchaser of Australian exports. We rank
second customer of the exports of Japan. . e look to increasing
and friendly links between our two fast-developing countries.
Indonesia successfully overcame the Communist attempt
to seize power. Its new government is concentrating on plans
for economic recovery and development. From the figures I
gave you a very difficult task lies ahead of them. Already
there are attempts being made to give practical assistance
from a considerable number of countries.
Australia has established in recent years warm
relationships with a number of these Asian countries. Even
in the confrontation period we retained links of understandg
with Indonesia. Cambodia is certainl not in the American camp but
we represent them in South Vietnam. Ve also represent the
U. S. in Cambodia. It is quite an interesting development
there and I give a lot of the credit to the French-speaking
mbassador who has established very good relations with
Frime Minister Sihanouk.
We have developed important and friendly links with
Thailand, more particularly over recent years and this aain
as a special interest for us as far as our nearest neighbour,
Indonesia, is concerned, because there has been a long
historic course of friendship between those two countries
and when the confrontation negotiations were carried through, 
9
it was, ou may remember, in Bangkok that the parties met
and in the friendly atmosphere provided by the people of
the Thai administration, they were able to make very good
progress.
STABILITY AS OUR GOAL
Our goal in Asia is one of stability. That is one
of our principal goals at any rate. We don't mean by that
something passive, conservative or resistant to change.
That in itself carries the seeds of instability and indeed
we have our own strong sense of national drive and independent
spirit and we've supported movements for national independence
in South East Asia. But our concept of stability is a
progressive one. We want in this region a constructive
assured environment in which governments and administrations
can plan and carry through with some certainty programmes
and reforms based on the rational use of resources and
conceived in the interests of the community as a whole in
which public authority is an instrumentality of the public
welfare and is responsive to the needs of the community;
and in which there is prospect of real participation on a
broad basis in economic an social affairs.
Stability brings progress. In South East Asia it is
the countries enjoying stability where conspicuously we find
development occurring, rapid change and reform and a sense
of national vitality and where the forces of modernisation
are most apparent. Another point I should note with you is
that nation-building on this constructive basis requires cooperation
from other countries in the region and a stable
external environment. A number of countries in South East
Asia today are, in fact reaching out towards regional
co-operation as with ASPAC, the Manila Conference, Developmait
Bank and in other ways and are truly entering into international
arrangements for security and defence, economic
assistance for educational and technical benefits. We in
Australia feel a strong sense of common interest and
mutuality of purpose in these matters. Despite the separateness
of our histories and of our cultural and ethnic backgrounds
our national aims and external attitudes are very similar
indeed. Respect for national independence, peace and stability,
economic development, widening opportunities and conditions
of freedom. Now this was summed up well by the distinguished
and able Foreign Minister of Thailand and he said that
although Australia was not racially a part of Asia, it was
considered as so because of the friendly interest she showed
in the welfare of the people of Asia.
aain, President Marcos, at the Summit Conference at
Manila had this to say about it: " The participation in this
meeting of the Prime Ministers of Australia and New Zealand
is a hopeful agry. These two freedom-loving nations are
our neighbours by the accident of geoeraphy but our friends
and partners by deliberate choice. They are as fully 
A 1 10
committed as ourselves to the freedom of Asia and to the
attainment of the secure and just peace indispensable to the
economic development of these combined nations. They have
much to contribute to the attainment of our common goals."
And that I think demonstrates that Australia has been
doing something of the job which your conference feels is the
responsibility that lies ahead of us.
I conclude by speaking of the goals that were set
out in one of the documents which emerged at the Manila
Conference. It was called the Joals of Freedom. It said
there, the seven nations gathered in Manila, declare
our unity, our resolve and our purpose in seeking together
the goals of freedom in Vietnam and in the Asian and Pacific
area." That document which I believe to be historic in its
impact and its implications, recites that the goals are:
" To be free from aggression. To conquer hunger,
illiteracy and disease. To build a region of
security, order and progress. To seek reconciliation
and peace throughout Asia and the Pacific."
If we can live up to those goals, all of us, not only
Australia but others in the region, then I believe we shall
be doing our job. 4 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 1/ 1967
VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I shall be in New Zealand at the invit ation of the New Zealand
Prime Minister, Mr. Keith Holyoake, from Thursday, February 2 until
Wednesday, February 8.
The friendship between New Zealand and Australia is close and
warm, It has been strengthened by our common background of British
democracy and parliamentary institutions. We have been comrades in the
cause of freedom and resistance to aggression in two WTorld Wars and, in more
recent years, in Korea, Malaysia and Viet Nam. We have many mutual
interests in trade, Commonwealth co-operation and in the security and
economic progress of South-East Asia and the Pacific. The word ANZAC
forged at Gallipoli has a special emotional and historic significance for
Australia and New Zealand. There is a personal friendship between Mr.
Holyoake and myself which appropriately reflects the relationship between our
two countries. This will be my second visit to New Zealand. The first was
made in 1950 when I led the Australian Delegation to the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Conference. I look forward to my discussions with Mr. Holyoake
and members of his Cabinet, also many other New Zealanders with whom I
shall be coming in contact. I welcome the opportunity to see something of
the considerable developments which are taking place in New Zealand in many
directions. CANBER RA,
January, 1967.
BACKGROUND: The last visit by an Australian Prime Minister to New Zealand
was in 1954 by Sir Robert Menzies. Mr. Holyoake was in Australia last June
for meetings of the SEATO Council.
Mr. Holt, while in New Zealand for the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association Conference of 1950, toured the North Is land
extensively but has never been previously to the South Island. His itinerary,
on this occasion, will take him to Wellington only in the North Island but to
several points of interest in the South Island.
Mr. Holt will depart from Sydney on Thursday, February 2,
and will arrive at Wellington Airport towards the end of the afternoon.
Friday will be spent in discussions with New Zealand Ministers, Saturday and
Sunday in attending various functions in Wiellington and in travelling to
Christchurch. During the remainder of the visit, the Prime Minister will be
visiting places in the South Island, and will leave Christchurch for Sydney
during the afternoon of Wednesday, Fetruary 8.
Mr. Holt will be accompanied by Mrs. Holt. With the Prime
Minister will travel also his Private Secretary, his Press Secretary and a
member of the Prime Minister's Department. 



VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY PRIME MINISTER KY
Extracts from Press Briefing by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold_-Holt
at Parliament House, Canberra 11th January, 1967
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, announced details
of the visit to Australia by Prime Minister Ky at a press briefing in Canberra
on January 11. After outlining the itinerary, Mr. Holt spoke about the background.
to the visit, gave his views on what he hoped it would achieve and
replied to critics of Prime Minister Ky and the projected visit to Australia.
BACKGROUND TO VISIT:
Speaking about how the visit developed, Mr. Holt said
" Some of you pressmen who were with me In Saigon
in April will remember that the Prime Minister then talked about
his desire to visit Australia again. He had been here in 1956 and
actually put in 79 hours of flying training In this country.
" But quite apart, of course, from any personal desire
to see again the country which he had visited in this way in earlier
years, he expressed a desire at our subsequent meeting together
at the Manila Conference to pay a visit, to have an opportunity, as
he put it, of thanking the people of Australia and New Zealand for
the help they had been giving to his country.
" I have no doubt also that he wants to give the Australian
people an opportunity to make some assessment of their own about
him. " Shortly before Christmas, our Ambassador advised us
that he had been told of the Prime Minister's desire to pay a short
visit here early in the New Year, and I brought this to the notice of
my Cabinet colleagues. They authorised me to inform the Prime
Minister through our Ambassador that we would welcome such a visit
and the opportunity it would provide for him to have talks with us
and to meet those off my colleagues with whom he had not previously
come into contact. " Quite apart from any other result of the visit, 1,
myself, am looking forward to hearing from the Prime Minister his
own account of developments in the military field, in processes of
constitutional development which are going on there, in the way in
which the economy is shaping up under the pressures of military
operations and the presence in that country of so vast a body of
servicemen from other countries. These are things in which we
are very much interested ourselves, and it is very valuable to
have a direct, first-hand account from the man who heads the
Government in the country. Of my own colleagues, some of them
have been there. Altogether this has some relevance to the attitude
which Australia should vezy properly take to this visit." / 2 
-2-
% here were five separate Ministerial visits to Viet Nam last
year, including my own visit. There was the visit of Mr. Whitlam. Mr.
Caiwell decided that he wasn't going himself and requested that Mr.
Whitlamn be enabled to go. There was Dr. Cairns' visit. A Parliamentary
delegation was there also from both sides of the House, and there have
been some visits by private Members of the Parliament. All of these
have been most courteously received and given every consideration and
attention, hospitably looked after. I gather that Mr. Whitlam himself
had an hour's interview with the Prime Minister and was given an official
dinner by the Foreign Minister of the Viet Nam Republic. So it will be
seen that up to this point of time, anyhow, the overwhelming balance of
hospitality and courtesy has been on the part of the Government of the
Republic of Viet Nam, and so I would hope my fellow Australians would
bear these facts in mind when we, ourselves, welcome an official
visitor and his party to this country."
OBJBCTWES OF VISIT
Mr. Holt said that both he and Prime Minister Ky were aware
that the visit would not please everybody, and would be opposed by some people
in Australia who had opposed military participation in Viet Nam.
He said
" Prime Minister Ky was aware of the likelihood of organised
demonstration by the same sort of people who had organised demonstrations
against myself and members of my Government and against President
Johnson when he visited us last year. But I am sure it must have been
in his mind that his visit would provide an opportunity for Australians to
form a more realistic appreciation of the main issues involved in not only
the Viet Nam conflict but the problems which a government engaged in
operations of war has to face in its efforts to build democratic institutions
and establish a democratically-based society.
" Also there is the personal aspect I mentioned of Australians
being able to makce a better, and I believe, a fairer assessment of the
man and the efforts that he and his colleagues are putting into this task
of building a democratically-based society, depsite the continuing
military operations.
DEVELOPMENT OF DEMOCRATIC PROCESSES
" Most of us are sufficiently close still to the events of the Second
World War to recall how we in Australia had to put much of our democratic
liberty in storage for the period of the war, and the Government had to
assume powers under its National Security legislation of a far-reaching
kind, and we recognise the need for this in the emergncy of war.
" Now here is a country where the Head of Government and his
colleagues are in almost daily danger of injury or assassination by
terrorist opponents. I think, myself, that it is quite remarkable that
the Government in those conditions should have pressed on as it has
vigorously with the effort to establish a constituent assembly. I
commented on this, you may remember, when I came back from the
Manila Conference. I would like to remind you of what I said at that
time I said then / 3 
-3
' It struck me as quite remarkable that the representatives
of the Republic of Viet Nam should be able to accept so explicitly
and however regretfully a continuing line of demarcation between
North and South Viet Nam until a decision has been taken by the
people of both areas for reunification. They stated that the work
of the constituent Assembly elected to draw up a constitution for
the Republic of Viet Nam was proceeding ahead of schedule.
They gave an undertaking that general electicns to select a
representative government would be held within six months of
the adoption of a constitution. Believing that the democratic
process must be strengthened at the local level as well as the
national level, the Vietnamese leaders announced that, to this
end, village and hamlet elections would be held at the beginning
of 1967. They further announced that they are preparing a
programme of national reconciliation. They would open all
doors to Vietnamese who had been misled or coerced into casting
their lot with the Vietcong. They would be given amnesty and
assisted to resume a normal existence as to their employment
and community participation.
" Further, the Vietnamese representatives made it clear
that they were not making any demands on North Viet Nam other
than that the aggression should cease. When it is considered that
the Republic of Viet Nam is still subjected daily to military and
terrorist attack with continuing infiltration and external subversion,
the attitude of the Vietnamese representatives at the conference
must be regarded as most helpful and forthcoming........
and so on.
OPPOSITION TO VISIT:
Referring to criticism of the visit, Mr. Holt said:
" It has interested me to note that the strongest criticisms
and these include those of Mr. Calwell have come from, in the main,
people who have neither met Prime Minister Ky nor have visited Viet Nam
and formed any impression for themselves of the situation there.
" It is rather significant that those members of Mr.
Calwell's own Party who have been there have, with the exception of the
statement which came from Dr. Cairns, refrained from comment
certainly of a critical kind.
" T was very interested this morning to see that the' Age'
consistently with the fine traditions of that paper, having taken a strong
editorial line, at the same time gave prominence to a special article by
its Saigon correspondent, Mr. Turner which, I think, gave from my own
contact with Prime Minister Ky in Viet Nam and at Manila, as accurate
an assessment as I could from my own judgment his sincerity, his
earnestness, his devotion to his country, his genuine efforts to build up
democratic institutions there."
Mr. Holt said that in view of the attitude which the Leader of the
Opposition ( Mr. Calwell) had adopted, it seemed that some unpleasantness
might be associated with the visit.
He continued...... / 4 
-4
" However, I am -sure that both he ( Prime Minister Ky)
and I will feel that-the-visit has been of value if it does give to the
Australian-people a better and fairer assessment of the man, his
policies and of the issues for which Australia, together with Viet
Nam and other friendly forces are fighting in that country.
Mr. Holt said he was satisfied In his own mind that the great majority
of Australians would welcome the opportunity to form their own judgment.
He added " That's the sort of atmosphere I have encountered, anyhow,
in my own contacts since this was first mooted. And we are able
from the sort of position in which I sit to get a fair idea of the
strength of public feeling from the correspondence which flows into
the office. " It strikes me as rather odd that it was quite acceptable
to Mr. Calwell for his Deputy to go to Viet Nam and be received in
the manner in which he was, to be personally in discussion with
Prime Minister Ky for what I understand to have been an hour, to
have accepted an official function; this apparently was entirely
acceptable in Mr. Calwell's eyes. To return that kind of hospitality
and in a country which has taken some pride in its hospitable spirit
is, in his eyes, a matter calling for the kind of condemnation which
he has publicly expressed. The only other thing I will say about it
is that having regard to Mr. Calwell's own serious experience and
almost tragic or fatal experience from so recent times, it does seem
the more remarkable that he should be actively inciting people to
demonstration. While he urges that this should be a peaceful atid
orderly demonstration, he recognises, since he disowns any
responsibility for any violence which may occur, that in that kind of
emotionally charged atmosphere,. there is always a danger of some
disorder and even violence as I have learnt myself over recent times.
" But I think that the Australian public is able to put Ito
own valuation on statements of this sort. I don't need to underline it."
PROCEDURE FOR INITIATING VISITS
Replying to a question about what might be considered an " appropriate
welcome" for Prime Minister Ky, Mr. Holt went on to explain to newsmen the
way in which such visits are arranged.
Mr. Holt began by saying he had been intrigued to see that some
press commentators had envisaged Australia would be staging something
comparable with the visit of President Johnson. Mr. Holt said it would be more
appropriate to compare the visit with that last year by the Thai Prime Minister,
Field Marshal Kittikachorn.
A once -in -a -lifetime visit by an American President was an historic
event of considerable Importance for this country and was treated accordingly.
For instance, he didn't think that the former British Prime Minister, Mr. Harold
Macmillan had expected anything. of that sort when he had visited Australia.
He continued.... " Prime Minister Ky's is an important visit but it is a visit
of a kind which we ourselves or I make to other countries, and the
Prime Minister is making here. 
Backgrounding the press, Mr. Holt said
" I think you should try and get in the heads of some of
your editorial writers the way these things occur. If I want t6 go
overseas as I did last year, for example, to see our troops hi'
four different countries, I don't sit back and wakt until somebody
says ' Come and visit us' and then as an incident to that seek Eo'
see them. If I have a purpose which seems to me to be important
enough to go to a country, soundings are made through the
Ambassador as to whether such a visit would be acceptable to the
government concerned. You may work out a bit of detail as to the
kind of visit it will be and where it will take you, and then whel
these details are completed, a formal and official invitation comes
as a matter of courtesy. This is protocol conduct from the
government concerned to the visitor. These things are done, but
I don't imply from that that this Is an unwelcome visit.
The press briefing concluded with the following questions and
answers
Q. Will representatives of the Opposition be Invited to Commonwealth
functions
MR. HOLT: Well, this raises a problem. You see, Mr. Calwell is the
official leader of the Labor Party. He has made his attitude, as
spokesman for the party, clearly known. He made it clear that not
only would he not accept any invitation but that he would demonstrate
against the visit personally and lead demonstrations against the
visit. Well, if we were to go behind his back and invite individual
members of his party, I think we could rightly be accused of trying
to make mischief in his own ranks. If, on the other hand, there
is a desire by members of his party, or he conveys any such desire
to us that they should be present at those functions where it would
be appropriate for Members of the Opposition to be present, of
course we would take account of that.
Q. This approach would have to come through Mr. Caiwell, would it,
or would you take it from individual Labor people?
MR. HOLT: Well, I think I would deal with it when I knew what had
occurred and the circumstances but I don't imagine that
we would receive individual approaches. He speaks far his party
and he is, at least pro tem, the leader of the party.
Q. Before Mr. Caiwell started sounding off, did you contemplate
giving time for Mr. Galwell to have a private meeting with Ky?
MR. HOLT: In the ordinary course of events, I am sure that not
only would we have wished to provide an opportunity but I am
certain that Prime Minister Ky would have been glad of an
opportunity to talk to members of the Opposition.
Q. Would you provide this opportunity now for Mr. Whitlam in spite
of the circumstances? ./ 6 
-6
MR. HOLT: Well, as I say, what is the proper course for a Head of
Government to follow when he has an official Leader of the
Opposition? I don't think it would be the proper course for
me to go behind the back of the Leader of the Opposition to
individual members of his party.
Q. Sir, had Marshal Ky kept entirely private his wish to come to thip
country, and approached you unofficially, privately throug4th
Department of External Affairs, would you have invited him
to come now?
MR. HOLT: If he had made known his desire to come, what reasons would
I have for not acceding to that wish? My colleagues were made
aware of the matter, of course; it is not my sole responsibility.
We work as a Cabinet on decisions of this sort. But can I rqmind
you that already in recent times, the Prime Minister has vi sited
Korea, the Philippines, Thailand, the Republic of China, Ma laysia
and Honolulu which does happen to be one of the United States.
So there are six countries, most of them associated in military
operations
Q. Was the United States involved in any way in negotiations for this
visit? Did they seek to persuade us?
MR. HOLT: Officially, I make no comment. Unofficially, I can say to you
there was certainly no attempt to dissuade us, or for that matter,
persuade us. We naturally let them know that this visit wils in
contemplation. We keep in close contact with them. We are in
virtually daily contact with them on the Viet Nam situation.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, apart from this being a sentimental journey,
will there be any hard political discussions?%
MR. HOLT: Well, I thought I had made it clear that I thought our discussions
in Cabinet would themselves be of considerable value. I ould
hope to see the Prime Minister give us an up-to-the-minute
cover of how things are developing in the military respect;'
You will remember out of Manila, instead of a " search andi
destroy" operation, there was a shift to the " clear and hol01"
type of operation. I would like to know how that is working out
in his eyes, his assessment of the latest operations there,*, how
the civil aid programmes are moving, and also what he feels
tbout the position of the economy under these pressures I spoke
of. Now that will be valuable in Itself for me and for tho hnore
senior of my colleagues who have already had some contact
with him, but for others who have never met him, I think it
will be very valuable also. I am looking to the opportunities
which will arise at one or two points here for closer and less
formal discussions with him myself.
0. Sir, will you be in any position to discuss any expansion of ciVIl aid?
MR. HOLT: I did mention to you earlier, I think, at our press conference
just before Christmas that a good deal of work is in progress in
the relevant Departments, reviewing our civil aid activities,
but I am not in a frosition to speak in any detail on that now,
nor would I expect to go into detail with him on that. That will
call for some further Cabinet consideration. 



FOR PRESS : 61/ 021 P. M. No. 2/ 1967
U THANT'S JUDGMENT ON VIET NAM
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
While U Thant, speaking at his first full-dress press
conference since his re-appointment, did so with the authority of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, his comments, challenging the
contention that Viet Nam is strategically vital to Western interests and
security are those which derive from his personal judgment. There will
be many in positions of authority who do not share this judgment and this
certainly includes my own Gove-i ment. We consider that the outcome in
Viet Nam is vital to the security of the countries of South-East Asia and the
Pacific and indeed of Asia generally.
VWe are convinccel that other free countries of this region
also believe this. I would include in this list Korea, the Republic of China,
Thailand, the Republic of Viet Nam, the Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore,
New Zealand and Australia. It is my own belief that this view is also
widely held in Japan, India and Indonesia.
The issue in Viet Nam is a basic factor affecting the
prospects for peace, prosperity and progress and true national independence
in this area of the world. It has been justly asserted that peace and
prcolperity are each indivisible. An issue which affects directly or indirectly
the well-being of so many of the world's people must be vital in any
realistic sense to the western world.
17 communist expansion in South-East Asia had been allowed
to proceed unchecked, I personally question whether the overthrow of
communism in Indonesia would have occurred. With much of Asia under
communist control and the sub-continent of India under threat, could the
western world have remained inactive? But for massive and effective
military and civil assistance from friendly countries outside the region,
the countries of South-East Asia would either have to carry a crippling
defence burden, frustrating to their plans of development and social improvement,
or live under constant threat of external danger or internal subversion
and terrorism. The free countries of this region want the western world
to know that we regard the contribution made in particular by the United
States to the security and progress of this area as fundamental to our
prospects of security and national growth.
It is our judgment that in accepting these burdens, the
United States is also performing a service vital to the prosperity, security
and well-being of the entire free world.
CANBERRA, 12th January, 1966 



67/ 0' 6
FOR PRESS: p. m. No. 3/ 1967
STATE FUNERAL FOR FORMER PRESIDENT OF
THE SENATE
The conunonweolth Government will accord a State funeral
for the late Honourable Gordon Brown, formerly President of the Senate
of the Commonwealth Parliament. The late Mr. Brown died in Brisbane
yesterday. A church service will take place at St. Philip's Church of
England, Cornwall Street, Thompson Estate, Brisbane at 11 a. m.
tomorrow and afterwards at the East Chapel, Mount Thompson
crematorium. Flags will be flown at half mast on Commonwealth buildings
in Cueensland and Canberra tomorrow.
CANBERRA, 13th January, 1967 



67/ 018
FOR PRESS P/ M No. 4/ 1967
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Arrangrements are being made for a further series of economic
consultations with representatives of industry, commerce, and the
trade unions. The Government continues to derive considerable
benefit from these discussions as a valuable means of keeping itself
fully informed on current and prospective developments in the
economy. A grroup of senior Ministers will meet representatives of a
group of national organisations in Canberra on the morning of 13th
February. The or-: anisations invited to attend are:
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
National Farmers' Union of Australia
Australian Primary Producers' Union
Australian Woolgrowers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Bmkers' Association
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Australian Council of Retailers
In the afternoon of that day separate meetings will take place
with the Manufacturin. g In dustries Advisory Council and the Export
Development Council and in the evenin with representatives of the
Australian Council of Trade Unions.
CANBERRA 18th January, 1967. 



FOR PRESS WI~
P. M. No. 5/ 1967
MEETING BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN CABINET
AND THE PRIME MINISTER OF VIET NAM, AIR
VICE MARSHAL KY
Prime Minister Ky and members of his government met with
the Australian Cabinet this morning.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, in introducing Air Vice
Marshal Ky paid a special tribute to the leadership the Prime Minister had
given Viet Nam at a most difficult time in its history. He expressed the
hope that the visit of Air Vice Marshal Ky and his Vietnamese colleagues to
Australia would further strengthen the good relations existing between
Australians and the people of South Viet Nam and promote a fuller understanding
of the dangers and difficulties the Government of South Viet Nam faced,
and the progress being made in overcoming them.
Air Vice Marshal Ky thanked the Australian Prime Minister
and Government for the opportunity given to visit Australia and meet
personally with Australians in their own country.
Prime Minister Ky outlined the progress his government was
making on all aspects of the development of stability and progress in Viet Nam.
He reported on steps taken in South Viet Nam since the Manila Conference
to implement the policy of the clear-and-hold operations of the South
Vietnamese Army and reported the encouraging improvement In the overall
military situation. The Vietnamese representatives explained in some detail
the programme for developing administration within the newly-liberated
areas in order to render them secure and ensure their social and economic
progress. Air Vice Marshal Ky thanked Cabinet on behalf of the
Government of Viet Nam for the action taken in sending Australian
servicemen to Viet Nam and expressed the gratitude of the South Vietnamese
people for the various Australian measures of economic and technical
assistance, including Colombo Plan, the SEATO Aid programme, the Army's
civic action programme and the work of voluntary aid, and particularly the
work of Australian surgical and medical teams. The continuing needs of
the population were described.
Prime Minister Ky outlined to Cabinet the advances made
towards the establishment of a new constitution for South Viet Nam.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, Informed Air Vice Marshal
Ky that the Australian Government was encouraged by the Vietnamese report
and confirmed Australia would continue to give practical assistance and
support to the efforts of the Vietnamese Government and people to establish
peace and stability in Viet Nam. An open door was always left for negotiations
with the Government of Hanoi, and the Prime Minister noted that the policy
in this respect, outlined at the Manila Summit Conference, would continue
to stand in the future. The Prime Minister thanked Air Vice Marshal Ky
and members of the Vietnamese Government for their review of the situation
in Viet Nam and expressed the hope that they would enjoy a successful and
happy visit In Australia.
CANBERRA, 19th January, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 611967
-ME MBERSHIP OF COMMONWEALTH GRANTS
COMMISSION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, announced
today the appointment of Mr. W. R. Lane as a Member of the
Commonwealth Grants Commission. The period of the appointment is
until 30th September, 1969.
Mr. Lane is a graduate of the Universities of
Queensland and Cambridge and at present he occupies the position of
senior lecturer in the Department of Economics in the University of
Queensland. He has specialised in the field of public finance and has
taken close interest in Commonwealth-State financial relations. During
1964 and 1965, Mr. Lane took leave from the university to work in the
Commonwealth Treasury where he concentrated on research into
Commonwealth -State financial relations.
The other members of the Commission are Sir Leslie
Melville LCB. E. ( Chairman) and Mr. H. J. Go odes, C. B. E.
CANBERRA, jnuary, 1967. 



67/ 023
FOR PRESS-: P. M. No. 7/ 1967
CIVIL AID FOR VIET NAM
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, today spoke with the
Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Hasluck and Mr. Askin and Sir Henry
Bolte about possible aid for Viet Nam from New South Wales and Victoria.
As a result of today's talks with Mr. Hasluck, arrangements
Swill be made for a First Assistant Secretary of the Department of External
V Affairs, Mr. K. C. 0. Shann, to meet the New South Wales Minister for
Conservation, Mr. J. G. Beale, to discuss what New South Wales might have
in mind with regard to technical aid.
At Avalon this morning, Sir Henry Bolte indicated to Mr.
Holt Victoria's interest in whatever might be done along these lines.
The Federal Cabinet will have before it a paper on civil
aid for Viet Nam at its next meeting on WeVdn esday week.
CAPBERRA, 23rd January, 1967.
NOTE This is not a Prime Ministerial statement. You could use it as
a statement of fact or attribute it to a spokesman or to me.
By the way, I notice that a lunch-time radio news bulletin quoted
the Prime Minister as describing the Ky visit as an " unqualified success".
VWhat he in fact said was that the visit had served the common purposes of
the two countries very well, and went on to describe why the visit had been
a success. At no time did he use the word " unqualified". A. EGGLETON
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister 



OFFICE OF THE PRESS SECRETAR Y TO THE
PRIME MINISTER,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA. 24th January, 1967.
PRIME MINISTER'S MOVEMENTS
The Prime Minister is returning to Melbourne at
lunch time today and will be working from his Melbourne office for
the rest of the week. Among other things, he will be preparing for his New
Zealand visit, ( he leaves for Wellington on Thursday week, 2nd February)
and on Thursday of this week, he will speak at an Australia Day luncheon
in Melbourne. Mr. Holt plans to spend the long weekend at Portsea
and will then return to Canberra. There will be Cabinet on the Wednesday
( 1st February) and if time permits, I will try to arrange a Heads of
Service briefing for the end of that day.
The PM is due to leave for New Zealand on the following
morning. Press Secretary I will be in Melbourne until Thursday evening when I
will return to Canberra for the weekend.
My Melbourne numbers are
635086 ( Office)
630261 ( Hotel Windsor after hours)
A. EGGLETON
Press Secretary 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 8/ 1967
AUSTRALIA DAY MESSAGE
From the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Today we Australians celebrate the 179th anniversary
of our founding. Ours is not a long story as the history of many other
nations is counted but in that time we have evolved our distinctive
national identity and character. We have been assisted to do so by our
heritage of British democracy and the cultures of European civilisation.
We owe much to the courage, the industry, the enterprise and the endurance
of earlier generations of Australians.
We are a fortunate people enjoying, in an environment
that is stable, peaceful and yet stimulating, one of the world's highest
living standards. We are growing both in maturity and stature.
But increasingly Australians of today are finding their
thoughts dwelling on the challenges, opportunities and the obligations
which derive from our proximity to the teeming countries of Asia and our
neighbours in the Pacific.
We face our tomorrows 1' n good heart. Our rich and
varied resources are being developed with skill and energy. We rank
already amongst the great trading nations of the world. And so we should
celebrate this national birthday with high expectation and confidence in
our future and with gratitude for our past.
It is a happy coincidence for me that this national day is
also the first anniversary of my own government. Confirmed in strength
so recently by the electorate, it will be my continuing endeavour to
promote the peaceful progress of the nation with fair dealing to all.
CANBERRA, January, 1967. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 9/ 1967
MR. HOLT'S FIRST YEAR AS PRIME MINISTER
From press enquiries received today, it seems that some
of you are interested in facts and figures to background a story about Mr.
Holt's first year as Prime Minister ( based on the anniversary of the
swearing-in of the First Holt Ministry on Australia Day last year).
For those preparing an item on this subject, the following
might be of interest
* In his first year of office, Mr, Holt has flown some 125, 000
miles in the course of his duties,
* He has had personal discussions with the leaders of ten countries
( not counting those represented at the Prime Ministers' Conference
in London). The meetings were with the leaders of Thailand, Viet
Nam, Malaysia, Singapore, Korea, the Philippines, New Zealand,
Malta, Britain and the United States.
The year's highlights...........
February, 1966
* Talks with Mr. Denis Healey on future defence East of Suez
Discussions with Vice-President Humphrey and Ambassador Harriman,
primarily on the question of Viet Nam
* Visit by the Prime Minister of Thailand ( Discussions on the threat of
Communist expansionism)
* Introduction of decimal currency
* Review of the state of the economy particularly in regard to
drought relief
* Dawson by-election.
March Parliament
* Decision to send task force to Viet Nam ( including National Servicemen)
Modification of migration laws in respect of Asians.
April Debate on Viet Nam continued.
Kooyong by-election
Visit by Queen Mother
" Prime Minister officially opened meeting of Inter -Parliamentary
Union in Canberra
Visit to Viet Nam, Thailand, Singapore and Malaysia
May * Return from South-East Asia
Queensland State elections. / 2 
-2-
June Premiers' Conference and Loan Council
Talks with the Prime Minister of New Zealand
Opening of SEATO Council Meeting
Departure for Washington and London.
T eturn from Britain and the U. S.
Talks with industry
Pre-Budget discussions
August Budget Departure for Prime Ministers' Conference
September Prime Ministers' Conference in London
October Visit to Australia by President Johnson
Manila Ccaference
November Election Campaign
Government returned with record majority
December "" Formation of Second Holt Ministry
January, 1967
Visit by Prime Minister Ky of Viet Nam
February Visit to New Zealand ( first by an Australian Prime Minister since
1954)
T. EGGLETON
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister
CANBERRA, January, 1967 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 12/ 1967
AUSTRALIA DAY CONGRATULATIONS
Congratulatory Australia Day messages have been arriving
in Canberra today from Heads of Government around the world.
By the end of the afternoon, greetings had been received
from:-Canada, China, India, Malagasy, Singapore,
Uganda, Viet Nam, Malta, Burma,
Indonesia
In his message, Prime Minister Ky of Miet Nam said
" On the occasion of the Australian Day, I should
like to ccnvey to you, Mr. Prime Minister, my heartiest
congratulations and my best wishes for the prosperity of the
people of Australia. I wish to take the opportunity of renewing
to you my deep appreciation for the warm welcome you reserved
to the Vietnamese delegation, to my wife and myself during our
visit to your country. Please accept, Mr. Prime Minister, the
renewed assurances of my highest consideration."
The message from Mr. Milton Obote, President of
Uganda read " On the occasion when you celebrate your National
Day, I wish on behalf of myself, the Government and the people
of Uganda to convey to you personally, the Government and the
people of Australia our warmest congratulations and good wishes.
We look forward to continued friendship and co-operation between
our two countries.
CANBERRA, 26th January, 1967. 



AUSTRALIA DAY LUNCHEON
ROYALE BALLROOM, LELBOURNE 26TH JANXUARY, 1967.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
MR. HOLT:
Mr. Chairman Your Excellencies Lady Delacombe Distinguished
guests, and this includes my Parliamentary and Ministerial
Colleagues and Ladies and Gentlemen:
First, Sir Norman I must congratulate you, and I do so
on behalf of the Commonwealth Government, for the work that you
and your colleagues are doing to bring a wider and deeper
observarce of this National Birthday of ours and it must be
very gratifying to you to look around at this room today and
see how the initiatives which you and those with you have set
in motion some years ago are now producing this wider recognition.
In this part of Australia by the stimulus you have given, I
believe, about Australia generally certainly in my own experience
and this is perhaps not merel a product of any particular initiative
of any organisation, but of the degree of progress and development
and maturity that is going on inside Australia itself there is
this deepening awareness of the significance of our National
Birthday and the growing desire to recognise it and participate
in it. The other thing which I feel you must be congratulated
upon is the enterprise you have shown in making each year a
selection of the man or woman who in your judgment is the Australian
of the Year. I make no complaint that Parliamentarians are
disbarred from this very fitting recognition. Ve get our recognition
in other ways usually a three yearly interval, either favourable
or unfavourable, and we get enough of the limelight anyhow, but
it has been truly said that a great nation is a nation which
produces great people. It doesn't have to be a large nation, or
a powerful nation if it produces great people it is a great nation,
and we have confidence and pride in the quality of the Australian
people, and we do well to recognise those Australians who have
shown such distinction in the year under review that they have
earned the accolade of their fellow Austrilians and have been
honoured with this proud title. You have chosen well, you have
spread your choices through various fields of activity of interest
and importance to us and this year's selection is well up to the
high standard of your earlier selection and I offer my personal
congratulations to hr. Brabham as I did when he secured the World
Championship. I want to say thank you on behalf of us ill, that includes
my Government and your organisation and all assembled here, indeed
all to whom his warm thoughtful, generous words will come. Thanks
from us all to Mr. iAelan for th. it remarkably eloquent address to
us. I felt that we could not have expressed for Australia and to
Australia more admirably the thin-s that we are feeling at this
time, and how appropriate it is that these words should come from
the representative in this city of our great Pacific partner nd
ally, the United States of America.
has seen ouIr satyw o tchoatu ntardiveiss edblryo ugbhetc aculsoes etrh e tyoegaert hetrh att hhaans evjeurs t beclfoosreed
in their history. The tangible evidence of this is that at four
separate sets Qf meetings the Heads of Jovernment of our two
countries came together for our common purposes. Never before in
the history of our two countries have the Heads of those Governments / 2 
-2-
met so often and for such common purposes as was the object of
our discussions, twice in Washington, at Manila and here in
Australia in the course of the year which has just closed-and
that is significant, I believe, of what is occurring in this
area of the world.
It is of course, no accident or coincidence that these
meetings should have taken place with such frequency because we,
with the United States, have so much in common in this area of
the world and indeed in the world at large; our common principles
of democratic freedom, our adherence to principles of social justice,
of a prospering world at peace, is the goal to which we constantly
aspire, our common determination to play such part as we can in
improving the lot of those people who live with us in the Pacific
and Asian region*
These are things which have held us closer together our
comradeship in the issue of Vietnam, where such a massive effort
has been put forward and so much sacrifice by the people of the
United States in initiative which is vital to us and indeed important
to the free world as a whole.
You spoke, Mr. Whelan, of the influence which this small
country, small in terms of population can exert and those were not
fullsome or overly flattering words, because we recognise that this
is a fact of modern history so far as our own country is concerned
in this area of the world and various factors have combined to
produce this. I discovered in my first few days of office that
both President Johnson and Prime Minister Wilson were inviting
me to maintain with them the same close, intimate correspondence
which had been developed between them by my predecessor Sir
Robert Menzies, and this surely was an indication that this small
country has a voice which is valued and respected. Some times,
people say, we are going American in my boyhood I used to hear
people say that we used to cling to the skirts of Downing Street;
we are not going American or for that matter going English we
are going Australian; we are -oing Australian. That is why the
Heads of these great JovernmenIs respect our views they want
independent views and frank views from a friend and from an ally
and that is what they received from us. I can assure you
communication is frequent. It is helpful, informative sincere
between us all and if helps us in the common purposes to which
we aspire. And so, as this becomes more widely known around
Asia and indeed throughout the world Australia s influence and prestige
develops. Then we have had the task in this vast continent not
always favoured by climate nor seasons nor fertility of the soil,
of building one of the affluent societies of the world and you
have referred to our standard of living our high standard of
living. This impresses our neighbours in this area of the world,
who themselves have problems of development. They seek advice
technical assistance and help of various kinds from us. They
don't do so with any feeling that in that way they are demeaning
themselves. We have from their point of view no great power
aspirations. We have no colonial past to embitter the relationship
between us. And we are a frank and friendly people whom generally
speaking, they find they can like. This too, helps to bulld our
influence and the bridges of friendship that we can create in Asia
are bridges which help us all. I could give you one short
illustration. Cambodia is a country which at the present time is
not supporting our policies, indeed it has no diplomatic relations
with the United States of America. And so in Cambodia Australia
represents the United States' interests, and in South Vietnam
Australia represents the interea. ta of Cambodia. Now this is an
example of the kind of thing I have in mind when I say this
country can be of value and is recognised as having that value by
our friends in this region of the world.
It is only in comparatively recent years that we have
built up our capacity for these things. In the foundation of our
Federation in 1901 there was a place for a Department of External
Affairs in the seven States then created. But it seemed to have 
-3-
so little to do and there was so little interest in its activities
that it was abolished in 1916 and it wasn't until 1955 that we
re-established a Department of External Affairs. It was in 1946
that we set up our first Mission to the United Nations in New
York. But since that time in the 20 years that have elapsed
there has been a -rowth of the establishment of the Department
from 410 personnel to 1,570 personnel. Where there were then 19
posts abroad representing Australia, that is in 1946, today there
are 54 and the largest number of any section of the world in which
these are found is the area of Asia and South East Asia, where we
have 19 posts, 18 in Europe, 7 in North and South America, 7 in
Africa and 3 in the South Facific. In addition, of course, we have
built up our trade posts, our immigration posts and other means of
carrying Australian interests out into other countries. But you
will gather that this is of comparatively recent origin. My
Parliamentary colleagues will know that it wasn't so very long ago
that a debate on External Affairs in our House would attract very
little interest or attention. Now it is the most eagerly sought
after for participation by Members of the Parliament.
You spoke, Mr. Whelan, of the standards we have built
up and this again illustrates how Australia can have an influence out
of all proportion to its numbers. If you look at the situation in
India-and I don't say this in respect of either of the two
countries I mentioned in any reflection on what they are doing for
themselves, we know quite clearly the problems which exist in these
countries but India is a country with a population 42 times that
of Australia and it has just doubled the value of gross national
products of Australia. Indonesia, which has nine times the population
of Australia, has a value of gross national product one third of
that of Australia; and you will see that the reference made by
Dr. i" helan in carrying on some remarks of mine that we have ranked
among the top ten or twelve tr. iding nations of the world. This has
revealed that our country, small in numbers, nevertheless has an
impact both in influence and in its economic strength, its trading
capacity out of all proportion to the population of our people.
So we can, I believe, on this our National Birthday,
feel that we are favoured people, that we have achievements behind us
to which we can look with pride, yet, as the proposer of the toast
so eloquently stressed, there are brighter horizons ahead for us.
. e share that judgment and confidence, Mr. Whelan, we Australians
believe that our tomorrows will be the greatest days of Australian
history. Jiven a world of peace we cannot only expand our own
country's capacity, build our population, improve our standards
but make a growing contribution to the welfare of those around us.
So, with that bright prospect before our eyes, with a vision
of a greater Australia greater in influence, greater in strength
greater in security and prosperity wve can today in all certainty
say it is a happy birthday for Australia and may there be many
happy returns ahead. Thank you again. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 10/ 1967
VISTT BY SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
COMMONWEALTH AFFAIR-S
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Secretary of State for Commonwealth Affairs, the
Right Honourable Herbert Bowden, C. B. M. will visit Australia
for about one week next mouth.
Accompanied by his wife, he will arrive on the 19th
February in the course of a tour of a number of Commonwealth countries
in this part of the world. While in Australia, he will visit Canberra,
Sydney and Melnurne. I am very glad Mr. Bowden will be coming to Australia.
I have already met him as have some of my colleagues, and this visit
will provide a useful opportunity for talks with Cabinet as a whole.
CANBERRA, 26th January, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 11/ 1967
EXCHANGE OF MESSAGES BETWEEN INDIA
AND AUSTRALIA
Australia and India, both of whom celebrate their
National Day on the 26th January, today exchanged congratulatory
messages. The message from the Australian Prime Minister, Mr. Holt,
to the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, read
" On behalf of my colleagues in the Government
and all Australians, I extend to you and thepeople of India
our sincere good wishes on your celebration of Republic
Day. Our countries are closely linked in sentiment
and association, and on this day of joint celebration we
express a special interest in the welfare and prosperity
of the people of India and look forward to our continued
friendship and co-operation."
Mrs. Gandhi in her message said:
" It gives me great pleasure to convey to you on
behalf of the Government and people of India, and on my
own behalf, our cordial greetings on the occasion of the
National Day of Australia. By a happy coincidence, we
share the same National Day. The relations between our
countries grow closer and new avenues of co-operation and
collaboration present themselves with welcome frequency.
On this important day, I also send you our best wishes for
your personal well-being and for the happiness, progress and
prosperity of the Australian people."
C/ N BERRA,
26th January, 1967 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 13/ 1967
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Arrangements have now been completed with the State
Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and the Australian
Loan Council to be held in Canberra on 16th and 17th February.
I shall preside at the Premiers' Conference and Mr.
McMahon, as Treasurer, will be Chairman of the Loan Council
CANBERRA, 27th January, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 14/ 1967
MEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD FOR ASSISTANCE TO
AUSTRALIAN COMPOSERS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, announced today
that following on the Commonwealth Government's decision to provide
assistance to enable Australian composers to make their works known,
arrangements have been completed for the setting-up of an Advisory Board
to administer this aid. The Membership of the Board is as follows
Sir Bernard Heinze, Chairman
Professor F. A. Callaway, Professor of Music,
University of Western Australia
Mr. John Hopkins, Director of Music, Australian
Broadcasting Commission, Sydney.
The Secretariat for this Board will be provided by the Prime
Minister's Department and enquiries should be addressed to the Secretary,
Advisory Board Commonwealth Assistance to Australian Composers, Prime
Minister's Department, Canberra.
CANBERRA, 29th January, 1967
BIOGRAPHICAL DETAILS REGARDING THE ABOVE:
Sir Bernard Heinze, M. A. ( Melbourne) LLD, Brit. Coil. Mus., Doc W. A.,
W7. R. C. M. , Loii Director N. S. W. Conservatorium of Music, Sydney,
1956-66. Ormond Professor of Music, University of Melbourne 1925-56.
Conductor University Symphony Orchestra 1924-32, Victorian Symphony
Orchestra 1933-1956.
Frank Adams Callaway, Mus. B. L. R. A. A. R. F. T. C. L.,
CX. Dean Faculty of Arts University of W. A. 1960-62. Professor
of Music, University of WN. A. Since 1959. Conductor University Choral
and Orchestral Societies W. A. since 1953. Member Australian Music
Examinations Board since 1955.
John Raymond Hopkins, Director of Music, Australian Broadcasting
Commission, Sydney. Hon. Fellow Royal Manchester College of Music.
Asst. Conductor B. B. C. Scottish Orchestra 1949 -52, Conductor B. B. C.
Northern Orchestra Manchester 1952-1957. National Orchestra N. Z.
Broadcasting Commission, Wellington 1957 -63. Musical Director N. Z.
Opera Co. 1957-61. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 15/ 1967
VISIT BY PRINCESS ALEXANDRA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
It has been announced in London that Princess Alexandra
and her husband, Mr. Angus Ogilvy, will make a private visit to Australia
beginning on 24th February and lasting for about a week. In the course of
the visit, Mr. Ogilvy will be attending to business interests in Australia.
Princess Alexandra and Mr. Ogilvy will already have made an official visit
to Burma before coming to Australia.
Although Princess Alexandra's visit will be private in
character, the Australian people, with their very happy recollections of
her earlier visit, will welcome her back to Australia. The idea that she
will spend what will be a virtual holiday here will give its own pleasure
to the Australian people.
Princess Alexandra and Mr. Ogilvy will begin their visit
in Canberra and will stay with the British High Commissioner and his wife,
Sir Charles and Lady Johnston, who are family friends of many years.
Later they will move to Sydney where they will stay at Kirribilli House as
guests of the Commonwealth Government.
Although the visit is private and will therefore be without
a list of formal engagements, I hope that Princess Alexandra will find
opportunities to move about. I am sure this would be her wish as well as
ours. CANBERRA, January, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 716
DUKE OF EDINBURGH'S VISIT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
His Royal Highness, the Duke of Edinburgh, has been
pleased to accept the following itinerary for his forthcoming visit to
Australia from 1st to 10th March
17Yednesday, 1st
Thursday, 2nd
Friday, 3rd
Saturday, 4th
Sunday, 5th
Monday, 6th
Tuesday, 7th
Wednesday, 8th
Thursday, 9th
Friday, 10th 1P. M. Arrive at Canberra by R. A. F.
Comet from Singapore via Darwin
In Canberra
Morning Leave Canberra for Melbourne
MorningLeave Melbourne for Tasmania
In Tasmania
MorningReturn to Melbourne
In Victoria
MorningLeave Melbourne for Sydney
In New South Wales
MorningLeave Sydney by R. A. F. Comet for
Singapore via Darwin
All internal air journeys will be by Royal Australian Air
Force aircraft. The Duke of Edinburgh's visit is primarily in connection
with the preliminary arrangements for his study conference which will
take place in Australia in May, 1968. He will have meetings with conference
organisers in Melbourne and Sydney. In Melbourne they will take place
on Friday 3rd and Tuesday, 7th March and in Sydney on Thursday, 9th March.
Consultations will now take plac-e with the State Governments
of New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania to prepare in draft form a
programme of engagements for those days when His Royal Highness is not
participating in study confe.-cence discussions. An announcement of these
details will be made after the proposals have been out to His Royal
Highness and accepted.
CANBERRA, 1st February, 19; 67 



. NEW ZEALAND -TOUR 1967
DEPARTURE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
FROM RAAF BASE, FAIRBAIRN, CANBERRA, A. C. T.
2ND FEBRUARY, 1967
Before departing on his tour of New Zealand, the Prime Minister made the
following comments to the press in response to questions
What is the purpose of your visit, Sir?
PM: Principally to get to know the New Zealand people better, to
let them see the Australian Prime Minister, have talks with my friend,
Mr. Holyoake, the New Zealand Prime Minister, meet Members of his
Cabinet, discuss matters we have in common interest, and inform myself
on some of their problems and get a better visual view of what New Zealand
is looking like after an absence of olaeen years.
Q. Would your trip, Sir, have any possible relation to the fact that Britain
might enter the ' European Common Market?
PM: My purpose is not to negotiate on any particular matter. I
will be free to discuss with Mr. Holyoake and his Cabinet any particular
matter they care to raise with me. But it is primarily a goodwill visit,
an attempt to make more frequent contact with our good friends and
allies of New Zealand. After all, we have been very close together in
many matters in the past. We have fought together in wars. We are
linked together now in Viet Nam
Q. Will Viet Nam figure largely in your talks?
PM: Well I am not raising any particular matter, as I said. I will
hold myself available for discussion on whatever topics the New Zealand
Government cares to raise with me. I am not discussing trade matters in
any depth or detail. As you know, Mr. McEwen will be going to New
Zealand quite shortly under the arrangement we have for annual
discussions on the New Zealand / Aus trali a Trade Agreement.
Q. Mr. Holt, New Zealand is quite famous for its big fish. WIill
you be doing any skin-diving over there?
PM: I don't expect so. The water is probably a good deal colder
than that around Portsea and that is cold enough at times.
Q. You are not nervous about Dinah, are you Mr. Prime Minister?
PM: Well I have never been nervous about any member of the.
feminine sex. 1 hope that Dinah will treat me kindly.
Q. Your swimming experience may be useful today, Sir.'.
PM: I would not like to contemplate that prospect, Harold. That is
not a very cheerful thought to put into my mind as we take off
1, of course, have had in the last twelve months several opportunities
for discussion with Mr. Holyoake. We have got to know each other very / 2 
2-
PM ( Contd.) well and we are on very good and friendly terms with each other.
But as I said at the outset, this is primarily to enable Mrs. Holt and
myself to get to-know the New Zealand people better and to get to
know through us, Australia better.
Q. It is quite an historic trip, Sir. According to reports, you are
the first Prime Minister to visit New Zealand, is this true?
PM: No. Andrew Fisher visited New Zealand in 1914 and conducted
some negotiations on mutual social security affairs, I understand.
And Sir Robert was there in 1954 on a short visit. B ut still it is a
long gap. We ought to be seeing each other more often. However, it
must be borne in mind that the Prime Ministers of the two countries
usually meet at the Prime Ministers' Conferences and other matters
of that sort, so they have not been out of touch.
Q. Will you be meeting any of the people, Sir?
PM: Certainly, there will be various occasions on which this will be
possible. But New Zealand people, after all, are very like Australians.
Thank you. 



NEW ZEALAND TOUR 1967
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD
HOLT, ON ARRIVAL AT WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND 2ND FEBRUARY, 1967
Mr. Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen:
I bring to you a very warm and friendly greeting to you,
Prime Minister, to your Government, and to the people of New Zealand
from the Government and people of Australia.
I am sure there is in my own country a strengthening
feeling that our two countries should be closer together in terms of
physical contact, in our policies, and in the mutual beneficial trade that can
develop between us, and as I made in my first year of office visits to our own
Forces abroad, I felt that my next priority, having got our Prime Ministers'
Conferen ce and the Manila Conference and matters of that sort, in which
both your Prime Minister and I were directly and personally involved, that
high on the list of priorities indeed, the first journey of the year in this
year after re-election should be a visit to New Zealand. I was delighted
to accept the invitation which my old friend, your Prime Minister, Keith
Holyoake, extended to me.
My wife has had the most fleeting contact only with New
Zealand. S" he was on a journey to America and had lunch in Auckland, I
think, some years ago. It is sixteen years since I was here, leading the
Australian delegation to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference at
Wellington.
( Mr. Holyoake: Too long.)
It is much too long, as you say, Keith. I think one of
the reasons why you have not seen more of Australian Prime Ministers is
that we do meet, and my predecessor did meet with you frequently, at the
Prime Ministers' Conferences abroad and at other g atherings of that sort,
but there is no substitute, if one wishes to understand a country and get to
know it, for the physical contact with the people and with the country. I
think I have learned more about New Zealand in the last seven days as I
tried to brief myself on what I might find here and on what we might discuss
here than I have learned in all the earlier years I have had in public life.
And there have been some very interecsting revelations for me coming from
that. I knew that we had won Davis Cups together. I did not realise that
the first time we ever won a Davis Cup was an Anzac combination, or
before there was an Anzac in those days in 1907, and I learned too
( Mr. Holyoake I will have to learn this, too)
Oh, yes, Norman Brookes and Wilding. They were a
very successful combination. I learned, too, that your cadets and this
is one reason why I would have been glad to see your guard of honour
your cadets have so frequently won the sword of honour at Duntroon. And
this year at the Officer Cadet School at Portsea where I have a seaside house,
my wife tells me that two New Zealanders were the two senior boys in that
particular year, one getting the sword of honour and the other the Queen's
Medal. So that we respect you not only as worthy friends but as worthy / 2 
2.
competitors il ields of sport~ aiid other areas where we come into contact
one with the other.-I amDooking forward tremendously to this visit and learning
more about your beautiful country, having talks which will be of value I am
sure to us all, with your Prime Minister and Members of his Cabinet. And
I am quite sure that this visit will be fruitful for all the purposes that I
expect from it, and that with so much in common to serve, that our joint
interests can be assisted by interchanges of this kind.
My colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister, will be with you
quite shortly for the periodical discussions on trade matters, and I would
hope that my own visit is itself a symptom of a desire for much more
frequent exchanges at all levels of Government between our two countries.
MR. HOLYOAKE: I would just say briefly I am not going to make a speech
unfortunately the weather has upset the earlier arrangements but again
a very warm personal welcome, Harold, and I know you know we are so
close. You know New Zealanders very well, but it is grand you should
have this opportunity of meeting them and getting to know them on their own
ground. With those few words, I warmly re-echo our welcome.
4 



NEW ZEALAND TOUR 1967
JOINT STATEMENT ISSUED BY MR. HOLYOAKE,
PRIME MINISTER OF NEW ZEALAND AND MR.
HOLT, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA FOLLOWING
CABINET DISCUSSIONS 3RD FEBRUARY, 1967
The Prime Ministers of New Zealand and Australia have
greatly welcomed this opportunity for a general discussion in the company
of members of the New Zealand Cabinet, on matters of common interest to
our two countries. All have found it of great value and the Prime Ministers
intend to take the further opportunities they will have for close discussion
during the remainder of the visit.
This meeting continues and expresses our close association,
and falls within the context of a series of intimate but informal talks which
have. taken place between the two Prime Ministers during the past year in
London at the Prime Ministers' Conference, in Canberra for the meeting of
the SEATO Council and at the Manila Conference.
Today we have talked together on our outlooks and policies
on matters of common interest in the South-East Asian and Pacific region,
international trade and the trade between our two countries. Our discussions
confirm that our interests run very much together.
We agree about the need to continue military assistance in
the defence of Viet Nam while, at the same time, actively searching for a
peaceful settlement. We recognise that, hand in hand with the military
effort, there is an increasing need for civil aid for the Vietnamese people.
We see the turn of events in Indonesia, of course, as of
major importance to both our countries, and we hope to see Indonesia
playing its full part in promoting peace and progress in the region.
Taking an overall view of South-East Asia, movements there
for greater regional co-operation offer encouraging possibilities for the
future. Having regard to the vital interest for both our countries in the
future of the region, we are agreed that Australia and New Zealand should
pursue policies designed to encourage these trends.
Along with our interest in South-East Asia is our concern
with developments within the South-West Pacific Region.
International trade and related matters are of particular
significance for our two countries. W~ e have a common interest in
achieving more realistic marketing arrangements for agricultural products.
British entry into the Common Market would produce problems for both
countries and the prospect of this calls for the continuation of our closest
consultation. Matters relating to the Free Trade Agreement will be the
subject of further and detailed discussion between our Deputy Prime
Ministers who are to meet shortly. 
-2-
We see scope for mutual benefit in closer co-operation
on tourism, particularly in the encouragement of movement of tourists
from other countries to New Zealand and Australia.
Australia and New Zealand share a deep-seated attachment
to the Commonwealth. They recognise, however, the growing complexities
and problems arising in our multi-racial Commonwealth and will co-operate
together towards promoting the Commonwealth as a force for peace and
progress in the world. We welcome the world role which Britain continues
to play in the achievement of the purposes of the Commonwealth. In this
connection, we attach great importance to the decision of Britain to maintain
a presence East of Suez and to continue to accept a role in South-East Asia.
Australia and New Zealand remain equally determined to play their part in
maintaining an adequate Commonwealth presence in the area.
We feel that in today's discussions we have been able to
further our common ourposes on immediate political and economic problems
and on world issues of special significance to our two countries. Our
discussions have been informal, frank and friendly, as befits our close
relationship. We intend that there shall be further similar meetings. 



UZN* Z EALAID TOUR 1967
PRESS CONF7RENCE HELD BY MR. HOLT
IAT 7ELLI.. JT ONl 33D FEBRUARY, 1967.
Q. Have you thought of any possiole increases Pew Zealand might
make towards the Australian T-Ask Force?
P. imv. Jell you would hardly expect the two Prime inisters to
come togetAer without some discussion occurrin. in relation to
Vietnam, and I think there was a reference to That in the
communique which has been put out. There have ouen su-restions
I gather that my visit here haLd some connection with That and the
size of ew Zealand forces. I make it quite clear that that was
not included in any of the purposes of m visit, nor would I presume
to 4ay to a Kew Zealand overnment what the level of its contriution
oug1nt to be. It is quite capable of resolving that matter for
itself, but I do say, as I recall it in the com: unique that we
continue our support of Vietnam in its defence against agression and
we actively join in the search for a just and peaceful negotiation
or a just an peaceful settlement arising out of a negotiation.
hat would be your vi3ew if the Few Zealand Tovernment were to
propose that the battalion now with the Commonwealth Strategic
dieserve be re-deployed in Vietnam, and has this been mentioned to
you in official conference?
P. M. I would not comment on that matter. It would raise questions
which would relate not only to * ustralia but to the United Kin dol:,
the level of forces required ir the Rieserve, and this is a matter which
if Mr. Holyoake wished to raise it, would no douut be considered by
the overnment. I make no comment on that.
Q. ' That was actually discussed this morning in Cabinet?
P. 1. I am not to De cross-examined on a Cabinet discusjion. I do
not know what the practice is in this country but in my country Cabinet
discussions are confidential to Cauinet, and I regarded this one as a
confidential discussion subject to hat aoT., ars in the com. munique.
2. How long do you exnect the Vietnam , iar to continue?
I wish I krnew the answer to that one. I could plan with much
more certainty in my own country than is the case. I do not think anyone
can predict the course either of the hostilities or of the prospec
for the negotiations. e are a little more hopeful than we were. I
do not know how justified those hopes are that negotiitions could
emerge, perhaps at no very distant point of time, but I do not claim to
have substantial evidence that this is likely to be so. There have
been su restions in more recent times, appearinr rather more
fre uenTy than before, that this is a possibility, and I imagine
that the events that are occurring irn China would have produced some
review of their situation on the part of quite a number of eople in
various countries. 3ut as to the course of hostilitis, I do oelieve
that the position represents a very suostantial improvement on the
situation which existed 12 months ago. I came back myself last April
saying' I :! as convinced we had reached a point where the Viet Cong
the North Vietnamese could not win this conflict, but at the same
time I predicted that if we were able to meet successfully the more
highly organised attacks more highly or anised in the sense of
proceeding from lare bodies of men th i there would be a disposition
to revert, to Yuerilla tactics, and the fact that guerilla tactics
have substanti lly increased, I think is confirmation of the vier
I held then, and also some substantial evidence that they have not been
farin' well where they have engaged our forces by ours, I mean those
of South Vietnam, the ;' mericans and other friendly forces in the area
they have not been engaging them successfully.
Have there been any serious discussions in Australia on a Pacific 
Trading Ijreement involving New Zealand, Australia, Japan, Canada,
and the United States,
F. M. No. It is the sort of thing that sometimes is canvassed in
academic argument or in the sort of speeches thit back-bench Members
make from time to time, but I would not say it has been seriously
entertained by any Jovernment of which I have an awareness. After
all there is no corresponding situation in Asia to that which exists
in Europe. The countries have very different stages of development,
very different stardards of industry and living, and while there is a
great trade developin and the trade between ' ustralia and Japan is
perhaps the most dramatic example I can point to, I wJould expect trade
generally uetween countries such -s our own and yours to increase as
population grows, consumption standards rise, as capacity to consume
increases these all have some beneficial trading effect for us.
i7e have, of course, a bilateral arrangement with Japan which by and
large is working very well. Certainly the trade is increasing very
satisfactorily. Q. You don't see any advantage in the idea at the moment?
P. M. 7ell, I don't regard it as practical politics or Dractical trading
at the present time, because there are significant differences, but that
does not mean there could not be useful bilateral arrangements.
Q. The EEC development su gests that Britain will eventually go into
the EEC and that hiw, Zealand and australia, as far as their own trade
with 3ritain is concerned, might be left outside. Do you think that this
will eventuall perhaps not in our lifetimes lead to economic
and perhaps political federation betweer Australia and lew ealand?
P. H. Y-u use the word'eventually' about entry to the Common iarket.
I don't think there is any early prospect ) f it from what one can
: gather from the exchanges that have taken place, but no one can predict
these things with certainty. as to eventual union of one form or
another between our two countries, the Frime Minister has to look to
the matters within his own likely ran e of ooeration and finds himself
busily enough occunied doing that, an I hav&amp; not detected in either
of our two countries any widespre'. d sentiment in favour of such a
course. I think most thoughtful people realise the practical problems
which arise, out that is not to say that there can't be a strengthening
of unity in objective and in arrangements of a tr ding and security
kind. ' ie already have security partnerships in ANZUS rad SEATO. ' ne
have a trading agreement which has not yet run more than about 12
months and as I said at the lunch tody, it would certainly be our
wish that this should operate to the mutual benefit of both countries.
It is not desired that we should have a one-' ay benefit.
Q. Are you satisfied with the way the Free Trade Agreement is
working at the moment?
P. M. I do not claim to be an authority on the operation of the Free
Trade Agreement. My colleague John Lcien. inister for Trade, is
our specialist and expert on this, and he : ill oe ovor here shortly
and you will be aole to put questions of this sort to him and expect
more detailed and rather more authoritative answers on it. I have
gathered from our end, and indeed from this end, that its value is
accepted. I have found in my dealings with the Premiers of my own
States th-t if we reach agreement on something and one group eels it
is not working out as satisfactorily as both parties imagined it would,
they quickly make that know-n and we make adjustment accordingly.
Q. Mr. i. att suggested that there was some dissatisfaction on this side,
and your reply w: as that this would be only temporary because of drought.
i. ould you sort of
P. F. No I do not want you to read that into it. I think he was making
the point that in the year in which it had been in existence it had
not produced the results that had been hoped for at this end. 7ihile
I do not have the full explanation with me of the factors which may
have influenced trade over the past 12 months, I did point to one of / 3 
the factors which could have affected the buoyancy of trade from
the Australian end. It has not been as lively a year for us as some of
the earlier ones in recent times, Lut we ' tre moving, we think., into
a more buoyant situation at the present time.
Q. Is there any sug estion that hew z" ealand might have to cut its
imports to Australia
P. M. Again, I do not , want to be pre-sed closely as to what were
entirely confidential discussions but I don't, by saying that,
want to convey the impression that the subject was ei her discussed
or thtt was the line of discussion. Don't read that into it. I
think these are matters which more appropriately could be put to
Hol oake.
Q. On the free trade business, I zet the impression that in Australia
they are reluctant to take finisheA products from New 4ealand. That
is, we have already struck trouble with paper pulp and kraft paern
plywood, and so on. Is there any likelihood of that attitude ceaning
up in the future?
P. You mentioned one conspicuous matter and I was told by mcolleague,
r. , Mc2wen, that this was one of the matters he would be
discussing wnhen he came over here. _ ut I have not gained the
impression myself, and frtnkly there has not been a -ood deal of
Cabinet discussion on this since the " oreement came into force but
I have not gained the inmpression mysel that it is working out
unsatisfa. ctorily. ho doubt if that is the vie;; held here it will
be conveyed to him ind he will be reporting back to us, but we have
a bi': country to tAminister. It has " t lot of proolems, and I do not
try To oe a specialist on all of them. I look to my M7inisters to
attend to those matters which fall within their own jurisdiction.
Q. Sir, Do you think there is any possibility or any advanta-e
in the eventual amalgamn. tion of iNew ] e-land and Austr-alian A" rmed
Forces? ' ell, a-ain that raises urobles uoth of a technical kind
matters of n' 1lional identity ifntters of national pride I suppcse,
also and we have found in the past when we have been linked
together nd resisting ag ression or firhting in the cause of
freedom that the forces o our two cournries got alon extremely
w. ell together. After all it us in that spirit that the anzac
tradition became establised. I am sure th: t the Service representatives
would be looking for ways and means to collaborate more effectively
together if they do hapren to be working in the field together. In
Vietnam for example, your artillery element there works in closely
with not only the ;' ustralian Artillery but in support of the , ustr. lian
Infantry. Q. Sir, Australia's military contributions for South East Asia are
much bi g-er and include things like conscripted troops, whereas hew
Zealand is much smaller ind we do not have conscription. Is there a
feeling in Australia that New Zealanders are not aware of the dangers
to this pirt of the world from enemies in South Iast Alsia?
P. M. I do not hear that discussed in Australia. I think most
Australians reco nise th. t just L s we have commitments in other
directions which affect the scale of contributions e can make Few
,, ela. nd his its own commitments and its own uroblems. Currently it
is facing the quite difficult problem of providing -ll the overseis
exchange it needs for its various purposes but, as I said earlier,
I am sure we will feel tha at ! ew 1ealand believes it can d should do,
can be safely left to the Jovernment of the Iew Zealand people. I may
say that sometimes you find th t the degree of support varies according
to geo-raphl I h-. ve , alwayfso und th t the people of Queensland who
were ciosesI to the threat of invasion during the last ur tndlwho
were close, of course to the battle of the Coral Sea., which had the
effect of nreventing the invasion of Australia, appear to be more
defence-minded, more sensitive to threats to their own security, than
0../ 4 
-4-
some of the southern areas. '. estern Austrilians, too, right at the
extreme side of the Continent, seemed to feel the more remote
because they are separated from us, not by water as you are, out
by a reat Ueal of territory includin 2 ood deal of desert.
They too sometimes feel a little isolte from the defence
stanpoint and press for more defence activity in their area.
lut I would not read too much into those matters. I think the
Nation as a whole revealed in the course of the last election that
it ws giving substantial support to Jovernment policies in this
field. Q. gould you care to co:; ment on some of r. Arthur Calwell's
statements and activities when '' arshal Ky came to Australia?
P. M. I did not think it appropriate to o so in Australia, and
I have not come here to New eiland to say things about him here
I was not disposed to say in my own country. I think Februtry
8th will be a critical day so far s he is concerned, * nd I will
wait until I learn hat his intentions are on that day.
Q. Do you foresoe any move towards or need for the re-armament
of Japan in years to come, or a defence alliance between Australia
or New Zealand and Japan, particularly if the Chinese hostilities
continue? F. YE. ell, you are getting into a field of thinking which would
be beyond my owin cornetence at nresent. This raises issues in
Japan s relations ; ih much larger countri! s than ours, and of course
relates also to its own special situation in th . t area of the world.
I do not feel I can make 1 useful comment about it.
Q. In your talks this morning did you discuss Indonesia? Did you
talk sout the supply of credit from Australia?
F. M. o. ut I don't -ant to get to answers by exhausting other
possibilities. Q. You have had decimal currency for a year now-. . e are going to
change in July. Some neople come nack from trips to Australia and
say you are having all sorts of problems with it. Other people
come vack and say it is as simple as a breeze. Could you give us
some idea for people here?
F. M. As in most st: btements at poles of the extreme, there is something
to be said, I suppose in between in respect of it. Those of us who had a
large part to play with the introduction of decimal currenc and
it was planned n'd carried through durin my own period s Treasurur
in the Commonwealth have been * rtified by the smoothness of the
transition and the absence of difficulties which we had anticipated.
When you become accustomed to a particulhr currency through your
lifetime, it does call for some mental adjustment. Even I find myself
at times converting back into pounds from dollars so th tt I wvill have
a clearer idea of just what it is I am asked to pay for something.
This even occurs on the race course. In the first weeks I had to work
out how much I would normally have put on this horse in pounds, mnd
relate that to dollars. But what you might call the machinery aspects,
I think, have functioned extremely * ell. By mnlchinery I am not
thinking in particulir of the conversion of the machinery with E. S. D.
symbols over to the dollar letterir. ThaLt is going ahead well in
front of schedule. I think it is Wout seven months ahead of schedule
and this has been pleasing. The cost of the conversion worked out
at less than we had originally estim-ted. Thtt, too, was gratifying.
At the moment we are passin' throu--h this more awkward stage :. hich
is unavoidable in a transition of This kind whee you do have some
machines working on one letterin and others w orking on the new
decimal lettering. You do have some of the old coins current together
with the new decimal coins, but I think most people are finding it a
much easier adjustment than they had contenplate and the advantages
of it undoubtedly far outwei h may temporary inconvenience. The
oun er generation of Australia ns and ew Zealanders are -oing to
enefit from this in their education. 1e were finding mentioned 
this yesterday to someone here that the larger firms in Australia,
before decimalisation was introduced were conducting their accounts
inside their organisations on the b'sis of decimals and then
converting back into pounds, shillins and pence for any transactions
that went on outside. I think this is pretty good proof that there
was a substantial convenience in accountancy, anyhow, in workinr
on the decimal basis. ,7e will settle down to it much more quicly
than -ie had earlier anticipted, and the fact that not only your
country but the United Kirdom As now decided to go decimalo I
think is further proof th'N it is worth while.
Q. Y'ere there many com plhints in your country from consumers about
prices going up after the change-over?
P. 1. There were a lot of predictions beforehand that traders would
take advantage of this or thit, rices would go up, but if I recollect
correctly and I think I do the movement in our Consumrer Index
wl-s rather smaller after decimalisation, certainly within the last
quarter just under review when decimal currency had been in effect
some time. There are other causes which sear on movements in the
Consumer Index even the actions of uovernments in nutting up fares
and rates and the excise on beer and tobatcco. These things all come
into the Consumer Index. He studied this quite closely in Australia,
lookin at the South frican experience, ind there is no evidence
in South Africa thft costs have risen beyond what might have been
re-arded as the normal order of progression certainly at no higher
ra e than in the period preceding decinalisation.
Q. 7ith the end of Indonesian confrontation and the comparative
stability in South 7est Asi, how long do you foresee a need for the
Commonwealth StrLtegic Reserve?
P. M. I would hone it would continue indefinitely, because I am
quite certain th'it it provides, with the British presence in that
area of the world, a stabilising and moderatinZ influence whose
presence is not resented by the Jovernments of the two cnuntries
most closely associated geogrphically Malaysi or Singapore. I
am sure they welcome the adied securi ty the presence there brings
to them. when the Minister for Defence w. s here in Australia and
presumably your Dean Eyre was over with us 2, t the time there was
some feelinx then tha-i. t the British might in the ne-r future or by
1970 move their troons from that area. . e emphasised how important
we felt it to be that they should remain there, and were very
oratified tha-. t the United Kingdom Toverrment subsequently announced
it proposed to keep them there indefinitely rovidin-that their
presence was accepable to the countries most intimaely concerned.
So I do not see an early movement back of troons in the Strategic
Reserve. In any event we would not be likely to reduce our
establishment. are currently building up the ' ustraian Re ular
Army establishnent to about 40,000 personnel md whether you fiave
them stationed in Australia, or at some noint such as this ;; here
the are tle to deal more quickly with troulle should it emerge, is a
matter of military advice expert technicl advice, I think. There
are political questions which arise also but we look at the complex
of these things to see what ought to be Aone.
Q. Has there been any discus ion of further ustralian credit for
New Zealand following the pounds twelve million loan which we obtained
late last year?
I ell, I have no comment to mrke on thit.
Q. Has it been raised?
Do you imean today, or for th: at matter at any earlier point of
time, no.
Q. Referring in a rather round-about way to military conscription
in Australia, did your Jovernment not wish -t some stige or other
/ 6 
-6-
that it would have oeen simpler to detach troops from the
Commonwealth Strategic Reserve rather than introduce conscription?
en we introduced conscription and perhaps I should remind
you, not that in any ay I wish to avoid the issue, but as a matter
of historical fact, the decision in relation to that matter was taken
before my Jovernment came into existence. I was a supporter of the
decision and a party in the Cabinet to its adoption, but it was not
a decision which wis taken during my own term. We implemented it, and
the decision to introduce national service training and to make use
of national service trainees for overseas service ' as based on the
best military advice we could secure and at the time we would not have
found it racticable to use the Strategic ieserve and serve the
commitments for which they were intended and at the same time have
the numer of troops we wanted available for participation in the
Vietnam conflict. It was to us a necessary decision, and I think the
Australian Electorate has now accepted that fact.
* e X K ; i t X 



NEW ZEALAND TOUR 1967
LUNCHEON 3IVEN 3Y MR. HOLYOAKE, PRIIE M! INISTER
OF NEW ZEALAND IN HONOUR OF MR. HOLT, PRIME
MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
" ELLIUITON, N' ZEALAND33RD FLBRUARY, 1967
Text of Speech made by Mr. Hugh '. att ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition)
The Right Hon. the Prime Minister, the Right Hon. M1r. Holt, Your
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Could I first of all apologise for the absence of the
Leader of the Opposition Mr. Kirk, who I understand could well be
Sir in your country while you are over here. He would have loved
to ave joined y. u oday at this function. But I do want to join
with the Prime Minister in extending a very warm welcome at least
as warm a welcome as it is humanly possible to extend on such a day
as this in : ellington to welcome you to our shores a very important
occasion for us here in Iew Zealand. As the Prime Minister has
stated we are the same people: we have the same principles: we
have the same ideals: we enjoy similar standards of living: and
the more we visit one another's countries the richer we will be.
There was a time when New Zealand depended a great deal on Australia:
in fact there was a time when we were -overned from Australia
at least, from part of Australia: New oouth iales. But we grew
up and we gained our independence, our own ' overnment but we are
not completely independent of one another, neither would we wish
to be. But it is strange how many people in the world still think
that New Zealand is part of Australia. And you know somehow Sir,
that does annoy Kiwis. ' hen you are in New York or London and somebody
says to you "' here are you from": " I'm from New Zealand": " Oh,
that's an island off the coast of Australia, isn't it," And then
of course we have to explain, we have to explain that we are not
any longer roverned by Australia that we are not part of the
Australian Constitution but that we do depend a great deal on
Australia, on our friendship and co-operation one with the other.
It is only natural that we will have a great deal in common.
Incidentally, I was born in Australia, But I have never in my
whole life taken any credit for that.
One of the problems facing both of our nations at
this time is this pro.. lem of trade. Our growth and expansion has
brought immense problems with it and we are ooth concerned with
expanding our trade with the rest of the world. In the past you
have buiTt your industry. Your industrial development has been
nursed and encouraged by your aovernment's protection. It has
made Australia a treat industrial country. We admire your drive
and expansion in the field of trade and the standard of
workmanship is a credit to your technicians. ; Je are pleased to
purchase the products of your industry, but at the same time we
believe you could purchase more from us. The New Zealand-Australia
Free Trahe Agreement signed two years ago was designed to " ive
freer trade between the two countries, but unfortunately there
are some who believe that the reverse is indeed happening. I hope
that the spirit behind the Free Trade Agreement is in fact given
effect to and that the figures that have oeen produced to show
that New 2ealand is indeed in a worse position today than she was
when the igreement was signed are only a temporary indication of
a reverse, and that before long Australia will be purchasing more
of New Zealand's production. iie need to trade with you: we want
to purchase Australian goods: but we have a feeling that Australia
could do more to assist New Zealand by purchasing her production. / 2 
-2-
I have stated that you concentrated on developig
your industry. We in New Zealand have done likewise. 7e must
continue to do so. We can learn a lesson fr-m what you have
achieved in your country. You gave protection to your
industry. must'continue to protect ours, to maintain our
standard of livi n, and as long as we can both understand the
problems that each country faces well, then, we can really
achieve something. New Zealand has some advantages over
Australia. In this field Australia has many advantages over
New Zealand. One advantage we have that I am sure you would love
to have is some of that cheap electric power that we can produce
from the lakes and the rivers that you will have an opportunity
of seeing. v. e in New Zealand are using that cheap power for the
development of our industry, and we must continue to do so. You
will not have the opportunity on this visit of seeing the
foundation being laid for New Zealand's iron and steel industry
in the North Island. I wish you had. I hope you will return to
see it, and I hope you will realise that when you do, Sir, this
great iron and steel industry will mean that we will be producing
here in New Zealand much of the -oods that we are now importing
from Australia. ' ie have to do it, because we have to be selfsupporting
where we possibly can. I read from your itinerary
that you will be visiting the South Island. You will see there,
especially at this time of the year some of the west wheat
growing country in the world wheat growing country that can
produce over twice as many Dushels per acre as the wheatgrowing
country of Australia. It is not so long ago that Few Zealand
exported wheat to Australia. Last year we imrported 4 1/ 2 million
bushels, but when you pay a visit to the South Island, Sir, you
will see that this year here are 20 000 a-ditional acres of
wheat under production, and so we will only need to buy one
million bushels of wheat from Australia possibly, and I hope we
will see the day . when we will not have to buy ary wheat from
Australia. Now, Sir, that does not mean that we do not want to
trade with Australia, but we are following a pattern that you
have shown us, that we, as you, have to develop our own country.
I do believe that there is a -reat future as the
Prime M inister has said, in the tourist industry, but I do believe,
Sir, that we know you much better than you know us. we know
when obooy Si . pson wins the toss or )' oes out for a duck, or whether
the great Australian Davis Cup is eing played for or whether the
, allabies have won their matc in France or in Scotland. know
everything that you do, but when we go to Sydney or to Melbourne
we can scarcely read a word of what is happening in Eew Zealand.
I think a great deal more can oe done to advertise our country
in your country as you hive done to advertise your country in ours.
And so, Sir, I do say th', t I appreciate the opportunity of oining
with the Prime Minister in this very warm welcome to you today.
May you and Mrs. Holt have a most enjoyable few days in this
country of ours, and may you leave it with an appreciation of t; e
fact that it is worth coming back to and it is worth encouraging
other Australians to do likewise. All the very best to you and a
safe journey home.
Right Hon. Keith Holyoake
Mrs Stevenson and Jentlemen:
I give you the toast to the 3uest of Honour, the Right
Hon. Harold Holy. 



NE, ZEALAND TOUR 1967
LUNCHEON IVEN BY IR. HOLYOAKI, PRIME MIFISTER
OF NE'J ZEALMND IN HONOUR OF MR. HOLT, PRIME
MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
': ELLINJTON, EL Z: ALAND 3RD FLJRUARY, 1967.
Text of Speech Made by IMir. HIolvoake
Right Hon. Harold Holt, Mr:. Stevenson, Your Excellencies, my
Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, and Jentlemen:
It gives me tremendous pleasure on oehalf of you all
and on behalf of all of the people of New Zealand, to issue the
warmest welcome that I am capaole of doing to our Juest of Honour,
the Ri. ht Hon. Harold Holt, Prime Minister of Australia. It is
only 12 brief months since he ecame Prime Minister of Australia,
but in that time he has already won for himself a very distinctive
place and earned a reputation for decision-making and for veing a
very decisive and active leader, and we are all delighted that
he is able to find the time possible practically a long weekend
out of a very busy life to come to meet New Zealanders on their
own ground. This we take as a great compliment to us. are
delighted also of course that his charming and elegant wife was
aole to accompany him.
Need I say that Australians and ' ew Zealanders have
always been close friends, and we always will be. I think that
our relationship is without parallel throughout the world. It is
unique. There is nothing quite like it. It is true that we are
linked together by treaty, but it is not the formal word, it is
not the printed word, it is not the treaty that really binds us
together. These things I think, are embedded deep in our
unIerstanding of each other, in our mutual respect, in our common
heritage, and in our common destiny.
' e have always oeen aware of many similarities. lie
have the same language almost the same, I'm not up to date on
this. I remember an old friend of mine many years ago telling me
that he could speak the Australian language. So I asked him why,
and he told me he visited Australia once. It was in the time of
the fight for the universal franchise a long time ago. He said
he was going down a street at King's Blank Cross and he heard two
Australians arguin, and one said " Bill, what do they mean ' one
man, one vote' And Bill said ".' ell it's simple: it's just
one blank man one blank vote." And John said if they
blanketty well mean one blank man, one blank vote, why don't they
blanketty well say so." He contended that he had in that short
time learned to speak the Australian language. I am not better
informed on what he meant or actually what happened than that.
Our languae our origins, our membership of the
Commonwealth, our mutual love of sport our determination to fight
for the liberties of man which we consider fundamental to our
mutual way of life these thinis we have so much in common. These
are, I believe, the basic truths and principles upon which our
deep friendship rests: these are the things. I do want to make
this point and Harold Holt ; would, I am sure, wish me to make it
that neither of us is either the image or the echo of the other.
* 7e have also dissimilar characteristics and these are understandable.
New Zealand is a group of islands. Australia is a great continent
one of the treat continents of the world. In New Zealand we have
almost matchless resources for pastoral pursuits, the growing of / 2 
-2-
grass almost a perfect climate as you will have noticed,
Harold. I am bound in extenuation to point out that this is
the tail-end of cyclone " Dinah" which originated somewhere in the
great continent towards our north-west somewhere, I think. On
the other hand, of course, Australia has vast supplies of coal,
iron, and very many other now very valuable minerals, in addition
to her great agricultural wealth. Dissimilar we have less than
000,000 population Australia, 12 000,000. So these are the
obvious differences between us, and that will continue to produce and
perhaps emphasise, and some people over-emphasise further
aifferences. I think this an inevitable thing. People do tend to
over-emphasise the difference oetween Jrothers and sisters, because
they expect them to be so much alike. They do not do this where
people are not closely related. These are the obvious differences
in what we can produce, what we may achieve, but what is important,
we think, is that our peoples are ooth seeking the same goals
together and in very much the same ways. 1e are moving toward
them together. This I believe, particularly in recent years
has been happening in a very great variety of settings in the
Commonwealth in the United Nations, in SEATO and AZUS, in ECAFE
the Colombo flan, ASPAC, and now in the Asian Development 3ank and
other spheres I could mention. I think it is worth calling to our
minds that some 65 years ago, when the people of Australia were
considering the question of a Federal Constitution, we were
invited to discuss this with them and perhaps take a part and
become a part of that Federation. It was considered. Those who
preceded us decided no. ie had our own special destiny: we had
our own special aspirations: and so we would keep apart. ., e
felt that we had -erhaps a distinctive contrioution to make. In
our humble way we have tried to make it. 3ut again I come back to
the fact that particul. rly in the last 25 years in this very
rapidly changing world, we have reacted to the same problems, the
same positions, the same challenges in very much the same way. The
discussions that my Cabinet colleagues and I were privileged to
have with Mr. Holt this morning only tended and served to emphasise
and underline that fact. We have ooth learned of course that we
not only cannot ignore but we desire to know our near neighbours
in the north much better the people of South East Asia and of
Asia generally. ie realise more than ever and every day that
goes past does emphasise it that our destiny is tied up with
these countries in the matter of security, culture trade. Je
can learn much from them, from the association with their old
and their rich cultures.
' e have learned to make new friends and we have
made them very much together. Yes, there are differences between
us but we do recognise that our paths lie very close parallel.
I think nerhaps the development of recent years with the tremendous
travel between our two countries of our own peoples: I am
informed about 50,000 each year now businessmen, tourists,
artists, sportsmen and the rest. This of course, is serving to
tie us much more closely together, and 1 look forward, we in ew
Zealand look forward, to a continuation and indeed a growth of
these exchanges between our peoples so that not only Parliamentarians,
not only businessmen, but the man in the street as we label him,
can get to know the other on their own ground. This is very
important indeed.
Mrs. Stevenson, Your Excellencies, Jentlemen, there is so much
more that one could say, but you will want to listen to Harold
Holt, our Guest of Honour. I am . oing presently to invite I'r.
Hugh ;. att, the Deputy Leader of te Opposition, to join me in
this welcome before I propose the toast to our Juest of Honour.
All I can say is that on your behalf those of you gathered
here: and this Harold, is a very good cross-section of all of
our people, so I know I can speak on uehalf of all our people when
I say to you that I cannot think of anybody who could possibly be
more warmly welcomed here in lellington and in New Zealand you
and your wife. May you feel this in the few days you are here:, 
-3-
may you feel this warmth of friendship exuding and reaching out
towards you. May you, as a result of th: t, take awa very happy
memories, deep memories, of the fondness o the people of iew
Zealand for yourself, your wife, and the people of ustralia
generally. You are just exactly a thousand times welcome here in
. ellin-ton and New Zealand. Now I invite Mr. Hugh . i'att to join
me in this welcome. H--1 



NEW ZEALAND TOUR 1967
LUNCHEON GIVEN BY MR. HOLYOAKE, PRIME MINISTER
OF NEW ZEALAND IN HONOUR OF MR. HOLT, PRIMS
MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
. ELLIBTON, NE ZEALAND 3RD FE3RUaRY, 1967
Text of Speech MaJ'e by Mr. Holt
Prime Minister: thit distiguished Australian emigrant, Mr.
,; att: Your Excellencies: Mrs. Stevenson and other Parliamentary
colleagues: Ladies and Jentlemen:
First, Prime Minister and I do not know that I will go
on saying " Prime M'vinister" because I am liable to lapse into
something more familiar through force of habit, but first, Prime
IMinister may I thank you very warmly indeed on behalf of my wife
and myself for what you have said so generously and in such warm
and friendly terms about us and about the people I have at this
time the honour to lead. I stand in this room recalling memories
which do not seem all that long distant in point of recollection
although it was about 16 years ago in point of time, because my
first and only previous visit to this beautiful country of yours
was as the leader of the Australian Delegation to the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association, and I recall us having eaten in this
room and hearing oratory no less extensive than that to which you
are to be subjected here today, and I have always held very
pleasant recollections of New 2ealand from that visit. You were
kind enouh to see to it that I then was able to visit some
considerable nart of this northern island, and that is really
my justification for spending so much time in the South on this
occasion. I hope in the years t. come there will be many more
visits and that I shall see very much more of this country than
will be possible even through the length of this particular visit.
It is always good to come amongst friends, and it is even
better to come amongst friends who have common interests, common
purposes to serve, who can themselves act in a way that is
beneficial to you and give you the opportunity to act in a way
which is beneficial to them.
And I must say in passin Yr. ' att, following your
reference to trade between our two countries, that it is the desire
of my Government that any agreements we make on matters of trade
should serve not just the interests of one country, but should be
mutually beneficial for both our countries, and if you find, or if
experience proves that this is not the way the Agreement is
working out if it does not serve our common purposes as fully as
we would both hope, then you will find a helpful and constructive
Australian attitude in order to make that possible, and my
colleague, the Minister for Trade, will be over here to confer with
his opposite numoer, your Deputy Prime Minister, very shortly, and
it will be in that spirit that he will do so: and that is largely
because of the feeling that we have for each other, but it is also
attributable to the recognition that a growiig, prosperig,
developing, strengthening New Zealand is of advantage and strength
and help in promoting the prosoeritv of the country I represent.
So here is enlightened self-interes't given an opportunity to express
itself, and exoress itself in an environment of friendship and
co-operation together.
You spoke, I think, Prime Minister, of the historic fact
/ 2 
-2-
that in 1901 some consideration was given to a closer union
politically-with our two countries, and there have been people
in our Parliaments since that time there may have jeen one or
two in yours: they have been less vocal so far as I have been
aware who have continued to advocate this. I view that prospect
of course with rather mixed feelins. I don't in fact regard it
as a practical prospect in the future that I can look to, because
you very properly have stressed the Few , ealand identity which
means so much to you, and your independence which means so much
to you, but I have sometimes thought of your situation and I am
speaking in particular of you, Prime Minister as oeing a very
happy and lucky one to be head of a Tovernment in a country which
has only one House of Parliament, whose Jovernment is drawn from
only one political party, and which has a unitary system of
Jovernment. Nov, I lea'd a coalition and I am on very good terms
with the members of my coalition but it is a coalition. I lead
it in a Parliament that has two Chambers and in a Federation which
has six States. Now, if there were to ue other members of that
Federation with the strength of mind and independence of spirit
that I have gathered is revealed in this country, those problems
would oe very much more complex than they are at the present time.
' hat you were saying, Mr. att, about the difficulty you have in
getting people overseas to recognise the separateness of our
countries is in one sense, I think, fortification and confirmation
of this degree of friendship that exists between us, and confirms
what you have been saying, Prime inister, that our situation is, so
far as I could ascertain it ar) und the world, unique. I don't
know any two peoples, any two independent countries, that are
closer together in appear: nce, in manner in haoits of life in
identity of interests than we find exist between Australia and
New ' ealand. And that, of course, is the -rime reason, or certainly
one of the prime reasons, of my visit here on this occasion. As
I said yesterday, I felt it Tas my first duty if I could zo abroad,
to go abroad to see our own troops serving Australia in the countries
where they were located, and this developed into something of a
South East Asian mission in the result, oecause these became
formal visits, although the original purpose was for me to make
contact with our own people and have them feel how proud we were
of them how grateful we were for the services they were rendering
us and the common cause of freedom. And then, of course there
was the conference of Prime Ministers the need to establish early
contact with those two great leaders who mean so much to both
our countries, President Johnson and Prime Minister J'ilson. You and
I were together then, later at the Prime Ministers' Conference, and
then the quite historic vanila Conference, the fruits of which we
expect to see of benefit certainly to this area of the world and
to the free world as a whole as the years go on. 3ut when I was
planning the tasks ahead for 1967, having got the election out of
the way, the first priority on my list was to make contact with
my friends here in I2ew Zealand and I am very glad that this has
been possible and you were so kind as to open That invitation up
to me. I spoke of our similarities. You chose to find some distinctions
between us in our manner of speech, and I suppose that is so. l. e
Australians are far less conscious of the fact that we have a
different and not particularly attractive national accentuation
which is observaole to others but which so frequently passes us
unobserved amongst ourselves. I had early evidence of that when
I went on my first visit to the United Kingdom again with a
Parliamentary Delegation, the C. of those aays, in 1948, and on
my first night at the Savoy I asked for a whisky and soda. The
waiter brought along a mixture which, while interestin in
appearance, didn't seem quite to suggest the specification I had
proposed. I tasted it. It was very a-reeable, but certainly was
not what I had requested. So I said, Hey, what's this you've
brought me". " vhat you asked for, Sir, a whisky cider". I am
quite certain that Keith would have no such trouble with the A. B. C.
or B. i. C. accents that we hear so effectively from him. 
-3-
Right Hon. Keith Holyoake Mine's a whisky and water.
Right Hon. Harold Holt . ell, he is safer with whisky and
waer perhaps, but if he ever did ask for a whiskv and soda
he would get it in ample measure and correctly to specifications.
There is one matter which does not seem to ha've altered much.
Perhaps I should hesitate to mention it. '., hen I was in this
room before, I seem to recall explaining to us then that this
really was not ty ical of " ellington weather and that the tood
weather would fo low later. _ ell, I have no problems on tiat
score. Coming from Australia, any rain is welcome. ,. hen I was
asked what I Thought about the climate this morning as we went
to the . ar Memorial, I said " I only wish I could transfer some of
this rain across to my own arid continent." This perhaps has
some bearing, lr. Watt, on what you were saying aoout how this
Trade Agreement was working out. I don't want to harp on this
thing, but I would like you to have this special factor in mind.
1ie have just oeen coming out and these processes of full
restoration are not always speedy from what has proved to be
one of the most serious droughts in part of Australia that we
have ever experienced. It intrigues me that when some other
country has fire, or flood, or some other natural disaster, the
word goes out around the world and the hat goes round to well
disposed countries, and wie are all hanpy to help a nei huour in
distress. 7ell, I don't say that we have been in all that distress,
but nooody seems to see drought in quite the same light, and yet
in our country drought can have consequences far more serious
financially and in relation to the smooth running of the economy
than any of these natural disasters elsewhere. I illustrate this
for you by pointing out that in this most recent drought we lost
14,000,000 sheep, and in the State of New South ales we lost
per cent of the cattle population of that State. Io'. the economy
went on. Some people seem surprised and disappointed that it did
not make the same rate of progress that we had made in more
favourable years. I think we did very well to keep the economy
running along as successfully as we d'id despite these great
national and natural losses. but I do think thAt this as had
some bearing upon the buoyancy of trade between our countries
and I hope tha with more fav') uraole conditions now restored there
should be some improvement in that respect.
You have referred Prime aanidr ' Mri. s t. eart t echoed this
that we have a great deal in common and we have many mutual interests
to serve. really are a very fortunate set of pebbles in these
two countries. . V'e h ve Joth been the inheritors of that splendid
British tradition of democratic institutions and Parliamentary
Jovernment and the acceptance of the principles of freedom and
justice, the dignity and individual liberties of our citizens. This
itself was a great heritage, and we have ueen the inheritors together
of a rich European culture which we have oeen able to apply to the
circumstances of these countries " Down Under". And we have been
favoured oy resources which have enabled each of us to build up a
standard of livin. r which ranks amongst the highest to be found
anywhere around the world. Despite our short'histories, ; e have
built these standards and that of course has a Dearing upon our
significance, certainly in this region of the world, and in the
world at large. You feel nerhaps even more acutel: than , e do the
fact that in terms of nopulation we are small coun'tries in the
world scene. : e are still pushing on to our first 12,000,000: you
are moving on, I gather, to your third million. But we would be
treating ourselves with less than the significance that is due to
us if we were simply to look at this matler in terras of population.
First of all there is the well known fact that great countries
are the countries which produce great men. They are not to oe
counted in heads of population. They are to oe counted in the
quality of the people that they produce and lew; Zealand need bow
its head to no country in the quality of the people it produces and
the contribution which these people have made to the world in many
fields of science of culture, of endeavour. You have produced your
Rutherfords, your ellers, your Hillary9, * and scores of others
whom if time permitted me I could mention, and we, your closest / 4 
friends, your allies, and your partners salute a great people
here in New Zealand.
But the other thing is that you and we by virtue of the
capacity we have shown to increase the nroduction of our countries,
do have a rating internationally out of all proportion to our
numbers, and I can illustrate this for you 1 think, quite simply
in this fashion. Let us take India and Indonesia for my first two
examples. Indonesia has just on nine times the population of
Australia. It has one-third the value of gross national product
of Australia. India, with 42 times the population of Australia, has
just about double the value of gross national product of my country,
and you can translate these illustrations into New Zealand terms.
You can see that when you have only got somethin under 12,000,000
people but you rank with one of the highest standards of living in
the world and you rank amongst the first 10 or 12 trading nations of
the world, then you do possess a significance out of all relation to
your numbers. But the matter goes even deeper than that. It is my
firm belief that if your country and mine together are to have a
greatness of destiny in the not too distant future I am not speaking
of any point of time close ahead or even in our lifetimes, but in
historical terms, in not too distant a future it will be because of
the influence, the assistance the encouragement and the example
that to ether we have been able to exert in relation to the area in
the world in which we live, and in particular in South East Asia and
the Pacific region, and we do have an influence beyond all
relationship to our numoers. I know that your views are welcomed and
respected by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and the President
of the United States. In my first week of office, I was invited
both by the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of
. reat Britain to continue the personal and intimate correspondence
with them which they had developed with my distinguished predecessor.
ow, Sir Robert was, as you know a man of international stature,
and he was so reco'nised around the world and one could understand
the great men of other countries seeking nis views and respecting them,
out when they put that same invitation to a fledglin-Prime Minister
little known outside his own country and only recently confirmed in
office I think that established that it was the views of the
Australian people that they were anxious to have, the judgment of an
Australian Jovernment, a judgment and view which would oe expressed
frankly, honestly, forthrighlly, and with every intention to help in
finding solutions which were acceptable to us all. This happens to
us, it happens to you, and we are so placed by Providence in this
area of the world and with our oackground of democratic traditions
and with our high standards of economic achievement to be able to
help people in This part of the world. And we are finding, as I am sure
you are finding, that increasingl our advice is jeing sought by the
countries of the regrion. . e don' have to muscle our way into
institutions like the Asian and South Pacific Association of
Countries, or the Asian Development Jank, or other organisations of
that sort. We are sought quite eagerly, we are welcomed
fullheartedly, and we know that we have a contribution there which we
can make. Australia and New Zealand, because of all these things which
lie open to us because in the Commonwealth of Nations, this Lreat
multiracial gathering , jwhich becomes more complex and difficult to
hold together as the additions are made to its numaers, you and we
think so much alike about the problems that arise there that our
joint strength can make a significant contribution there. And so it
goes around the world where we meet together for these international
purposes. We have a common interest in helping to build satisfactory
trading arrangements so that the nrimary products of our two countries
can be marketed on the basis of a reasonaole return to the producer
and in an orderly way, avoiding, if we can or as far as i'e can not
the hazards of the season only Providence can lQok after that for
us, and we must as realists accept the fact that there will be these
fluctuations but avoiding as far as it is humanly practicable to
so organise matters, these sharp fluctuations on world markets for
primary staples, so as to avoid all those dislocations which occur 
in our economic circumstances. In these, in so many ways, we have
common interests to serve. In this area of the world we can make
a' joint contribution to security, as we do through the Commonwealth
Strategic Reserve as we are doing in our joint contributions in
the conflict in Viet Ham looking like you, not as people who seek
the field of wr because of an appetite for conflict but searching
for a just and endurin; peace which will enable us all to get on with
the . ob of building a better world order in the countries of Asia.
So that there is every good reason, apart from kinship, apart from
natural identity of habit of life and attitude of mind, for us to
remain close together in relation to these common purposes. And a
visit of this kind and visits of your people back to us, not merely
Prime Ministers but others, can help to serve those purposes. I
would mention Mr. i. att, that we have tried to assist this in
another direction in my country uy making one of the perquisites of
the Member of Parliament a journey to New Zealand at dovernment
expense if he will choose to make that journey. This is the only
country outside of the territories under our own immediate control
to which we extend this privilege. Someone rather unkindly suggested
this morning to me," ell, this looks as if we were regarding New
Zealand as one of our own territories," to which I could only answer
you can't win: that's clear." Aut I had hoped it would be
seen as another manifestation of our intimacy, of our friendship,
and of our recognition that we do have so many common interests
to serve. Now, Prime Minister, as you krow, there were two gestures
I wish to make but just before I come to that, which is the
concluding part of what I want to say, let me make a special
reference to tourism, because you will recall I said something
on this in the course of our discussions here together this
morning. I believe that both our countries have a great deal to
offer to the tourist from other parts of the world. You have long
had a Minister of Tourism, and you have lon had a highly
successful tourist traffic. . e have had, of course some and it
has been rowing quite steadily. hen I reconstructed my own
3overnmen recently, I appointed a young and promising 1inister to
look after this special field under the general supervision of the
Minister for Trade my Deputy Prime Minister, and the Minister
for the Navy, Mr. Don Chipp as nart of his ministerial duties is
now Minister in Charge of Tourist Activities. But thinking about
this without any special knowlede of what is now being done and
something of this may already be done it did seem to me that
we could help each other in this direction if we used our own
facilities and our own resources to encourage the tourist to each
of our countries to include a visit to the other country as part
of the tour. The American who comes here might beencouraged to
go on to Australia rather than back to Honolulu. The Asian who
comes down to us as the nearest point for him or for her might be
encouraged to see something of the beauties of New Zealand. I am
sure there is room for some fruitful co-operation in this particular
field. I have raised it with your Prime minister and his Cabinet,
and I hope that this matter can be followed up quite fruitfully.
I was thinking, Prime Minister, of what little gesture I
could make as a guest, with my wife and my party on your shores,
to express the good will and the friendship symbolically of the
Australian people for your own and one thing which came to mind
was that I might be permitted to make a gift to the Jovernment
and people of two pictures quite large pictures. One of them
is a picture which has a strong historical association with your
country. Indeed, I believe it was on loan to New Zealand over the
period of The Queen's visit here and that is the picture drawn in
chalks of the murder of Marian Dufresne back in 1770 or thereabouts
a picture by Meriam. Some of you who saw it when it was over may
recall it. It seemed to us that this was a part of your history
and that this could be back with you in New wealand.. But to balance
things out a bit, I thought you should also have an example from one
of our most distinguished of the younger school of Australian painters,
Sidney Nolan, who now, of course, has an international reputation / 6 
-6-
and almost an international price I mi. ht add a picture of the
Kimberleys. in Australia. This will endure as your history endures.
I* hope for Sidney Nolan's sake his work endures and also to make
the gift more en uring I hope you, Prime Minister, will accept
these from us as a sym6ol of the good will and affection of the
Australian people.
The other matter which seemed to me to be worth discussing
with you arose partly from the fact that as I knew I was coming
here I devoted more time, I suppose in seven days, to a study of
New Zealand, its climate, its geography, its economy, and its people
than I had in the previous 30 years of puolic life, and I found
many things in my reading and in discussion about your country with
which I was not familiar, and indeed of which I had been previously
ignorant and it pointed up t&gt; me really how much better we do
need to know each other, having so much', as I have said earlier,
in common. . h-it you said, Mr. . att, about more space being occupied
in the Australian Press by news from New Zealand struck a responsive
chord with me, and I would willingly surrender a good deal of
editorial space in my own country to you for that purpose. But
quite seriously I think that, too, is a matter which the press of
my country mi. ht very well examine, and I shall look for an
opportunity o? raising that matter with them. But this being the
case, I thought " I: ow what way is there that we could encourage a
better knowledge" and I thought we might make a quite modest
commencement on this out one which I felt confident would appeal
to your Frime Minister and his colleagues, and I have suggested
that we invite to Australia under a system of scholarships, if
you could call it that, each year, two New Zealanders to oe selected
appropriately by representative peonle a man and a woman: I am
sufficiently conscious of the vote of the ladies in my State, Lirs.
Stevenson, to see that we deal evenly on this to come to
Australia for, say, 12 months, if that seemed an appropriate
length of time, to have some study perha:-s at the Australian
National University, of our history, our economy and our institutions,
but also to spend a -ood deal of their time going around Australia,
no matter how remotev they may wish to proceed, and there to see
some of our institutions in operation to see some of our develorment
projects as they come to fruition and to return to New Zealand
perhaps to go into public administration, the Department of External
Affairs, the field of journalism, or the teaching profession,
somewhere preferably where the knowledge that they had absorued
could be passed on to their fellow New Zealanders. I would like to
call them Anzac Scholars, because the Anzac spirit is still strong
in the hearts and minds of our people. 17e do have a National Day
on 26th January, but there is no day in the Australian Calendar
celebrated with more solemnity and with due observance than this
dav which commemorates the forging of that wonderful tradition
between our two countries and if it did not seem inappronriate
perhaps they could be called Anzac Scholars, but the name is less
important than the fact. I mentioned this matter to your Cabinet
this morning. I am lad to say that the suggestion was warmly
received, and if it has the approval of your Jovernment I shall see
that effect is given to it.
So Mrs. Stevenson and Jentlemen, here we are bound together by
inheritance of institutions, traditions, democratic practices,
cultures, by the geography in which we find ourselves, inspired
and stimulated togetier by the possibi. lities tht lie open to us
for positive and constructive achievement in this area of the world
in which we live, and while these things persist and they must
persist as long as our independence en ures for our two countries
then who can douot the strength and wa. rmth of the friendship between
the people of New Zealand nd Australia. And if in my term of
office as Prime Minister of my country I can do anything to serve
that friendship and to strengthen the ties between us, you can
confidently rely upon this being my purpose. / 7 
-7-
Concluding Remarks by Mr. Holvoake
' ell I'm sure you would all like me to say how much we have
enjoyed that comprehensive and quite inspiring address from our
Guest of Honour. I am sure you will also oe pleased to know that
our Cabinet has already approved in principle of the two proposals,
both imaginative, that Mr. Holt has himself produced the question
of co-operation in the tourist industry, and reciprocity in Anzac
scholarships have approved this princinle and we will certainly
follow it up. Thank you for all these things that you have said to
us Harold. Now of course the occasion is for giving gifts, and on behalf
of the Jovernment and the people of New Zealand I want also to make
a ift to the Prime Mlinister of Australia. I decided upon this gift
oe ore I knew of the munificence and the imagination behind the two
gifts which he has made. Those pictures are really priceless, they
are invaluable. To add to the ma. nificence of the gift, the
Firestone, the Maori picture I have forgotten the name now it
was until now part of a very valued collection in Australia. It is
not just an odd picture they have picked up somewhere. It is part
of their own collection, and so it is of tremendous significance that
Mr. Holt should say today " It is a part of our collection but we
th -ught rightly it beloned in New Zealand" and he is giving it
to our nation. I am quite sure that our National Art allerv or
wherever it is decided that it shall repose, will be delighted and
excited, and so will all the people of New Zealand, about both of
these pictures. Also the paintin oby Nolan. I have not had a
close study. I have asked that they should be displayed along a
table somewhere. I understand they are just outside: if you wish
to have a closer study they will be there.
Now the gift I propose it will not oe displayed right now,
but here is a copy of it. Some of you will have seen it, most of
you will have heard of it. This is a publication by one of our
noted publishing firms, A. I. Reed entitled " The New Zealanders",
an exact copy or the Folio which Her 1ajesty The Queen gave to
us as her Yift to the New Zealand Nation when she was last here in
New Zealand the original from the library of ' indsor Castle from
amongst her Collection. She thought this wis something we would
like, and we treasure it, of course. A. H. Reed have made an exact
copy of this. It is a beautiful piece of work: we think so anyway:
and I am asking Harold Holt to take this back as a very humble gift
compared with this gift to the people of ZZeeawl and to their
collection of New Zealand treasures in Australia. It is a collection
of prints by George Angus. They were made in 1846 or around that
time. They were given to Her Lajesty The Queen. They really were
in the first place I think it is shown in the script in the Folio
dedicated to His Royal Highness Prince Albert at that time. It is
quite a treasure, and I would ask you Harold, to accept this rather
humble gift, alongside yours, as a token of our esteem for you and
the people of Australia', and also as a mark of our deep appreciation
of your visit to our country so early in your long tenure of office
of Prime Minister. 7 Y 



NEW UiALA'TC TOUR 1967
TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THlE PRIE MINISTER.
MU. HAROLL HOLT~, AT WVELLINGTON, NEVJ ZEALAND 3RD PEBRUARY, 1967
Prime Minister, I woul. like to begin by referring to a
statement you made yesterday and then repeated today. You said
a visit to New Zealand was the first of your priorities for
this New Year. Now, among Australia's foreign policy commitments,
how high does the relationship with New Zealand rank as a
priority?
PM: Very high, because we are linked as partners and allies in such
agreements as ANZUS and SEATO, which bear on the security of
both our countries in this area of the world. We work together
in such schemes as the Colombo Plan. We are in the Asian
and South Pacific Association of Countries, and the Asian
Development Bank. We are working together on the Commission in
the South Pacific. In so m~ any directions we have common interests,
common purposes to serve. At gatherings of Prime Ministers,
Australia and New Zealand usually have rather similar attitudes
in fact, very similar attitudes to the issues which arise there,
so it becomes very desirable that with so much to be served in
common we should work as closely together as we can.
Does this working closely together go as far as seeking the
advice of one country or another before you make a major foreigni
policy decision?
PM: It does on matters which concern us both. We keep in very close
touch with this country.
To perpetuate the following up of these common purposes to which
you refer, do you see any value in setting up some sort of
permanent consultative machinery, like a Secretariat?
PM: There was thought given to that, as you will recall.. Back in
1944 there was a suggestion for a regular process of
consultation. I think, though, that the subsequent developments
have largely nullified the need for this, because we do cone
together for so many of the other purposes that I have mentionedat
various levels of Government, Ministers, Prime Ministers, and
Officials for such matters as those I have mentioned, and I
think what we need is not so much the formal machinery for
consultation but a desire and expression of that desire to be in
closer consultation, regular consultation with each other. I
may say that so far as the Prime Minister and myself are concerned
we met last year on three sets of meetings, and we developed a
process of telephone consultation which I think was useful for
both of us.
This does raise a point, doesn't it the personality issue.
If, for example, you did not get on well with Mjr Holyoake,
cooperation between Australia and New Zealand might not be as
great as would be desirable for both countries, and that is why,
surely, there is one reason for setting up some sort of permanent
machinery so that the consultation is always there and not / 2 
dependent on personalities.
PMll First of all, I think it highly unlikely there would not be a
friendly feeling between the leaders of our two countries and
this is irrespective of politics, I might say. Australians get
on well with New Zealanders, and vice versa. But there would be
consultation of an official kind at the various levels involved
in all these activities Colombo Plan, Development Bank, ASPAC,
and whatever else is in discussion at the time.
In the past and now, of course, as you have just outlined,
Australia and New Zealand have often forged general policies and,
going back to 19) 4g again, for example, in the Canberra Pact there
was a definite attempt then to get a joint policy so that both
countries could hope to exercise some sort of influence on the
great powers. Now, I wonder if you would agree with the argument
that both countries to a certain extent have lost some independence
in foreign policy-making because of their wish to shelter
under the American Nuclear Umbrella?
PM: Well, any less independence now than we used to have in the days
when the Rritish Navy protected us both? I can remember a charge
being levelled against a Government I supported that we were
clinging to the skirts of Domning Street, and now people are
saying that we are going American: as I said the other day at an
Australia Day gathering, we are not going American we are going
Australian. Any country which is not able to protect itself from
its own resources, I suppose, could be said to have sacrificed
some degree of its independence, but isn't that true of every
country which goes into the United Nations? It is influenced
very considerably by the discussions and the decisions which come
iron the United Nations. It is a little old-fashioned now, I
think, to speak in terms or think in teims of complete independence
in what is becoming an increasingly interdependent world.
On the other hand, I am quite certain that both Australia and
New Zealand are able to exert an influence out of all proportion
to our numbers on the great powers, certainly on the United
Kingdom and the United States.
Because they agree with the United States or the United Kingdom
and tend to participate in the policies that both of these powers
are enunciating for example, the presence of Australian and
New Zealand f'orces in Viet Nam?
PlhI: No, I think it is becalise of the special position we occupy in
this region of the world the fact that we can form a bridge
of cooperation and understanding, sometimes in situations where
the great powers cannot. I could illustrate this by our
situation with Cambodia. Wie represent the United States in
Cambodia, and we represent Cambodia in South Viet Nam. Now, no
great power would have been as welcome to Cambodia for this
purpose as we have proved to be. There is a feeling amongst
several of the countries of this region that we do not possess
the legacy of a colonial power past, that each of our countries
is striving to develop resources and thereby set some sort of an
example to others who have their uevelopment ahead of them.
It is known that we are on good terms with such powers as the
United Kingctoim and the United States. All of these things help
to build our influence on the other countries, and that influence
on them makes us a valuable ally for the United States and the
United Kingdom. 
3.
Over the last two or three years especially there has been a
marked increase, it seemed to us here, in Australian activity
in Asia, and this too has coincided with greater American
interest in that area, and it would appear at least it has
coincided with a declining British influence in the area. Do
you think these three factors are all intertwined together2
PM: I would not regard our interest as being so much a product of
American interest. I would claim that American interest has
increased in Asia because of the discussions and influences that
we have been able to bring to the United States. I had a very
good illustration of that last year when in the space of a
fortnight I had two visits to Washington, and in between those
visits, I having stressed the value that the other countries on
the periphery of Asia were deriving from the American
participation in Viet Nam, the President invited me back, and
just before I returned he made a very significant speech which
I think took the United States further into Asia than any American
President previously had done, not only in a military sense, but
a virtual assurance that in the positive tasks of peace America
would be giving constructive and substantial assistance.
Finally, Prime M. inister, do you see Australia as taking over the
role in Asia that Britain seems to be abandoning?
PM: I doubt whether Australia has the resources to do this. We are
trying to do a great deal, but after all we are a developing
country ourselves: we are a capital importing country. We see a
growing involvement for ourselves in Asia and would expect to be
making a growing contribution, preferably in circimstances of
peace but if necessary towards the security of the area. But
after all, wie are only a people of less than 12,000,000 at the
present time, and while I said, talking at the lunch at Parliament
House, that because of our productivity we do rate very much
higher than n..-mbers would suggest, still we do not class ourselves
as a major power.
Interviewer Prime Minister, thank you very much. 



NEW ZEfL1ND TOUR 1967
RECEPTION GIVEN 3Y TiHE CAFTERURY
CHAMIJER OF COIMERCE IN HONOUR OF
THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, i,
M IHIR. O LD HOLT
CHRI2TC.. URCH, NEW Z'ALATD
4TH FEBRUARY, 1967
Text of Speech by Mr. Holt
Mr. Smith Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Mr.
Mayor, Distinguishes Juests, Ladies and Jentlemen:
I hope thit Mr. Smith will not get too far away from
me because I may need an interpreter from what he has been
telling me. However I found at Riccarton this afternoon that
they understood the language of my money and I have since
suspected that this was a conspiracy coo ed up by Keith Holyoake
who had been presented to me as a keen judge of equine form, witfi
the Canterbury Jockey Club in order to redress to some modest
degree at any rate, the gap in your balance of payments. I can
assure you that since I arrived in this country the economic position
of Few Lealand has improved appreciably: in fact, I have a little
problem to sort out o settlement of an obligation to the Chairman
of the Club ard my own High Commissioner as resources dwindled as
the afternoon went on. Bit this very happy * athering is
redressing the balance of the day for me. I began most
auspiciously in that, havin h'id the sort of weaher that one
expects in ! ellington, I cuame hopefully to the South. I was not
aware, frankly, Lr. Sith, thAt as makin a little history in
doing so, and in coming with my charmin wife, my decorative wife,
who as you see is my own secret weapon as I was hus able to
describe 1Madam Ky, out it is very grtifying to le-trn that I am
the first Australian Prime Minister to have visited the South.
Right Hon. Keith Holyoake ( inaudible).
Right Hon. Harold Holt Well, I was coming to that. You see,
we have in Can. erra a distinui shed representative of your
country. . e also h' ve a distinguished representative of the
United States. You Iknow your own representative very well
Luke Hazlett. The American, Ed Clrk, may not os so well mknown
to you, but Ed comes from Texas, and ie ha-ive always argued that
Ed was a Texan first an American second and an AustrAlian third.
Now Luke, I think, is a mainlander of tAe South first, a New
Zealander second, and an Australian third. If Keith Holyoake will
only leave him with us a little longer I might be aule to r. iove him
up in the placinks. It is for us a deliyhtful prospect to have this time
with you. It is a very long ime ago although in retrospect it
does not seem so long this is one ot the oenalties of the aging
process, tht the years seem to gallop as you get older but it
is 16 years since I w. ts first in your country, and havin. r carried
out the duties for which I was sent here by my JovernmenY as the
Head of the Australian Delegation to the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Conference, I was given the opportunity by your Government to see
something of the economy and the beauties othe Forth of New
6ealand: and so, when the arrangements were . eing made for this
visit I said " Now, I have read a lot and heard a lot about te'.
spleniid grandeur and beauty of the South of Few Z ealand.
ellington is a ' must' thit's where we conduct the official
business but I must see something of the South", and so here we
are, and the larger part of our journeyings through New Zealand / 2 
-2-
will be carried out in this very beautiful southern part of your
country. Je are. looking forward to that very much and delighted
to find that -the weather is being kind to us.
Now, Lir. Smith one of the agreeable surprises of the
day and I have referred already to some of the disagreeable
surprises: I don't suppose there's a Form Juide attached to the
back of the document you have presented to me and as for the other
gift which I certainly appreciate and regard is an honour and a
compliment: I don't quite know what the perquisites are attached
to it, but my wife, eing a realist as women generally are and
naturally cautious as most women proved to be, said Does this
mean that we have to get married again?" I would like elaboration
on that point from you before this function concludes. But this
gathering was, as I say, a very agreeaole surprise. W'; hen I found
had oeen invited to come alorn and talk to the Chamber of
Commerce, or meet the Chamber of Commerce, I had a picture in my
mind of a sort of 3oard Room and a table in which a lot of rather
stuffy characters including myself sat round together and
discussed the state of the world and the Nation, and there it was
with suitable lubrication, of course, as befits these occasions,
but I found that I came into what apeared, on the surface anyhow,
to ue a very convivial gathering, and if I can only stop myself
in time we will all be aule to oe convivial a'ain together. That
is not easy, as some of my colleagues will tell you. Jut in my
own country we have, I think, worked out a very satisfactory
relationship with Organisations such as your own. As a Jovernment
and it is part of our philosophy of Jovernment we believe that
the good of the Nation will be cest advanced if there is teamwork
between those who have the responsibility of Government and those
who conduct the Organisations representative of great sections of
Industry whether it is manufacturers
Right Hon. Keith Holyoake ( inaudible).
Right Hon. Harold Holt IKeoiwt, h , you hve enjoyed not only
a very handsome election win, but I Inow how well you are regarded
by Industry and Commerce in your own country. Jut in mind, we
have worked this out iappily together. It was not al. vays a happy
situation, out the machinery we have evolved developed out of some
of the economic problems we had early in the 1960' s, and we felt
that in order to ensure that the " overnment was acting in the
knowledge of the views held by Industry, we do arrange to meet
representative 
before the first Session of the Parliament, and before the dudet
Session of the Parliament, and Chambers of ! Manufacturers, Chamuers
of Commerce, representatives of the Banks, of the primary producer
organisations, come along and get into discussion with us. '. e
invite the trade unions, too and they have preferred to meet us
separately rather than with the others, ' rd at least on those two
periods in the year we are told quite frankly and in the presence
of each other and this Keith, I assure you has proved an advantage,
because we had found that there w-is a disposition for the
manufacturer to put his story quite vehemently to us and the
representative of the primary industries to put his story quite
vehemently to us, separately, not in the presence of each oth r, but
it is amazing how the process of sitting around together and knowing
that there was a critical voice ready to pick up aything that might
seem an exaggerated view or an unreasonably presented view of
economic circumstances or of tariff policies, and matters of that
sort, has produced a much more useful concensus of thought inside
the representative organisations, and I have been told hat by some
of their spokesmen that this was the greatest value, really, that
they have got out of these gatherings that they have heard the
other fellow's point of view and they have been aole to take that
into account in their own planning. So I just say in passing that
we value the Organisations representative of Industry, of Commerce,
of Primary Production, of our financial institutions, and we confer
regularly with them, and I am sure that out of this teamwork of a
relative v informal kind we have had more realistic and more
effective national policies. / 3 
-3-
But I wasn't here today just to speak on those matters.
That strikes one again most forcibly coming to this country is
that however much we may speak of how like each other we are
how many things we have in common, our joint membership of that
great Ahzac tradition which has meant so much to the people of
ooth countries with Anzac Day the most solemn day of commemoration
in the national calendar it is only when you get amongst the
people of the other country that it comes home t you with full
impact just how alike you are in your thinking perhans not
entirely in your speech, althoughwe do not detect these things
this may oe more apnarent to you but really an Australian coming to
New iealand, or a Iew Zealander coming to Australia, finds himself at
home. I have been struck even in this gathering here this evening
with the number of people who have come from Australia, and I have in
Australia many friends who have come to settle and to work with us
in our country. Some of our most distinguished men Sir Frederick
;. hite, Sir Douglas Copland, and there are scores of them that if
time permitted one could mention. And it is only when this impact
hits you tl; ai: you start thinking it out. You know, we are closer
in Canberra to you than we are to our own people in Perth and the
people of Perth, although they are with us on the mainland, there
is a great area of desert in patches oetween us nd them: between
us and you there is a great area of sea, uut we are closer physically
in point of time, in point of journeying. And now that I have
discovered this, as I should have discovered it lone ago, I am going
to see to it that my own visits and those of my M inisters are more
frequent. I hope those of your Frime Minister and of his colleagues
will be more frequent. As I said at our luncheon yesterday, to give
some evidence of our desire to brin. our relations closer and to
work more closely together on matters of mutual concern, ' we do
provide that any of our Parliamentari. ns are free to go and visit
few Zealand at our Jovernment's expense, because w'e believe that this
is of value to us, and we hope that it will be of value to you.
Now r. Smith, you spoke of the opportunities the challenges,
that we have to ether in relation to the regions to the north of our
countries. I suppose in my own there are some parts of Australia,
perhaps many Australians, who are more acutely conscious of this
by the mere circumstance of geography: we are right close within
lying distance, minutes almost, o a people 100,000,000 strong
in Indonesia restless, with a revolutionary philosophy, but with
great resources which in time we hope will be effectively develoned.
I can illustrate for you the feeling of some of our people when I
say that it is literally closer from Darw. in to Saigon than it is, say,
from Brisuane to Perth, and we are vry conscious, and become
increasingly so as events move more dynamically in those parts of
the world, of our involvement geogrphically economically, from
the security point of view and in a variety of other ways, and I
know that your Prime Linister is very conscious of this. Je were
together at Manilh. . e subscribed together to the Declaration and
the joals of Freedom in M. arnila, and we believe that our two countries
have the opportunity oy virtue of our economic capacities, by the
standards we have been aule to build in our two countries, by the
warmth of friendship which exists, radiating out to us from them to
exercise an influence, to be of some help, and, small though we
are to have a significant place in the scheme of things not onl
in this area, but towards the peace and proress of the -world. And
because we have the stimulation : and inspiraion of those goals,
there is a warmth and strength in our partnership which derives not
merely from our close kinship, uut a feeling that we have a destiny
to share together in the years which lie ahead. I hope that my own
visit here will help to promote those oo, ctives and will be tangiole
evidence that there is a warmth of friendship and of good will in my
own country for yours, that there is a resolve that our two countries
shall work together in harmony and close co-operation for the
objectives that we have in common.
Thank you very much from M'rs. Holt and myself for this very
warm and friendly welcome you have given us here in Christchurch
this evening. 



NE ZEALAND TOUR 1967
RECEPTION } IVET1 BY THE CAIhTERBURY CHAMB; ER OF
COIME RCE IN HONOUR OF THE PRIME MINISTER OF
AUSTRALIA, IiR. HIAOLD HOLT
CHIRISTCIJIURCH, NE7 ZEALAND 4TH FEBRUARY, 1967
Text of Speech by Mr. R. E. Smith, President of Chamber
The Right Honourable the Prime Minister of New Zealand,
the Right Honourable the Prime Minister of Australia Your Jorship
the Mayor, Your Excellencies, our Distinguished Juests, and Ladies
and Jentlemen: Eight years ago the Canterbury Chamber of Commerce
celebrated its 100th Birthday. Over the history of our existence
we have entertained many distinguished guests, and amongst us this
evening are a numoer whom we would be happy to receive as guests
in their own right our own Prime Minister, Mr. D. McNicol,
Australian High Commissioner in INew Zealand, Ir. J. L. Hazlett
New Zealand's High Comrmissioner in Australia, Sir .' iark Oliphant,
a very distinguished Australian scientist, Mir. R. Maddres President
of the Nlew Zealand Manufacturers Federation, and we have five
Presidents of Chambers of Commerce from other parts of the South
Island. To these and our other Distinguished ruests might I offer
a very sincere welcome. e are glad to have you with us. But never
before throughout our histor have we had the honour and privilege
which we have this evenin o' welcomilb as our guest the rine
Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia. On oehalf of our members
and our Distinguished Juests, may I, Sir, offer to you and to Mrs.
Holt our greeting, our respect, and our warm good fellowship.
Australia had a birthday recently. It was its 179th
Birthday and never before today has a Prime Minister of Australia
visited the South Island of New Zealand. Consequently I have been
authorised to officially welcome the Prime . linister and Mrs. Holt
on behalf of the independent peoples of the South Island. Perhaps
I should explain that I use the word " independent" in its
descriptive and not its political sense. To mark the occasion I
have been reouested to present you with a Certificate given under
the Cla of the ' reat Moa which says: " i'hereas Harold Holt,
having been born in all innocence beyond these southern shores,
is nevertheless now, recognising that he is geo: raphically underprivileged,
granted full status as an Honorary South Islander, with
all the rights and purtenances that go with it." Perhaps I could
extend our welcome a little further. I : ould welcome you as the
Chief Minister of a member of a family of nations, the family of
nations we belong to, and, like any other family, it has its varied
personalities. One of our Scottish cousins was reported recently
as saying that New Zealand should realise it is a big boy now and
someone should prise its hands from its mother's apron strings.
e11, it is true that families' interests vary as time progresses,
but we also have to admit that mother, to use this description, has
her own problems at the moment. Within this family I think it is
generally and correctly acknowledged that Australia and New Zealand
are brothers, and it is a fact that brothers, particularly if one is
bi ger than another, tend to have separate and competing interests,
but eventually I think they realise that there is a great deal to
be gained by joint co-operation. Sometimes it takes a family crisis
to oring this about. It's true, too, that brothers sometimes even
speak different languages, like Strine and New Zealand.
The Canterbury Chamber of Commerce is keenly aware of the
part that it must play in this changing world, and as evidence of
/ 2 
-2-
this I would like to present to you, Sir, a survey of Christchurch
and its farming environs which was initiated by this Chamber,
financed and puolished with the joint co-operation of four
organisations representing the businessmen, including farmers,
of this Province, and prepared, you will be interested to note,
Sir, by a leading firm of Consultants from Australia. believe,
Sir that survey demonstrates the potentials and the advantages
of this area that we know exist. . ie are cognisant, too Sir, that
as outposts in the South lacific, Australia and New Zealand must
have a closer association with their relations in the Pacific area,
and particularly in South East Asia or, as I refer to call it,
the near North. are -lad, Sir, that you and our own Prime
Minister are aware, in the words of one of our local churchmen,
the Reverend Allan Brash, th: t our children have a western heritage:
and this is their ood fortune: they also h. ve an Asian future:
this is their challen'e. This is a time of change and challenge,
and we know that you save very great responsibilities. , e
conrratulate you, Sir, on the qualities of leadership which you have
amply displayed. ,7e oelieve that you have earned this period of
rest amongst the peace and the ueauty of our mountains and lakes,
but we are confident that you will return. Gentlemen and Ladies,
would you please demonstrate the warmth of your welcome.
( Acclamation.) 



NEW ZEALAND TOUR 1967
PRESS COFEREiCE SUMMING UP TIALK
! ITH F~ UI. JHULl TE ANAU, fhil 7TH FE3RUARY, 1967.
MiR. HOLT: I thou t I would give you some idea of the things
Mr. Holyoake and talked about. i. e have had a series of
opportunities-for thlking closely together. I won't be able to
go into a great deal of detail on these matters because a lot of
the talk was of quite a confidential kind, but it was helpful to
us both to exchange views in this intimate wayi and as you will
gather from the subject matter I will give you, the talks ranged
Tar and wide. Naturally Vietnam featured in its various aspects in our
discussions and so did the South Pacific generally. I was very
interested, for example to learn of the constitutional developments
which have occurred in the territories, formerly Trust Territories of
Iew Zealand, and some of these territories in this general area are
of such interest to us that I thought it would be useful, and I
suggested this to M! r. Holyoake, that at some point of time, not
necessarily this year but at a time convenient to us we take
a lo-k at the people to see how they are faring in the new
situations which have arisen from their new constitutional processes.
And decimal currency........ I was able to speak with some
authority on this matter, of course, as the Treasurer who introduced
the scheme into Australia; I have noticed quite a deal of discussion
in the press here about the transition phase. Some of the
apprehensions which have formerly been voiced in Australia were
expressed here and I was aole to tell them of our own experience.
The fact is that in some directions it has exceeded our expectations,
but the cost has been less than we had estimated and the changeover
of the machinery is proceeding well ahead of schedule.
Understandably as two Heads of Government, we had a good
deal to talk about together on the way we organize our Cabinet and
Parliamentary business and seei r. vh'it we could learn from each
other which would be helpful. found that there were differences
in methods of treating different subject matter Cabinet for example.
He was interested to see how our Procedures went, and I think I was
aole to indicate directions in which we had streamlined our Cabinet
business. On the other hand, of course, he had a rather different
situation here with a smaller iinistry and his Ministers are more
accessible in point of distance than mine can be. But this was the
sort of thing Parliamentary and Caoinet organisation of business
which came into our talks.
Tourism, I said something about this at the Parliamentary
Luncheon, and the more I have seen -as I have gone around the more
I feel that w: e can usefully co-operate together. Quite obviously
New Zealand has a great deal to offer which hould be more widely
known in Australia anrid I may be able to help in that direction, but
what I was thinking of particularly, when I spoke previously, was that
we might be aole to help each other by encoura; in-. tourists who come
to our own countries to take in a visit to the other as part of
their journey. I have been interested incidentally to see how the
Government ha-is established hotels such as this here at particular
points of scenic attraction where the area has not been adequately
served previously by the official hotel industry. Mr. Holyoake
expressed to me that they don't move into an area where there is
an hotel service provideR already, but the points where they are
featuring the attractions of the place and there isn't accommodation
appropriate to the sort of tourist traffic they are looking for
they have gone into this field. I am not implying that there is a
/ 2 
-2-
parallel to this in Australia but it is interesting to see how
they are handling it.
I think I have a clearer picture of the IManapouri Scheme
as a result of having come here, and its importance to New Zealand,
both to add some visual picture of the basis of the Scheme and also
its implications. The topic of forest products is one which is clearly one of
interest here, and while the Prime Minister touched on this and the
operations of the Free Trade Agreement, we did not discuss this in
any depth because John McEwen is coming over shortly for detailed
discussion on these matters as Part of the regular and periodical
conference in he writing out of'the Agreement. But I must admit
that I haven't detected the same tone in my discussions with
Ministers here that there has been evident in some of the editorials
and some of the statements b' representatives of industry on this
matter. ' e had a good deal to talk about together of mutual interest
arising from the visit to our respective countries of President
Johnson and Prime M'inister Ky. I was aole to inform the Prime Minister
in a quite incidental way of the purposeful approach of our
manufacturing industries in some of our more sophisticated projects.
For example, the wvork we are doing at 7oomera through ELDO and
also the manufacture of the guided missile system such as IKARA.
7e talked of the Manila Conference and the desirability of
maintaining momentum in relation to the goals which had emerged
from the Manila Conference. talked in a general way without
either of us having very precise information aoout the recent
developments in China. I1ow that is not an exhaustive list. It is
just a selection which I jotted down last night on some of the
matters which had occupied our time together. e covered a very
wide range, and I am sure I am very much better informed about New
Zealand, both as a result of my visit and the talks with Cabinet and
more particularly the Prime Minister. I think I can claim he has
learned a good de. al more asout : hat is going on inside Australia.
Aspects of the economy and the problems which he faces at
the present time of course may also have come into our thoughts.
But I am not wishing to imply on any of these matters that requests
were made by one or the other in exchanging information and views
not seeking many immediate outcome from them. I thought it might be
helpful to have cover of this sort because now we are moving into a
day in which there won't be much of an official nature and oerhaps
these are elements of Australia which will fill in a bit. Have we
made any arrangements for a final talk
MR. E; GLETOi: There will be an opportunity at Christchurch tomorrow.
They want an opportunity to have a final word with you and, of course
Christchurch would oe the est place for thit. And of course, when we
ret off the plane in Canberra tomorrow night there will be a simil: r
little gathering on the tarmac as there was when you left.
MR. HOLT: Well all right. I think w: e can give at that the general
impressions on how it went. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 18/ 1967
VIET NAM INCIDENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Government and the people of New Zealand are,
I know, sharing the sadness of Australia in our loss of brave young men
from this tragic mishap occurring in the stir of a close military
operation. But as we mourn these losses, we remember with
gratitude that the men of our two countries have combined many times
with a success achieved by their skill, courage and comradeship.
The bereaved and the injured have the sympathy of the
Governments and peoples of both our countries.
MOUNT COOK,
NEW ZEALAND.
7th February, 1967. 



FOGR PRESS!' P. M. No. 19/ 1967
TASMANIAN BUSHFIRES
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
John McEwen
We feel today for all Tasmanians, For the Commonweath
Government, on my own personal behalf, and on behalf of the
entire Australian community, 1 express deep distress and sorrow at the
bushf ire disaster in Southern Tasmania, including in and around Hobart.
I add particular feelings of sympathy for those who have been bereaved and
also for those who have lost their homes, or their livelihood, or both.
One immediate question. is, of course, relief
of personal hardship and distress. The Ccmmonwealth Government will
share the financial side of this work with the State Government. The
Commonwealth would always do this in a disaster of this dimension.
I have already taken steps to let the Premier of Tasmania know this.
But in addition, we wish to give such other immediate
practical help as we can. As soon as the fires were reported yesterday,
Army personnel were made available for fire-fighting and other services,
including emergency accommodation and xansport. Army assistance
will continue to be available. Further, I am letting the Premier know that I am
appointing the Minister for Air, Mr. Howson to take personal charge
of Commonwealth arrangements for assistance to the Tasmanian authorities.
HeI will be authorised to receive and co-ordinate requests and take action
on behalf of the Commonwealth. He will be assisted in this by a group of
officials from Commonwealth Departments and the Services.
The arrangement to allot co-ordinating responsibilities
to Mr. Howson does not change the understanding that Senator Henty, as
a Tasmanian Member of the Commonwealth Government will, as a first
personal priority, be in close touch with both the Tasmanian and Commonviealth
authorities. This has been so since the news of the fires yesterday
and will continue.
CANBERRA, 8th February, 1967 



N13 ZEALA" D TOUR 1967
FILAL PRTS'S CONFERENICE IVEN BY THE PRI MI I mRZr
ON LVI1-4-NE' ZALAND, CIRISTCIURCH AIRPORT
8TH FZ3RUXRY, 1967.
MR. HOLT: tle have reached the hlst stage of this very interestiny
enjoyable and informative visit to NIew 2ealand and shortly we shl
be taking off again for Australia. I am quite certain that for me
and indeed for your Prime Minister it has been a most valuable
visit. I have learned a great deal more about Mew Zealand and in
our intimate talks tngether your Prime Mirister and I have been
aole to exchan-e views on a wide range of matiers, which will be
of assistance o us both in our nolicy formation. The overwhelming
impression I shall be taking back to Australia with me and I am
sure this is shared by all members of the party is an overwhelming
impression of the goodwill * nd friendliness we have ercountered
wherever we have gone a.: o ut this country. There have been quite
spontaneous little groups of people, sometimes pulled up at the
roadside, sometimes in tourist buses. iherever we have gone we
have found that there have been cheerful smiles and happy friendly
xreetin-s. Frankly I haven't heard a sour voice since 1 left
Australia. And this confirms the belief I brought to this country
that our two peoples -are close to ether closer perhaps than any
other two peorle in the world. Iot only is there this definite
friendliness nd warmth of xoodwill but our interests are so closely
linked together thit this ; ill continue down the years ahead.
I didn't have a crowd in the Southlnd or South Island because
Southland has p articular significance for you I know and the only
cloud was that thit derived from the tragic episodes of the past two
days. Even there our sorrow in Australia was so obviously shared by
the people of this country and helped iaga in to emphasise how close.
we are to-e ther. I hive received fLessages of sympathy in respect
of both tiese triagic events from your Prime inister and I appreciate
that, as I am sure will my fellow countrymen.
I am seeing something of the tremendous tourist potential of
these Islands, and I shall be discussing with my own Linister for
Tourist Activities 1a: ys in which the tw countries can work more
closely toether. Your Prime inizter has from me on open invitation
to visit tustralia ' whenriever he can find the opportunity to do so. I
hope thtt there will ue other visits by Ministers riot necessarily
accompanied by the same formality but able as good friends can to
meet informally with us and see for themselves what we are tryin to
do on our own greit Continent. It has been, I repeat, a most valuable
visit and I am griteful to the Prime inister, his Jovernment nd to
all those ah? have assisted so pleasantly in m9king this journey a
profitable, informative and ernjoyaole one.
MR. E BLETON: ' entlemen, any questions?
Q. ( Inaudible, but obviously relting to forthcoming visit by Mr.
J4cEwen). . ell I expect him to be here very soon. I can't put a
nrecise date on it but I hid gathered from him it was likely to be
some time in February, and as to the scope of the discussions t; iere
* aaiih I shall be leavin
-ather from " iembers of your Jovernment ouite the same tone which I
iad detected in some of the editorials -nd some of the statements.
I think there is a , eneral feeling thint the agreement his not been
running for very lo1g. I gave a public assurance that from our
point of view, we wanted it to w-ork to the mutual benei. t of both
countries. . e see in a developing, prospering New Z] e. land opportunities
for our own trade just as we hope you ai 1 find in a growing, prospering / 2 
-2-
Australia opportunities for yours. If the agreement isn't working out
in a way that is regarded by both countries as beneficial then you will
find us helpful and constructive in our attitude twards it.
Q. Not only as far as Australia is concerned but defence how
closely will you see the arrangement between New Zealand and
Australia? F. M. I oelieve we have security problems in common in this area.
are the two countries of European civilization in this part of
the world. W'e have opportunities, I oelieve, for trade with the
growing economies of Asia and, in particular, South East Asia, and
those opportunities will be more fully developed if there is an
area at peace. It is the goal of ot of us to do what we can to
produce a negotiated peace that will oe a just and enduring peace
so that where we have to join '' ith others in producin the framework
for peaceful negotiations, then I believe our interests run parallel.
Q. This closeness of our efforts in so many cases, how is this
going to affect our relations between our two countries.
P. M. I am sure we will come close together over the years. Indeed
I am confident myself that this visit ' vith an even deeper friendship
uetween the two Prime iinisters vill make its contribution, as will
the contact made with the TMem. ers of your Jovernment and your people.
There will, I am confident, be a -rowing realisation that we must
stand closely together if ve are to serve our interests in the world.
Q. ' e have waited 15 years, something like that, for an Australian
Prime Minister's visit, now how long will we have to wait before
another one?
P. M. You must have b': en speiking. with someone in the North Island.
They told me in Christchurch they h-ve waited 179 yers for the first
visit of an Australian Prime Minister. It certainly'won't be anything
like 179 and not even 15 before you have another, if I'm allowed to
make a return to what have been very delightful centres that I have
visited in the course of this journey. And of course, after such a
long aosence I must include a visit to the orth in any itinerary
I follow on a subsequent visit.
Q. And finally, Mr. Holt, did iMr. Holyoake indicate any particular
likelihood of any kind tht he would take up your invitation of a
visit to Australia?
P. M. No, not pm-rticularly, but he knows it is there and he doesn't
have to make any long preparation or give us long notice. He will
be welcome any time he feels he can make the journey. And that goes
for his Ministers too.
Q. ( Inaudible).
P. M. As soon as I heard the first outline of the disaster I teleraimmed
to the Premier of the State asking him if help was oeing given ani if
there was any way in which help could ue given. I put a phone call
through to him at the same time but found that I. M. Reece, the Premier,
hid been on a visit to the mainland at the time of the fire. I spoke
to his Deputy, MIr. Fagan, and he gave me details of the loss s 1own
at that point of time. There were then 20 lives lost and 15 to
people not accounted for. It was estimated that some 700 to 800 homes
had been destroyed, as well as several factories, including the Carbide
Factory and the Cascade 3re', ery. Emergency arrrngements have been
made to take care of the homeless in the depots, town halls and that
kind of thing. I asked -hether our Armed Services had oeen called in
to help, but he said they had ueen very helpful yesterday and were
continuin their help, although the fire at that point had been brought
under control. Apparently yesterday there was a wind of 60 miles per
hour blowin and a temDerature of 105 which, of course is very unusual
for Tasmania. Since then I have learned from my own Office which I 
contacted in Canberra that my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister,
had made arrangements for one of our Ministers, Mr. Howson the Minister
for Air, who is also the Minister assisting the Treasurer, to act
as Commonwealth Liaison Minister for purposes of assistance, and we
shall, of course, be looking sympathetically at what can oe done in
this matter. There will be problems of re-employment, re-housing
problems a great variety. It so happens that next week a meeting
had been arranged of the Iremiers of the six States with me, and
this will provide a very convenient opportunity for me to discuss
these matters with them and with the Premier of the State himself.
3ut that is about all I can tell you at this stage. 



NEW ZEALAND TOUR 1967
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT AT FAIRBAIRN AIRPORT, CANBERRA
ON HIS RETURN FROM NEW ZEALAND 8TH FEBRUA* YW-1967
MR. HOLT: Well, I am very glad to be back home, and the first thing I want
to say is how saddened I have been to learn of this tragic business in
Tasmania. VWhen I got the news this morning, I sent a message off
immediately to Mr. Reece and then tried to contact him by telephone, but
he was, I gather, on the mainland at the time, and I talked to Mr. Fagan.
I told him that in my message to Mr. Reecel hadasked'if there was
anything more that the Commonwealth Government could be doing to be of
help, and when I spoke to him on the ' phone I suggested if there was
anything he could think of, to contact my colleague, the Deputy Prime
Minister. I gather Mr. McEwen himself had been active in the matter and
that Mr. Howson had been appointed as a liaison Minister f-r-) m the
Commonwealth Government. I asked Mr. Fagan whether our own Service
people had been able to help in any way and he said they had been extremely
helpful on the day of the fire, and at that stage, he felt it was under
control. As to the rest of the detail, I have only been able to pick up a
little bit along the way. I told Mr. Fagan to contact me If he could around
about seven tonight. I expected to be in then. He may have tried to do
so. If not, I will be trying to get in touch with him from the Lodge.
Q. Wil l you go down yourself and have a look at it do you think
you will get an opportunity?
PM: Well, I am willing enough It is a question of whether I could
serve any valuable purpose by doing so. There are busy days ahead here,
but of course if it was of any usefulness and help, I would be glad to do so.
Q. Have you any comment on the result of the Labor leadership
contest
PM:-Well, I heard the news on the plane of Mr. Whitlam's election.
I sent him a message telling him I had just learnt of his election, offered
my congratulations and expressed the hope that he would have a long tenure
of that office, as Leader of the Opposition. The election of Mr. Barnard
revealed, I think, how deep and strong the divisions remained inside the
Labor Party. There have been changes of personalities, but the problems
which confronted the Labor Party before the election remain with the sole
exception that there has been a change of personalities. As for myself
and my Government, we shall continue to strive to command the public
support which currently holds us there.
Q. I didn't understand what you meant about the divisions....
That was the vote between Barnard and Cairns you are referring to?
PM: I am not wishing to discount Mr. Barnard's abilities, but I
think most observers, most objective observers, would have considered
that there were several Members of the Labor Party who on Parliamentary
form would have had a claim on the vote rather more strongly than Mr.
Barnard, but it is not for me / 2 
-2
Q. Are you aware of the fact that Senator Willesee has been replaced
in the Senat
PM: No, I was not aware of that.
Interjection: By Senator Murphy.
P M. Yes, well, again I thirk that confirms the point I was trying to
make that this after Senator Vlillesee had been so shortly in office that he
should be rejected again reveals, I think, the divisions which exist, and the
currents which are swirling around the personalities. Howeier, we have
our problems; they -have theirs. We shall do our best to remain a Government
and no doubt they will do their best to displace us.
Q. Gould we ask you something, Sir, about -your New Zealand trip.
From what has come back, you have been most reluctant to discuss economic
issues. You made a big point of the fact that you were not ove r there
specifically for that and that Mr. McEwen was going over afterwards.
I was just wondering whether you could tell us whether there were any specific
points of difficulty raised with you from official sources because there were
a number of private criticisms of the operation of the trade agreement.
PM: Well there weren't all that many private criticisms. There
was the criticism expressed by Mr. Stock the Chairman of the Chamber
of Commerce. On the other hand, I was given the most cordial welcome
and reception by the Chamber of Commerce at Christchurch which was
attended by representatives of the Chambers of Commerce of all other parts
of the South Island. It was one of the agreeable surprises of the tour. I
had been asked to meet the Christchurch Chamber of Commerce. I went
along expecting to find twenty or thirty people of industry and commerce
around the table and having a discussion with them. Instead of that, it was
a very crowded and quite convivial gathering of estimable people from all
over the South Island. They told me in the 179 years which we had
celebrated just a few days before, I was the first Prime Minister to have
ever visited the South Island. There were these comments of Mr. Stock
as well as one or two editorials in the Press which came to my notice.
I think some of my critics here in Australia would have been rather surprised
to learn that in New Zealand some people think we are so smart that we
in some way are able to score advantages over the New Zealanders. The
point of substance, of course, is our hope that this agreement will work to
the mutual advantage of both. countries. Australia has much to gain from a
developing, prospering, strengthening New Zealand, as indeed they have
from a strengthening, prospering Australia, and I said there that this
agreement which, after all, is only about twelve months' old, could hardly
have been said to have given full expression to its elements in so short a
space of time, and particularly following a year in which Australia had been
contending with the effects of very serious drought in two of our principal
States that if this agreement in the longer haul was not working out to the
saisfaction of one side or the other, then I was sure that the parties to
it would approach it in a constructive and helpful spirit. I am sure that is
the spi nit my colleague will carry with him to New Zealand when he goes
there. I may say that in talking to members of the Government, I didn't
find this same degree of concern expressed. The question of forest
products is an important one with them, and I shall be mentioning that to
Mr. McEwen, although I didn't discuss it in any detail with the Government
there. The Deputy Prime Minister did tell me that the aspect which they
regarded as of topical importance was this question of forest products.
Altogether I may say, that the Prime Minister of New Zealand and myself / 3 
-3-
( Mr. Holt Contd.)
both felt we had derived great value from the visit and our two Governments
and two countries. He has exchanged with me, even on the aircraft, the
most cordial of messages. We were able to spend a lot of time together
covering a wide range of subject matters in a most direct and intimate
fashion. I did give to the press representatives who were accompanying
me ap indication of several of the subject matters we discussed. It
wasn't by any means an exhaustive list, but it ranged over a wide area both
of domestic matters and of international matters of mutual interest. The
overwhelming impression I bring back from New Zealand is the friendliness,
warmth and goodwill towards Australia and towards, if I may say so, its
Prime Minister. It struck all of us that there were quite spontaneous
expressions of this wherever we went and I didn't see a sour face or hear
a sour voice in the whole of my journeyings. On the contrary, people went
out of their way to come and see us in what is not a demonstrative country,
a little less demonstrative even than this undemonstrative country of
Australia.
Q. Did you arrange any further mutual visits wh-ile you were there?
PM: I made it clear and public that there was an open invitation to
Mr. Holyoake to come here with Mms. Holyoake whenever he would find it
convenient to do so and I have suggested to him that such is the relationship
between our two countries we should encourage more frequent visits by
Ministers on -natters of mutual interest or even of particular concern to
one country or the other and that we should not regard these as the kind of
formal visit which occurs from other countries to Australia. In point of
fact, it is no further indeed it is a good deal shorter from Canberra to
W7ellington or Christchurch than it is from Canberra to Perth, and there is
every good reason why Ministers from his Government should fly in and
do a few days of business here and fly out again, and the same with my
Ministers if that can be of advantage to us. I mentioned at the Parliamentary
Luncheon given to me or rather the Government Luncheon given
to me in the Parliament Buildings that we had already provided opportunities
for our own Members of Parliament to visit New Zealand as one of the
perquisites of off ice. Whether there will be reciprocity on that score remains
to be seen, but I may say Mr. Holyoake and his Cabinet greeted very warmly
my proposal about Anzac scholarships and immediately indicated that they
wished to have a reciprocal arrangement going, and we will see how this
works out. If it is as useful as I would expect k to be and successful as
Iwould hope it to be, then we can enlarge on that if we both think that is
desirable as time goes on.
Q. Do you see any possibility of a move to help New Zealand in its
balance of payments difficulties?
PM: Well, no requests were put to me. We did give some assistance,
as you may remember, not so long ago, but T gather that the Prime Minister
and his colleagues are looking at these matters now in their Cabinet
discussions.
Q. Sir, have you had a preliminary report, or a final report yet,
on this incident in Viet Nam in which the Australians were killed.
PM: No, I did receive an expression of sympathy and regret from
Mr. Holyoake as soon as he knew of the matter. It wasn't easy to get details
at first, and I contacted Australia, of course, as soon as I had some word
of the incident and was later supplied with the text of the two statements
made by the respective Ministers for Defence in each country and I made
a short comment myself while in New Zealand, which was appreciated by / 4 
4-
( Mr. Holt contd.
them. I spole on the ' phone again to Mr. Holyoake this morning and the
first thing he said to me was another expression of his profound regret at
what had occurred. He referred to the skill and efficiency for which the
New Zealand artillery are noted. But both Ministers the Minister for
Defence in New Zealand and ours have indicated that a full investigation is
going forward into the incident and I don't think I can help you any further
on it at this point.
Q. Sir, is there likely to be a common approach between Australia
and New Zealand to the possible entry of Britain into the Common Market?
PM: Well, I don't think we have yet reached the stage where we know
precisely what sort of timing or conditions would apply to a British entry.
Both Australia and New Zealand have made it clear in the past that their
industries could be affected New Zealand's, perhap4 more seriously
than our own by British entry. The United Kingdom Government has
maintained at all times that it would have regard to Commonwealth
interests in any such approach, and there have been assurances given
from various quarters that the special position of New Zealand would be
safeguarded. Whether this would extend beyond a transitional phase has
yet to be seen. We didn't go Into that matter in any detail or, indeed,
discuss it more than superficially, because our two experts on this are
Mr. McEwen and Mr. Marshall. They will be meeting again very
shortly.
Q. Could you just elaborate on that balance of payments question,
Mr. Holt. You said there was no request for assistance at this stage
but the Prime Minister and his colleagues were looking into the problem
now. This doesn't rule out the possibility of an approach from New Zealand
at this stage?
PM: Well, I am not in a posi tion to anticipate what action the New
Zealand Government may take. There are various ways in which a country
seeks to redress a balance of payments problem, and no doubt these are
being examined by them at the present time.
Thank you. 



67/ 006
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 22/ 1967
PRIME MINISTER'S MESSAGE TO AUSTRALIAN
BALLET COMPANY
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, today sent the
following message to Miss P. van Praagh, the Artistic Director
of the Australian Ballet Company
" On the eve of the departure of the Australian
Ballet for its overseas tour covering New Zealand, Honolulu,
Vancouver, Montreal ( Expo 67), South America and
Mexico City, would you convey to the Company the good
wishes of the Commonwealth Government and myself for
a happy and successful tour.
We are confident the Company will maintain the
high standard achieved on its previous oversea visit and
further enhance Australia's cultural standing.
Regards, Harold Holt,
Prime Minister."
CANBERRA, February, 1967 



FOR PRESS:-P. M. No. 21/ 1967
DEATH OF DAME ANN McEWEN
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
My colleagues of the Government and I are saddened by
the death of Dame Ann McEwen and express our deep sympathy.
Dame Ann was a woman of great strength of character
which sustained her bravely and cheerfully during her long illness.
Her many public services won her the well-merited
honour which she carried with distinction.
She will be mourned by all who knew her.
CANBERRA, February, 1962
NOTE: The Prime Minister has sent a personal telegram of sympathy
to Mr. McEwen, and spoke with Mr. McEwen on the ' phone
this morning. 



67/ O? 9
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 24/ 1967
TASMANIAN BLJSHFIRES MESSAGES FROM
OVERSEAS
The following messages have been received from the
Prime Ministerof Canada, Mr. Lester Pearson and the Prime Minister
of Malaysia, Tunku Abdul Rahman, expressing sympathy to the victims
of the Tasmanian bushfires
From Mr. Lester B. Pearson
" Canadians have been shocked by news of the appalling
loss of life and homes by fires in Tasmania. We of fer our deepest
sympathy to Australians and especially to those in Tasmania
most affected by this disaster."
From Tunku Abdul Rahman
" We are grieved to bear d d3 tk ragkt Tasmania bus hfire
which had incurred extensive loss of life and property. Please
convey my condolence and that of the Government and people of
Malaysia to the unfortunate people of Tasmania who have suffered
in this tragedy. Expressions of sympathy have also been received from the
Governments of Israel and Portugal.
The Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations,
Mr. Bowden, sent a message of sympathy to the Governor of Tasmania
yesterday. The B ritish High Commissioner and the President of the
Board of Trade, Mr. Jay have also sent messages to the Premier of
Tasmania. CANBERRA. February, 1967 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 23/ 1967
NEW ZEALAND CONTRIBUTION TO TASMANIAN
BUSHFIRE FUND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I have received advice that the New Zealand Government
has donated œ 10, 000 ( sterling) ($ A25, 000) to aid bushfire victims in
Tasmania. In addition, the New Zealand High Commissioner in
Canberra, Mr. Luke Hazlett, is organising an appeal among his staff
in Australia. These warmhearted contributions reflecting as they
do the close friendship between the two countries will be much
appreciated by all Australians as they are by the Commonwealth and
Tasmanian Governments.
CANBERRA, 1Gth February, 1967 



OPENINJ OF THE NODULAR IRON FOUNDRY
AT } EKERAL MOTORS-HOLDEU' S FACTORY
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
February, 1967.
Mr. ' ilson, Mr. President of the Senate, my colleague
the Minister for Labour and National Service, and many other
distinguished guests that I see in front of me here this afternoon,
and my greetings to the employees of 3MH who are also here with us.
It's a personal pleasure for me, Mr. Wilson to have this
opportunity of saying welcome to another important adaition to
Australia's range of manufacturing capacity. You have pointed out
that there are few such foundries as this to be found outside of
North America itself and I gather from the information you've been
good enough to supply to me, that not only will this new and valuable
equipment be able to supply your needs here in Australia, but that
you have a market for its products already with your Vauxhall plants
in the United Kingdom, and that the crankshafts manufactured here
will go to supplement the other automotive parts which already are
being sent to the United Kingdom from Australia. A quite remarkable
achievement in itself.
It is, of course well known to all Australians that the
manufacturing industries of this country have been playing a growing
part in our prosperous development. There are just on 60', 00
factories in Australia; more than double the number we had at the
beginning of World War II and the employment in those factories
represents an increase of 125% on the number engaged in manufacturing
in 1959. It now aosorbs through the range of manufactures around
Australia, just on 28% of our work force and when we look at the
number of migrants whom we must place in employment if they are
to build a satisfactory new life in this country, the percentage
would be even higher and certainly in this automotive industry,
it would rank among the Aighest proportions of any section of
Australian industry.
The automotive industry has become the biggest single
employer in Australia today. It absorbs, iether in production or
in repair, just on one in ' ten of ill those employed in manufacturing
industries and, thanks largely to this domestic manufacturing
capacity of automotive parts and asseaoled cars, we rank now amongst
the third or fourth motorized nation per capita in the world. I
like to think we rank third. I'm told there is a uit of an argument
whether we or New Zealand rank third, but if you talk about modern
up-to-date cars, I've no doubt that we compare more than favourably
with our sister Commonwealth country '. hich I have visited so
pleasurably so recently. And so I'm here to claim that we rank
third in the world, falling behind only the United States . and Canada.
A pretty remarkable circumstance in a country whose manufacturing
history is of such comparatively recent origin, certainly so far as
this phase of it is concerned. There is at the nresent time, as we
are all made rather uncomfortably aware as we go about our daily
occasions or our weekend excursions, a car for just on every four
men, women and children in this country and the proportion of cars
to people is tending all the time to increase.
One of the encouraging features of the growing and
diversified manufacturing capacity of the country is the expanding
success we have achieved in placing our manufactured exports aoroad
and just on 12% now in value of our total exports is made up of the
products of our manufacturing ildustries and that percentage is
tending all the time to increase. . e not only make the goods but we
are increasingly capable of placing them competitively with other parts 
-2-
of the world and some products which formerly we imported, we
are now exporting to the countries from which they came. For
example, we are exporting now, as Sir Ian McLennan would be happy
to confirm, steel to the United States and to the United Kingdom.
And I have already mentioned one of the basic components of the
motor car, the crankshaft, is to " o from this country to one of
the -reat automotive centres of tEe world, the United Kingdom, as
an illustration of how competitive we have become.
Now, undoubtably, one of the leading contributors to
Australia's success in the automotive field has been the General
Motors-Holden's organisation. They not only helped and indeed
were largely responsible in the pioneering stage for establishing
in Australia the techniques and the knowhow of the equipment and
the large scale production necessary for successful manufacturing,
but they have gone on rapidly and steadily with this process of
innovation with the kind of research and development which is
carried out in the technical area which I had the pleasure of
opening less than three years ago.
Every now and then, somebody takes a poke at General
Motors, feeling that there could be room for some Australian
equity participation and I subscrioe of course in principle to
this concept, but it would be quite a mistaken belief to imagine
that there is not a very sustantial Australian equity in suostance
in the profitable conduct of this mighty and vast organisation
here in Australia. It now has ten plants, taking on something over 20,000
employees. Through the sub contracting and supply that it
receives from other Australian owned and operated factories there
is employment given prooably to another 30 000 people, and I was
aware when I was Treasurer of the country ow much this company
contributed by way of our revenue receipts to the well being of
the Australian nation. I've ueen doing a little research on that
subject not, I haster to assure you, with the connivance of the
Commissioner of Taxes who, of course is bound to secrecy on these
matters, but I have it direct from the stable itself that since
1948 the company has paid either in company tax or customs duties
or matters of that sort a total of 357,000,000 to the revenue
of the Commonwealth and sales tax on its products has brought
us in another 0700,000,000. Now that is think you'll agree, a
very substantial equity contrioutinI to the funds availaole for
defence, social welfare or the manifold circumstances that modern
Governments have to take to themselves. And so I speak in
appreciative vein here today for the contribution which this great
company has made to the prosperous growth of Australia to the
well-oeing of our people and to the strengthening of the nation's
industrial face.
e are these days producin a widely exnanding and diversified
range of nroducts. I had to record quite recently a little talk for
the 1967 Canadian Exposition. Somebody thought out the bright idea
that unfortunate people visiting the Australian pavilion who are
looking for a little rest and relaxation, would sit in some of the
" talking chairs" we will provide. They will immediately be addressed by so."
notable public figure or an expert in his particular field. They
asked me if I would talk about our manufactures. And this is how I
happen to be so well equipped with all the statistics I have been
rattling off to you. But 1 myself was interested to learn that
included now in the range of more sophisticated products are radio
telephone equipment tr . nsistorized airways beacons, the pilotless
jet aircraft we call Jindiviks the anit-submarine guided missile
Ikara, and the anti-tank guided weapon Halkara and all of these
items have found markets abroad including the United Kingdom and
the United States. It's good I repeat, to feel that not only can
we do the job but we can to it on the basis that is sufficiently
competitive and attractive for these products to find their way into 
-3-
markets even in industrialised countries, with highly sophisticated
manufactures themselves.
Now this nodular foundry is as you've said a comparatively
rare oeing in the areas of the worlA outside of North America and
it speaks volumes for the confidence your company has in the future
of Australia and for its capacity to export a ' rowing proportion of
its manufactures to other parts of the world that you should have
established the foundry here, that you should have been capable of
doing this with Australian designers, Australian technicians and
workmen and to have produced such an impressive result as we see
around us here today. I am certain that you look forward to a
successful life for the foundry.
I understand that one of my more hazardous tasks is to press
a green button. I've never been mechanically minded, nor mechanically
efficient, and if anything goes wrong following the pressing of the
button it will be a case of human error not through any fault in the
equipment itself. And so formally declaring open, as now do, this
nodular iron foundry, wishing you and your company continued success
hoping that you in your turn will one of these days become a succe; sful
ambassador abroad for Australia, joining that select company which
includes Sarl Daum Harlow Jsae and David Hegland, I now have pleasure
in pressing the button and hoping to hell that the thing works. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 20/ 1967
COMMONWEALTH AID TO TASMANIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I wish to make it clear that contribution by the Commonwealth
of $ 250, 000 to help meet urgent cases of hardship which come to the
notice of the Tasmanian Government is merely the first advance of the
Commonwealth's bushfire assistance.
I have already assured Mr. Reece and stated publicly that the
Commonwealth Government recognises that Tasmania, being a small
State with limited resources, will need more assistance in other directions
such as with re-housing and rehabilitation of industry.
I told Mr. Reece that the meeting previously arranged for
next week of the Commonwealth and Premiers would provide a convenient
opportunity to discuss these problems in the light of assessments made
by then. I am sure the other State Premiers who have all sent messages
of sympathy will be glad to join with the Commonwealth in doing what we
can to help Tasmania through this disaster as speedily as possible.
CANBERRA, February, 1967. 



61/ 0" 0
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 25/ 1967
REACTION TO TSMANIAN BUSHFIRES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The loss and suffering from the bushfires in Tasmania has
produced a spontaneous sympathetic and helpful response in many parts
of the world. Messages and gifts continued to arrive during the weekend.
The gift of $ 50, 000 from the British Government was a
warm-hearted and generous donation. In addition, there have been so
many enquiries . from people in London wanting to make private donations
that funds have been opened at both Australia House and Tasmania House.
The New Zealand Government has already announced a gi-ft of $ 25, CCC for
the Tasmanian Relief Fund.
In addition to last vieekt messages from The Queen, Princess
Alexandra, who is to visit Australia shortly, has expressed her sincere
sympathy to all those Tasmanians who have experienced loss of any kind.
Among other messages delivered this weekend was the
following from President Johnson
" I have been Saddened to hear of the tragic loss of
life and property in Tasmania resulting from the disastrous
bushfires raging there. I speak for all Americans when I
express to you our profound sympathy for the people of Tasmania
and all Australians who have suffered as a result of this misfortune.
Countries to express their sympathy to the Tasmanian
bushf ire vict ims include Britain, Canada, New Zealand, Malaysia, India,
Israel, Portugal and Sweden.
All Australians, and Tasmanians in particular, will be
touched by the warmth of sympathy and ready expression of help.*
While I shall be acknowledging these messages officially,
I would like to say publicly how much the Australian Government appreciates
these gestures. Officers of my Department have spent the weekend examining
ways in which the Commonwealth can be of most help to Tasmania. Plans
for Commonwealth assistance will be discussed at the Premiers' Conference
in Canberra this week,
CANBERRA, 12th February, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 26/ 1967
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
The Prime Minister with his other Ministers had
discussions this morning on the economic situation with representatives of
a group of national organisations representing industry and commerce.
Representatives who attended the meeting were
Mr. F. R. Curtis
Mr. F. G. May
Mr. F. J. McAvoy
Mr. J. P. Heffernan
Mr. T. B. C. Walker President, Associated Chambers of Manufactures
of Australia
Pres ident,
Associated Chambers of Commerce
of Australia
President, National Farmers Union of Australia
President,
Australian Primary Producers' Union
President, Australian Woolgrowers' and
Graziers' Council
Mr. L. H. Heaslip, OBEVice-President,
Australian Wool and Meat
Federation Producers'
Mr. R. H. S. Cavan
Mr. D. C. Watkins
Mr. N. W. Lawrance
Sir Theo Kelly, OBE Chairman, Australian Bankers' Association
President,
Master Builders' Federation of
Australia
Executive Member,
Federal Chamb er of Automotive
Industries
Acting President,
Australian Council of Retailers.
Mr. Holt said that the organisations had welcomed the
opportunity to inform the Government of their veiws of the current and
prospective developments in the various sectors of the economy represented
by them. The Government, for its part, had found the talks of great value
coming as they did before a consideration by the Cabinet at its meeting on
Wednesday of the present state of the economy.
This afternoon, Ministers will meet with representatives of
the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and the Export Development
Council and this evening with representatives of the Australian Council of
Trade Unions.
CANBERRA, 13th February, 1967. 67/ 0'., 7 



EMBARGOED: NOT FOR PUBLICATION BEFORE MIDNIGHT 14/ 12/ 67
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 27/ 1967
BRITISH GIFT TO CANBERRA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Halt
The British Government's gift to Canberra to mark the
capital's Golden jubilee will be a carilon on Aspen Island in Lake Burley
Griffin. An announcement to this effect is also being made in the House of
Commons by the Prime Minister of Britain.
In 1963, the then Prime Minister of Britain advised the
Australian Government that the British Government would make a gift to
mark the Golden jubilee of Canberra, being celebrated that year. It was
intended that the gift make a significant contribution to the development of
Canberra and reflect Britain's and Australia's common parliamentary
heritage. It was suggested at the time that the gift might take the form of a
set or ornamental fountains or a bell tower.
Subsequently the Australian Government proposed that
the gift take the form of a structure housing a carillon to be erected on
Aspen Island. In consultation with the Royal British Institute of
Ardhitects and the Royal Australian institute of Architects, it has been agreed
that there should be a limited competition for the design: three Australian
architects and three British architects will be invited to take part. The
assessors for the competition will be Lord Holford, Mr. Bedford ( the Chief
Architect of the British Ministry of Public Building and Works), and Mr.
Overall ( Chairman of the National Capital Planning Committee). The winning
design will be put before the British and Australian Governments for
consideration before being adopted.
The British Government estimates the cost of the gift.
including the competititon, as being about OEStg. 2CC, 000.
The carillon will be a notable addition and asset to the
National Capital. The Australian Government warmly welcomes the British
Govenmen's generous and symbolic gift.
CANBERRA 14th February, 19.67 



FOR PRESS: P. M No. 29/ 1967
VISIT OF HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF
EDINBUR GH
Staten~ ent by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Details of the programme prepared for his Visit to
Australia, between March 1st and 10th, have now been approved by His Royal
Highness the Duke of Edinburgh. While a great deal of Prince Philip's time will be taken
up with meetings associated with the Duke of Edinburgh's Third Commonwealth
Study Conference, to be held in Australia in 1968, he has several othe r
engagements of a public and official kind and will visit some of the fire
disaster areas in Tasmania. His Royal Highness is scheduled to arrive at the RAAF
Base, Fairbairn ( Canberra) at 11. 00 p. m. on Wednesday. March 1st, after
flying in an RAF Comet aircraft from Singapore via Darwin. While in
Canberra, he will stay at Government House.
On Thursday morning March 2nd. at Government
House, he will attend the inaugural meeting of the Australian Outward Bound
Trust, and also have talks with members of the Third Commonwealth Study
Conference. In the afternoon he will attend a televised Press
Conference at Government House, in connection with the Study Conference,
and in the evening will attend a Parliamentary Reception at Parliament House.
Afterwards His Royal Highness will be present at a Dinner at Government
House. On Friday morning at 9. 30 a. in., he will fly from
Canberra to Melbourne in an RAAF Viscount aircraft.
The itinerary for the Visit is:-
Wednesday, 1st 11.00 p. m. Arrive at Canberra by RAF Comet
from Singapore via Darwin.
Thursday, 2nd In Canberra
Friday, 3rd Morning Leave Canberra for Melbourne
Saturday, 4th In Melbourne
Sunday, 5th In Melbourne
Monday, 6th Morning Leave Melbourne for Tasmania
Tuesday, 7th Morning Leave Tasmania for Melbourne
Wednesday, 8th Morning Leave Melbourne for Sydney
Thursday, 9th In Sydney
Friday, 10th Morning Leave Sydney by RAF Comet for
Singapore via Darwin.
CANBERRA, 15th February, 1967
BACKGROUND NOTE Programme details covering Prince Philip's Visit
to~ th&amp; Stat-e-s a-re not i(, normly announced from Canberra but from the State
capitals concerned. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 31/ 1967
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GAS PIPELINE FINANCING SCHEME
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
As a result of discussions that have been going on for some
time between the Commonwealth and the Government of South Australia,
followed by a decision at the Loan Council meeting today, agreement has
been reached between the Commonwealth and South Australia on a scheme
to finance the construction of a pipeline to carry natural gas from Gidgealpa
in the North-East of SQ~ th Australia to Adelaide.
On present estimates, the amount of finance required for
the project is $ 35 million spread over a period extending to mid-1972.
Expenditure will be heavily concentrated in the financial years 1967-68
and 1968-69. South Australia is to arrange semi -governmental borrowings
for the purpose of the pipeline authority which is to be established up to a
total of $ 20 million. The Loan Council agreed today to a special addition of
million being made to the semi -governmental borrowing programme of
South Australia for the period to 1971 -72. The purpose of this is to cover
the proposed borrowings for the pipeline authority.
Over the same period the Commonwealth will make loans
to South Australia to an amount of $ 15 million.
These loans will be repaid by South Australia over the
years 1972-73 to 1979-80G. It is expected that for this purpose finance
will be sought by way of further semi -governmental borrowings by the
pipeline authority.
CANBERRA, 16th February, 1967. 



67/ O? 0
FOR PRESS PM. No. 34/ 1967
COMMONWEALTH-STATE FINA NC! A L RELATIONS:
STATES' ATTITUDE
At the close of today's Premiers' Conference. the
Premier of New South Wales, Mr. Askin, made the following comment-
" Mr. Prime Minister, before we leave, I
should like to express our gratitude for what has been
approved. " I am sure we al11 appreciate the friendly
and considerate atmosphere that has been engendered by
both yourself and the Commonwealth Treasurer. This has
made our work much easier.
" The short-term solution that has been put
forward will prove to be very helpful to all the States. I
include the bringing forward of the assessment date to 31st
March. The big question, as we all know, revolves around
what will come from the long-term considerations.
" It is encouraging to the Premiers to note that
the Commonwealth has indicated that it is prepared to look at
the long-term possibilities and has even invited us to make
submissions on the matter.
" We can only hope that in June the merits of our
proposals will receive the consideration that has been foreshadowed.
If our proposals are considered on their merits,
we cannot ask for any more."
CANBERRA, 16th February, 1967. 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, 16TH FEBRUARY, 1967 6// 0 ' I 9
Commonwealth-State Financial Relations
The discussion at the Premiers' Conference today
covered a wide range of matters affecting Commonwealth-State
financial relations. It was agreed that consideration of longer-term
questions would be resumed at the Premiers' Conference to
be held towards the end of the current financial year. In
the meantime, however, the Commonwealth put forward certain
proposals which were designed to provide further assistance
to the State Budgets in 1966/ 67.
Details of these proposals, which were accepted by
the States, are attached. 
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE2. FEBRUA RY 1967
Financial Assistance Grants
Statement by-the. Commonwealth
Present Formula Under the States Grants Act 1965 the financial
assistance grant for each State for each financial year of
the present grants arrangements is determined by taking that
State's grant for the previous year ( with the addition of
$ 2 million each year in the case of Queensland) and:-
Increasing it by the percentage change in the
Population of that State during the year ended
31st December of the year of payment;
The amount so obtained under is increased
by the percentage increase in average wages
for Australia as a whole fot the financial year
immediately preceding the year of payment; and
The amount so obtained under is increased
by a betterment factor of 1.2 per cent;
Proposed Formula It is now proposed that, in future, the inicreasq in aveW
wages used in calculating each ye'ar's grants ( including . the
grants for the current financial year) should be the increase
for the twelve months ended March in th~ k year of payment.
Thus, the time-lag before movements in Wages are reflected in
the grants will be reduced from one year to three months. The
other elements of the formula will remain' unchanged.
The effect of this proposal on the amount of the
financial assistance grants for the current financial year
cannot be calculated precisely until figures showing the
increase in average wages for the twelve months ending 31st
March 1967 become available. On present indications, it is
estimated that the increase in average wages will be about
5.25 per cent or possibly 5.50 per cent. The effect on this
year's grants using each of these figures is as follows:-
Financial Assistance Grants, 1966-67
Smillion
Estimate of Estimates of Grants under Proposed
Grants Formula with Reduced Time Lag
State under
Present Assuming 5.25% Wage Assuming 5.5% Wage
Formula Increase Increase
Increase on Increase
Present on Present
Grant Formula Grant Formula
Grant Grant
New South Wales 272. 9 275.6 2.7 276.33.
Victoria 206.0 208.0 2.0 208.5
Queensland 123.8 125.1 1.3 125.3
8outh Australia 93.5 9440.9 94.7 1.2
Vestern Australia 85.0 85.8 0.8 86.0
tasmania 34+. 2 3450.3 34+. 6o.
TOTAL I815.4+ 823.4+ 8.0 825.4+ 10.0 
Further Addition for 1966/ 67
The Commonwealth is also prepared to make available
to the States an amount of $ 5,000 000 as a special non-recurring
addition to the grants payable under the formula in 1966/ 67.
This amount will be distributed among the States in the same
proportions as the grants produced by the formula.
The approximate distribution of this amount among
the States is set out below:-
State Amount
New South Wales 1.68
Victoria 1.26
I Queensland .76
ISouth Australia ø 57
Western Australia .52
Tasmania .21
TOTAL 5.00
Total Financial Assistance Grants 1966-67
) n the assumption that average wages will increase
by 5.25 per cent in the twelve months to 31st March, 1967
the total financial assistance grants payable to the States
in 1966-67 under these proposals are estimated as follows:-
Financial Assistance Grants 1966-67
million
Existing Formula
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania 272.9 206.0 123.8 93. 5
85.0 34.2
815.4 Addition from
Reduction in
Time-Lag
2.7 2.1
1.2 0.9 o. 8
0.3 8.0 Special Addition 1.7 1.3 0.8 0.6 0.5 0.2 5.0 Total 277.3 209.4 125.8 94.9 86.3 34.7
828.4 



FOR P: CSS / 4 x
4z 3D No. 33/ 1967
AID FOR TASAHIIA
The Priam3 inister, Mr. Holt said today that there
had been further discussion in the course of the visit to
Canberra of Mr. Reece of the arrangements to apply to relief of
hardship from the Tasmanian bushfires and mattcrs of
rehabilitation. The Treasurer, Ir. Hc'Mahon and Mr. Howson, the
Commonwealth's Liaison inister for purposes connected with
bushfire assistance had participated in the talks between the
Prime Mlinister and Mr. Reece.
The Commonwealth proposed thact special assistance
should be given to Tasmania in order to restore as quickly as
possible the economy of the State and to relieve the hardship
and suffering of those affected.
Mr. Howson had made two visits to Tasmania and had
held discussions with the Premier. In addition, Commonwealth
and State officers had conferred continuously on all aspects.
Mr. Holt said he and Mr. Reece were now able to state that they
had reached agreement on the basic principles of a program-me of
relief and rehabilitation. The Commonwealth had undertaken to provide
substantial support to the State for the measures Mr. Reece
proposed to introduce. These measures would be such as the
State considered to be necessary to meet the emergency and the
hardship which had been experienced in various sectors of the
economy. The State would consult with the Commonwealth about
its proposed measures of assistance to confirm their
acceptability for the purposes of the Commonwealth's financial
undertaking to the State.
As in the case of the help given to New South Wales
and Queensland for relief of the drought, the Commonwealth's
overall financial assistance to the State of Tasmiania would be
provided partly by way of loan and partly by way of grant.
Mr. Holt praised the generous and ready response to
the Governor's Appeal Fund from every corner of Australia and
overseas. This would go a long way towards relieving personal
hardship and distress. Mr. Reece had said that he hoped it
would be possible to provide many of the families made homeless
with some basic furniture and other essential household
requisites. Mr. Holt said he and the Premier reaffirmed the
basic principles already announced late last week concerning
assistance for housing. It was intended to provide housing up
to Housing Department standards with need as the first criterion.
The two Governments were now looking closely at the
problems of primary producers and people in business. They
had suffered not only an immediate loss of income but also a
loss of capital. It was not yet possible to lay down the basis
of assistance, but efforts would be made to enable those
affected to be rehabilitated in their own area. 
2
There were some particular problems facing primary
producers, especially those concerned with replacing fencing
and stock. These were being considered. There would be
special discussions about these between Commonwealth and State
officers as soon as possible.
The Commonwealth recognises that the loss of assets
to the State, such as schools, bridges and powerlines would
also need to be considered. Its approach would be to ensure
that these assets would be reinstated without the State
incurring an onerous debt burden, or the necessity to make
replacement at the expense of the State's ordinary works
programme. The Premier, for his part, paid a warm tribute to
the help and attitude of the Commonwealth, and expressed his
personal thanks to the Prime Minister, the Federal Treasurer
and 1ir. Howson.
CA bRRA.
" Ft h February, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 3016
VISIT BY THE FOREIGN MINISTER OF ISRAEL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Government of
Israel, Mr. Abba Eban, will pay an official visit to Australia next month.
Mr. Eban will be accompanied by his wife and by Mr.
David Rivlin, Assistant Director of the British Commonwealth Division
of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Mr. Emanuel Shimoni, Director
of the Bureau of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
The Minister and his party arrive in Sydney on Monday,
6th March, and travel on to Canberra the same morning. Later in the
day he will call on the Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Hasluck, who
will give him a dinner party that evening.
On Tuesday, 7th March, the Foreign Minister will have
discussions with the Minister for External Affairs and senior officials
of the Department of External Affairs. At noon he will give a press
conference at the H~ otel Canberra, following which the Government will
hold a luncheon in his honour. During the afternoon, he will call on the
Prime Minister and will also meet the Leader of the Opposition.
The Ambassador of Israel, His Excellency Mr. David
Tesher, will give a reception in the early evening of Tuesday, 7th Maith,
following which the visitors will be entertained at a dinner gven by Their
Excellencies the Governor-General and Lady Casey at Government House.
Mr. Eban and party will leave Australia on Wednesday,
8th March for a short stay in New Zealand. They will return to
Australia on Friday 10th and will spend two days privately with members
of the Jewish community before leaving again for overseas on Sunday, 12th.
The Australian Government looks forward to the visit
by Mr. and Mrs. Eban which is the first official Ministerial visit to
Australia from Israel. Following the visit to Israel by the Minister for
External Affairs, Mr. Hasluck in April, 1966, Mr. Eban's tour will
strengthen still further the many links between the two countries.
CANBERRA, 16th February, 1967. 



4 A P R 196?.
OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE DALWOOD WYBONG PARK
WINERY, N. S. W.
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr, Harold Holt. 17th February, 1967
Mr. Chairman of the Board of Directors, and Mr. Geoffrey Penfold Hyland,
my Ministerial Colleagues of the Commonwealth and State Governments,
members of the Parliaments of the Commonwealth and of New South Wales,
many distinguished guests, employees of this historic firm of Penfolds,
ladies and gentlemen: " If all be true that I do think
There are five reasons why we drink aber
Good wine, a friend, or being dry,*
Or lest we may be by and bye IR
For any other reason why.
Now I didn't get that out of somebody's book of quotations.
I learnt that one on a visit to New Zealand about a week or so ago, and
the Minister for Agriculture was with me and I said that one of my most
pleasant chores of the week ahead when I returned to Australia was this
official opening of the Dalwood Estate Vineyard and Winery, and he said,
" Well, this may help you. This demonstrates the respectability of wine
drinking which was expressed by -an eighteenth century Anglican priest
named Aldrich." My subsequent researches have confirmed that I felt
I knew all along, that both in the Old Testament and the New Testament
are to be found authorities for the proposition that the moderate consumption,
certainly of table wine, has been encouraged by the most respectable
authorities from the earliest of recorded time.
We find that in the Old Testament we are told that " wine makes
glad the heart of man", and the lbw Testament being rather more modern
in approach and presumably a certain amount of travel having been undertaken
in the interval, warned against the danger of drinking water. " Drink no
longer water but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake, and as one of
the most regular travellers for the Commonwealth Government I would urge
that note of caution upon you.
And, of course, there are so many valuable injunctions to the man
in public life from those who have written about this precious commodity. It
was Emerson who told us a man would be eloquent if you give him good wine,
and if I go beyond the time appointed so that we miss a second parachute jump,
you will know where to attribute the responsibility for that. And we are told
by the Germans that a day without wine is a day without sunshine, and this
would be accepted, I think, by many of us who would also agree with Horace
when he told us to drown our care in wine.
Now I myself am a great believer in temperance, including
temperance itself. I think we should be temperate in all things including
temperance, and that gives us a certain amount of flexibili ty in our approach
to the problems of life. And I am sure that it's been a great pleasure to all
of us to have come along here today as guests of Mr. Penfold Hyland and all
associated with this historic name in the wine industry of Australia, and in
these beautiful surroundings find ourselves together enjoying delightful food,
agreeable company and very enjoyable wine. / 2. 
2-
Now I mention the five reasons and I think that most of the,
if not all, can be exemplified here. Good wine we have enjoyed that.
I am told that something went wrong with the works yesterday and 200 gallons
flooded down the path inbetween these casks and will not be consumed not by
human beings, anyhow, in future. I don't know, 04ether we should rise and
pause for a moment to regret that circumstance, but we have enjoyed good
wine, Good friends, as I have looked around this room I see rma ny
people who have come from afar, from Sydney and beyond, braved the hazards
of the climate and the roads, which cannot be maintained on the quite inadequate
grant that the Commonwealth Government makes for them, but at the end of
the road of pioneering here, they are in agreeable company -and these very
pleasant circumstances. I am sure, Geoffrey, we have all felt it worthwhile
and that we rejoice with you in a day which honours the opening of this new
establishment contributing so much tc the future prosperity and progress of
the Hunter Valley. Now the Hunter Valley is itself, of course, one of the great winegrowing
districts of Australia and I predict that as people round the rest of the
world over the years come to appreciate the quality of Australian wines it will
become one of the notable wine growing districts of the world, and recognised
as such. I found it very impressive to learn from the facts supplied to me
that if there is brought into wine production the thousand or eleven hundred
acres which are under the control in this area of this organisation, the volume
of wine produced will be far in excess of that produced by all the other vineyards
at this moment of the Hunter Valley. And so this is a very remarkable
development in an area which has already contributed much to the propperity
and progress of this state of New South Wales, and here we have the elements
of a great national asset which will carry Australia's name to the approval
of those who consume its products beyond our own boundaries and far around
the world. Now one could say a great deal about the wine industry and I should
perhaps reserve that for a more suitable occasion in the Parliament. It's rather
interesting to learn as one studies the facts that the consumption in Australia of
table wine and this has been perhaps partly at the expense of the fortified
wines but of table wine has more than trebled over the past ten years. Now
that's not merely because we brought in a lot of immigrants from Europe who
have been accustomed to drinking wine as some of our people have been
accustomed to drinking beer. It's also attributable to the fact that as we
native Australians learn sonmthing of what wine can mean in more agreeable
living for ourselves, our own consumption of it has grown, and I believe it
could grow considerably more than it has. We have great natural advantages
for wine growing through most of Australia, or certainly many parts of most
of the States of Australia, an d I would gladly join with Mr. Penfold Hyland
and other spokesmen for the names that rate high in the wiine industry in a
campaign against what I might term at this point of time " snobbism' in the
consumption of wine.
You know there's a lot of guff that goes on in the consumption of
wine in public places, and the ritual that has developed around this, more
particularly over recent years, is quite terrifying to the average casual
restaurant visitor or hotel-goer. I had quite a run of experience of it in
New Zealand when I was there where most of our meals were spent out at
public places. You know. the drill that one goes through Having
settled yourselves down and got comfortable, if your host is sufficiently alert,
/ 3. 
-3
he will summmn tbe wine waiter. That will depend to some extent upon the
degree of service as to the time interval which then elapses. The wine
waiter will then present you with usually -a somewhat fly-speckled little
journal which contains what the house may or may not have to offer.
Frequently one is disappointed in finding that it's ou t of stock or somebody
else had the b ottle the night before, but a further interval passes and then
finally along comes the bottle usually if it's a white wine or a sparkling
wine, contained i~ n some ice bucket, there's a further delay while it's
twisted around and juggled about a bit, and then with a flourish the fellow
will remove the cork and he'll bring the cork over you to sniff. You are
terrified you're going to do the wrong thing at that stage. You'll either
tell him to take it back when it's perfectly good or you'll bravely say
"~ go on with it" when you suspect that it mightn't be as good as you would
hope. And then he'll give you a certain portion to taste. Now I have been
host on a good number of public ce-cas ions when wine was consumed and
I've run a bit of a mental graph on these things and I find that about two
times out of five, he never comes back to the fellow who's done the tasting.
And by the time you have gone through all these processes you're about
into the second or third course and cursing inwardly that it didn't come
earlier. Now, my upbringing on drinking with meals occurred shortly
after I left the university, at a quite modest restaurant, as it was then, but
it's become rather more posh establishment now in Melbourne, known as
the Florentino. For 2/ 6d. in the currency of those days one had a three
course meal and a little bottle of wine that was plonked on the table according
to whether you said red or white. I haven't used the word " plonked" with
any special significance, because I used to find this wine quite potable, and
if one was sufficiently injudicious, or didn't have enough work to do as in
those depression years most of us didn't, to consume that q uite small bottle
( about half the current small bottle size) and say you'd like another, you paid
an extra sixpence for that, and if you wanted lobster mayonnaise extra, you
paid an extra sixpence for that. Well some might say they were the good
old days. We didn't have as many sixpences in those days perhaps as we
do now but th-e fact of the matter was that you had a good potable wine that
had no nonsense about it. It was there from the time you started your meal
and away you went. If you wanted more it came quickly to you, and those
of you who have gone to Italy in recent years will know how you can still
repeat that process there to this day.
Now it was Omar Khayam who told us, as most of you will recall:
" I wonder often what the vintners buy one half so precious as the stuff they sell."
I'd like to just amend that slightly and put " what the restauranters or hoteliers
buy one half so precious as the stuff they sell" because I find it something of
a deterrent to sit down either at a hotel or a restaurant, pick up the wine list
and find that in their enthusiasm they've added something upwards of a 1007%
to what I know that wine can be bought at, not necessarily wholesale, but even
retail. And I think it's a very abort-sighted policy because you always think
hard about the second bottle when you know you are paying over 100% on the
price you could have it at home, and if by chance at a cheaper level you are
able to consume two or three bottles, well one is less resistant to the port
or the brandy which might follow as a logical consequence, and so I would
like to see the wine industry make its best efforts not only on Governments
and I don't reject or object to the representations we receive from the wine
industry but to use their influence to reduce the ritual so that more casual
wine drinkers will be encouraged to do it without feeling that they are exposing
themselves embarrassingly in public places and also to see that the price
reaches the consumer at a reasonable level. / 4. 
4-
Now I said that as a Government we meet the industry from
time to time. Quite obviously if one studies the facts this is a highly
favoured industry. There are very few areas of agreeable human
experience that remain untaxed by governments. I suppose love-making
is one and wine drinking is another. There are not many more that I can
think of. I perhaps should have th ought of this when I was with the
Premiers yesterday and they were wanting to open up new avenue-, of
taxation. But for our part we impose no tax burden on table wines.
I don't think we do, Geoffrey, on fortified wines. We certainly do on
brandy, but even here we have a smaller charge on brandy than we do
on the other spirits, which again creates a grievance with those wh'
manufacture the other spirits. In other words, you can't win in th-: sbusiness
of government, but none of us has ever regretted what we have
done in respect of the wine industry and the preference which has enabled
the surplus production of wine to be converted in many instances to brandy
and to give the Australian public the benefit of that lower price.
Now I don't want to weary you with anecdotes for they bristl. e
through the history of wine but there is one which I might leave with you
before I movre on, a story which appealed to me about Winston Churchill,
who of course did his best during his lifetime to assist the wine industry
to the best of his ability. And at one international conference in a very
large room Winston Churchill enlivened what was otherwise a dreary patch
of discussion by saying that the champagne he had drunk through a lifetime
would have filled that room. He had his scientist friend with him
he used to travel round with him the ? vbmber of the House of
his name escapes me at the moment but he quickly made some mental
calculations of the quantity which on average he would assume Sir Winston
to have consumed and he had to tell him that he wouldn't have filled that
large room. He would have only brought it up to a level of about tw-o feet
and the story runs that Sir Winston was in a rather depressed state of mind
for the rest of the proceedings.
But he is only one of a long line of notable public men who have
found in the consumption of wine in good company, relaxation, a source of
refreshment and an encouragement to get on with the tasks ahead.
Now my purpose, as you have been told, is formally to declare
open the Vineyard and the Winery of Dalwood Estates, but before I do that
as my final act I am going to ask you all to rise and join me in a toast, and
the toast is this: There is not with us today a very wonderful lady to whom
Penfolds means very much indeed and who has meant very much to Penfolds,
and I'm going to ask you to join me, as I am sure Geoffrey would approve,
in drinking a toast to Mrs. Gladys Penfold Hyland. I hope she is able to
hear what we are saying but if not, on your behalf and to her, I say from
all of us thankyou Gladys for all you've meant to Penfolds and thankyou for
being such a wonderful person as I find all the Penfolds are. So here's to
Gladys. And I now have very great pleasure in formally and officially
declaring open the Dalwood Estates Vineyard and Winery. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 35/ 1967
LIBERAL PARTY WHIPS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I have appointed Mr. G. D. Erwin, M. the Member for
Ballarat, Victoria, as the Government Party Whip in the House of
Representatives. His assistant will be Mr. D. J. Killen, M. the Member
for Moreton, Queensland. Both Mr. Erwin and Mr. Killen entered the Federal
Parliament in 1955. Mr. Erwin has served on various committees and has been
Chairman of the Printing Committee and of the Joint Select Committee on
Parliamentary and Government Publications and he was a member of the
Australian Delegation to the General Assembly of the United Nations in
1961. Mr. Killen has been a member of the Joint Parliamentary
Committee on Foreign Affairs since 1964.
CANBERRA, 21st February, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 3/ 96
CABINET DISCUSSIONS WITH MR. BOWDEN
The Australian Cabinet today held discussions with the Secretary
of State for Commonwealth Affairs, Mr. Bowden, on a wide range of
current topics. Among the items discussed were the Kennedy Round, British
moves towards entry into the Common Market, British Defei ce policy, Viet
Nam and Rhodesia. In introducing Mr. Bowden to Cabinet, Mr. Holt explained that
the meeting offered an opportunity for the Australian Cabinet to hear first
hand the views of the British Government on the current issues of concern
to both of them. The meeting did not have as its purpose negotiation on
any mattet. The Australian Ministers were particularly interested in the
background of Britain ' s present moves towards Europe and Mr. Wilson's
recent efforts to help with negotiations on Viet Nam. It was agreed that
the two Governments would continue to keep in the closest contact ai these
questions. Recent developments on the Rhodesian problem were also
discussed in detail, and the Prime Minister noted that Mr. Bowden was
specially qualified in this question. Although the position of the Australian
Government remained that it continued to regard Rhodesia as a matter
primarily for the British Government, the matter held vital implications for
the Commonwealth, and a continuing exchange of views was essential to
help in resolving the issue.
The Australian Government expressed appreciation to Mr. Bowden
for the continuing British military presence in South East Asia. Australia,
New Zealand and British collaboration had been an important element in
bringing stability to this area. A history of effort going back to the days of
the Communist insurgency in Malaya had produced working arrangements
which made the Commonwealth effort an integral part of the defence of the
region. Arrangements for the Australian feasibility study in respect of
Cockburn Sound Naval Support Facility are proceeding and will take into
account possible British use of the facilities in certain contingencies.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, expressed appreciation for
Mr. Bowden's visit stating that, while it was customary for a Secretary of
State for Commonwealth Affairs to visit Commonwealth countries, it was
a matter of considerable importance to us that Mr. Bowden, with his close
knowledge of Commonwealth problems and grasp of international issues of
special significance for Australia should visit us at this time when issues
of such moment were before both Governments.
CANBERRA, 22nd February, 1967. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
S PEEC
i " O i
The Rt. Hon. HAROLD HOLT, P. M.,
S ON
REFERENDUM PROPOSALS
Ministerial Statement
From the " Parliamentary Debates," 23 February 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister)-by leave-Mr Speaker, Cabinet
has given further consideration, as I outlined
in answer to a question put to me by
the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam),
to the matter of holding a referendum on
the two items which were the subject of
legislation by both Houses of Parliament
towards the end of 1965. It has decided to
proceed in relation to both of these matters.
The major purpose'of the first proposal was
to remove the requirement in the Constitution
that any increase in the number of
members in the House of Representatives
would automatically produce an increase in
the number of senators to the extent of half
the increase in the number of members of
the House of Representatives. The second
proposal, in the form in which it was previously
passed, was designed to remove the
provision which prevents Aboriginal natives
from being counted when the population is
reckoned. This is one of two provisions in
the . Constitution in which Aboriginal or
people of the Aboriginal race are mentioned
explicitly. They are to be found in section
51 ( xxvi). and section 127. Section 51
provides: 2888/ 67 The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution,
' have power to make laws for the peace,
order, and good government of the Commonwealth
with respect to:
( xxvi.) The people of any race, other than the
Aboriginal race in any State, for whom it is deemed
necessary, to make special laws:
The Government has decided to propose
that the words ' other than the Aboriginal
race' in any State' be omitted from the
section. While the original intention in
inserting these words was to safeguard the
position of people of the Aboriginal race
they have been widely misinterpreted and
there. is a general impression that they are
discriminatory. When amending proposals were previously
before the Parliament, that relating
to Aboriginals was adopted unanimously in
both Houses, and the proposal to break the
nexus between the House of Representatives
and the Senate was adopted unanimously in
the House of Representatives and by a very
substantial majority . in the Senate. Indeed
on the second reading of the Bill in that
chamber there were forty-four ayes against 
seven noes. On the third reading there were
forty-three ayes to eight noes.
For reasons which I publicly indicated on
February 1966, and later repeated in
my first policy statement to the House of
Representatives on 8th March 1966, the
Government decided to defer until the commencement
of this Parliament the consideration
of the taking of a referendum in
relation to these matters. I said then:
we intend, early in the life of the next
Parliament, to introduce the necessary legislation
to enable a referendum to be held on the proposal
to break the nexus between the two Houses of
Parliament. We will also then give a general indication
of our intentions in relation to the distribution
proposals which would be made should the referendum
prove successful. We intend, at the same time,
to present also the proposal relating to Aborigines.
This proposal has been supported by all political
parties, and there was indeed no negative case
prepared for circulation to the eledtors.
I now give the general indication then
promised of our intention in relation to
redistribution proposals. Need for this is
long overdue as I am sure all honourable
members will agree. Some metropolitan
electorates, for example, in the same State,
have fewer than 40,000 yoters while others
have in excess of 100,000. By the time of
the next election,' assuming the Parliament
will run its full course, the disparity will
have widened. Should the referendum in
relation to abolition of the nexus between
the two Houses prove successful the Government
would propose to increase the size of
the House of Representatives so as to provide
one member for iot fewer than 85,000
persons. It is worth mentioning here, I
think, that if . a . pecific provision relating
to 85,000' persons" were made it would be
the first occasion when such a specification
had been included in the Commonwealth
Constitution. This, we anticipate, would
require an increase of about thirteen in the
size of the House of Representatives.
Unless the nexus is removed an increase
in the House' of Representatives must be
accompanied by an increase of as nearly as
practicable half that number in the Senate.
If the present voting system were to. be
maintained ' this could be performed effectively
only by increasing the Senate by
twenty-four, thus involving a total increase
in the House of Representatives'of fortyeight.
In other words, to secure what would be intended as a modest increase in the
House of Representatives we would be
driven-I repeat, assuming that we maintain
the present system of voting for the
Senate-to a total increase of seventy-two
parliamentarians. The purpose of the nexus
proposal is as I have mentioned. It has
been suggested -that our object is to permit
an excessive increase in the number of members
of Parliament. This was one of the
grounds of criticism which we heard at the
time of the earlier legislation. This, of
course, is not so. Our proposal is, I repeat,
to ask the electors for approval to change
the Constitution so that as the growth of the
population requires we can legislate in this
" arliament for modest increases in the size
of the popular House. It is true that the
present Constitution would permit small increases
in the size of this House, but they
would have to be accompanied by directly
proportionate increases in the size of the
Senate. Our proposals, if carried, are
designed to allow the smallest increase that
we consider to be consistent with effective
representation without the necessity to make
adjustments in the size of the Senate.
There is no question of eroding the
proper role of the Senate by the. proposal
to.. break . the nexus,. nor. indeed of precluding
future, increases in the size of the
Senate. . I think. that questions of this sort,
with the restraints removed, could safely be
left to the i good sense of representative
members of the Parliament in both Houses,
themselves responsive to the wish of. the
. electorate, as. they interpret it at the time.
Under the existing constitutional provisions,
it is not: possible to secure changes in the
numbers of the House of Representatives
without running into serious difficulties in
effecting the proportionate changes in the
size of the Senate. We believe that the Government
and the Parliament should have
flekilblity to secure such changes in the size
of this House as we deem desirable as our
population grows. However, we believe that
the Senate as at present constituted is well
able to discharge, and ' discharge effectively,
the role designed for it by, the Constitution.
We are well aware that some fears are held
that the prestige and authority of the
Senate may. in some manner be diminished
as a conseqdence ' of this proposal and that
its role as a house of review and custodian
of the rights of the smaller States weakened.
We do not accept these views as having 
practical force. The Senate of the United
States provides an example of how a chamnber
much smaller in numbers than the
popular House may develop great authority
and prestige. In modern times, most senators-
in my experience this has invariably
been the practice of those from the Australian
Labor Party-have followed in the
Senate the policies adopted by the majority
in their party room discussions.
The Government, I may say, has considered
other suggestions that have been
brought forward to effect an increase in
-the size of the House of Representatives
and at the same time enable an increase
in the size of the Senate, but without
having the considerable jump in numbers
that would follow if we maintained the
present system of voting. We have looked
in particular at a proposal that the Senate
be increased by a total of six, with one
additional senator for each State. This
would mean that at alternate elections there
would be six senators voted for on one
occasion and five on the other. It might be
necessary to have six senators elected in
some States and five in others at the same
election. The possibility of a deadlocked
Senate would be considerably increased and
there are other factors which, in the view
of the Government, make this a less desirable
course than the more simple and clear
cut proposition to increase the House of
Representatives to the required extent without
the requirement of a corresponding increase
in the Senate.
We did consider whether other referendum
proposals should be added to the two
that had previously been considered by the
Parliament. However, except in the one
respect I have mentioned in relation to Aboriginals,
we have come to the conclusion
that we ought not to complicate the issues
to be put to the people by introducing additional
proposals but should confine OUrselves
to the two issues previously considered
by the Parliament. These, as I have
mentioned, were matters which received the
unanimous support of this House and, as
to one, unanimity in the Senate, and, as
to the other, the very large majority that
I have detailed. The Government feels that,
with an understanding of its intentions and
recognition of the necessity to provide adequate parliamentary representation for a
rapidly growing population, there will be
the necessary electoral support for the
desired constitutional change. There should
also be wide approval for the removal of
provisions generally deemed, even if mistakenly,
in some way to discriminate unfavourably
against Aboriginals and persons
of the Aboriginal race.
Our intention, Mr Speaker, is to put
through the necessary legislation relating to
these proposals as soon as practicable. I
expect it to be introduced in this House
within the next week or two. We propose to
have the measures passed by the two Houses
as expeditiously as possible. Whatever may
be the fate of the referendum we are
resolved that there shall be a redistribution
of electoral boundaries during the life of
this Parliament. Clearly it would be unsatisfactory
to continue indefinitely a situation
in which metropolitan electorates in particular
exhibit such wide disparity of numbers
of voters and in which there is great
need for a more balanced and more equitable
distribution of boundaries between the
electorates of the Commonwealth as a whole.
The expedition proposed for the passage of
the legislation and the submission of the
proposals to the people by way of referendum
is dictated in large part by our
knowledge that the carrying through of a
redistribution for all the electorates throughout
Australia will take considerable time. We
must have these initial procedures completed
well before the next general election, which
we hiope will occur in three years from
now. Wi Bryant-Mr Speaker, I -ask for leave
to make a statement.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Mr Harold Holt-I asked the Leader of
the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam) whether he
wished to make a statement. He considered
that as the legislation would be introduced
shortly that would not be necessary. If one
honourable member is given leave to make a
statement, doubtless others will want to join
in. There will be an early opportunity to
debate the matter when the relevant legislation
is before us soon.
Leave not granted.
BY AUTH-ORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
, SPEECHES BY
The Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION PARLIAMENT)
BILL 1967
AND)
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION ( ABORIGINALS)
BILL 1967
Second Reading
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 1 March .1967]
CONSTIUTION ALTERATION
( PARLIAMENT) BILL 1967
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister) [ 8.42]-1 move:
. That the Bill be now read . a second time.
As I informed honourable members in my
statement in this House last week, the Government
has -decided to proceed with the
referendum proposals that were embodied
in . the two Bills passed by both Houses
towards the end of 1965 and to add * a
further proposal with respect to section
51 ( xxvi). Because of the requirements of
section 128 of the Constitution relating to
alteration of the Constitution, the Bills that
were passed in 1965 with a view to their
submission to a referendum have lapsed and
fresh Bills must be passed before the alterations
they propose to the Constitution can
be submitted to the electors. The Bill now
before the House is, in its substantive provisions,
identical with the Bill on the same
subject passed by both Houses in 1965,
except -in one significant respect. That is
3211/ 67 the substitution of ' 85,000' for ' 80,000' in
sub-section of proposed new section 24.
1 will come back to this alteration later.
This Bill, as honourable members will be
aware, is the Bill to break the present link
between the size of this House and the
size of the ' Senate. This link or nexus is
provided for by. section 24 of the Constitution,
the first paragraph of which reads:
The House of Repiesentatives shall be composed
of members directly chosen by the people
of the Commonwealth, and the number of such
members shall be, as nearly as practicable, twice
the number of the senators.
Unless the requirement -that the number of
members shall be, as nearly as practicable,
twice the number of the senators, is
deleted from section 24, any increase in the
House of Representatives must . be accompanied
by an increase of half that number
in the Senate. While this provision is not
to be interpreted with exact mathematical
precision-indeed the present House
consists of slightly more members than the
120 -that results from a strict doubling of 
the number of Senators-it is nevertheless
clear, and it has been the consistent view
of constitutional advisers over many years,
that it is not open to the Parliament to
increase the size of this House except by
a very small number without at the same
time increasing the number of senators.
Such a limitation is not imposed on other
parliaments, and it is, I believe, the view
of a large majority of this Parliament that,
whilst the substantial growth in population
will make some expansion of this House
necessary and desirable, it should not
follow that the number of senators be
increased proportionately.
Unless some measures are taken soon to
increase the size of the House of Representatives,
it will bccame impracticable for
members -adequately to perform the
functions on behalf of their electors that
are expected of them. As Sir Robert
Menzies said when introducing the corresponding
Bill in November 1965:
*'' The problems being looked at by
honourable members today are three or four times
more weighty and more complex than they were
when I first came into this House. I know this
at first hand. I am not an idler; I have worked
all this time and I know what it means
We have the supreme duty to represent o ur
people and to represent them effectively. To
represent them effectively, there must be a
proper proportion between the number of members
of this Hotuse and the number of the electors
in the nation as a whole.
I shall illustrate the point a -little further.
If the Constitution remains unamended,
by 1969 the existing number of members,
or very close to -the existing number, will
have held for twenty years. The last change
of significance was made in 1949. ' It is
estimated that the population of. Australia
will have risen from just on eight . milli on
in 1949 to twelve million, or thereabouts,
by the end of 1969. There will be this
increase in population of approximately
since the last change was made. Anybody
who has been in this place for any
number of years will appreciate the force
of what Sir Robert said as to the range
of matters which have to be dealt with
compared with the more limited jurisdicdiction*
which -the Parliament took to itself.
in those earlier years.
As I mentioned in the House last week,
there is, I believe, agreement among all
members of both Houses that, because of the disproportion which has developed in
the numbers represented in certain electorates,
a redistribution should be made before
the next general elections. Some electorates
in the same State have less than 40,000
voters, while -others have in excess of
100,000, and the disparity will have
widened by the time of the next election,
whenever that may be. It would clearly
be imprudent to set in motion a redistribution
until we had ascertained the views of
the people on the question of breaking
the nexus. Further, not only has the number
of voters in some electorates now
become very large but, as suggested by
Sir Robert Menzies in the speech from
which I have just quoted, -the burdens of
members have increased considerably.
Government in Australia today is active in
many more fields, and the range of problems
which th-is has created has had a
significant impact on the duties of the
people's representatives.
Additionally, our population contains
growing proportions of young people and
of migrants. The future of our country lies
to a significant extent in these people, and
they have therefore been the subject of
special attention by the Government and
its agencies, through social services and
other means. The Commonwealth has increasingly
been drawn by the will of the
electorate into fields that were originally
the province of the States. We have seen
this occurring in health and education, to
give only two illustrations. Although the
young people and many of our migrants
hiave no vote, their welcome presence in
the community has the effect of adding
significantly to the burdens of those who
represent the electorates in which they live.
I know that this strikes a" responsive ch~ rd
in the LUader of the Opposition ( Mr
Whitlam),' who has told me on more than
one occasion not only that he has an electorate
with a yery'large number of voters
but also that a very considerable number
of migrants have settled in it.
Mr James-He told the right honourable
gentleman-that in confidence.
MrU HAROLD HOLT-I do not think so.
He has made no secret of the fact that he
represents a substantial part of the Australian
electorate, at least in his own constituency,
even though I cannot attribute 
the same merit to him with respect to the
electorate at large. I am sure that my colleagues,
the honourable member for Lalor
( Mr Lee), the Minister for Immigration ( Mr
Snedden), who represents the electorate of
Bruce, and the honourable member for
Mitchell ( Mr Irwin), will confirm the point
that I have made. I have singled them out
because they come readily to mind.
The points that I have mentioned all
suggest the need not only for a redistribution
but also for power to make increases
deemed appropriate in the size of the
popular House. Unless the nexus is removed,
a significant increase in the size of the
House of Representatives cannot be made
unless the number of senators also is increased
proportionately. To enable the
Senate to continue to operate on a basis
similar to that on which it is operating at
present-that is, with an uneven number of
senators standing for election on every
occasion in each State-the minimum increase
is twenty-four. This would mean
increasing the size of the House of Representatives
by some forty-eight members.
No-one in this Parliament-nor any member
of the public-would want this result.
Nor do we as a government.
There have been suggestions-and no
doubt they will be made again-that the
object of the proposed changes in section 24
of the Constitution is to permit an excessive
increase in the number of members
in Parliament. Nothing could be further
from the truth. The purpose of the proposal
is to seek from ' the electors approval
to alter the Constitution so that, as the
growth of the Commonwealth's population
demands, this Parliament can legislate for
a modest increase in the size of the popular
House without -having at the same time to
increase the size of the Senate. If carried,
our proposals will permit the smallest increase
that we consider to be consistent with
effective representation. Indeed, as I shall
explain later, there will for the first time be
introduced into the Constitution a provision
which will have the effect of placing
an upper limit on the number of members
of the popular House.
The Government, I may say, has considered
other suggestions that have been
brought forward to effect an increase in
the size of the House of Representatives and at the same time enable an increase in the
size of the Senate, but without having the
considerable jump in numbers that would
follow if we maintained the present
system of voting. However, we have concluded-
as indeed Sir Robert Menzies
concluded-that none of them offers a
wholly satisfactory solution, under the system
of proportional representation-a system
which experience has shown to be the
best that has so far been devised. We have
looked in particular at a proposal that the
Senate be increased by a -total of six, with
one additional senator for each State, making
eleven senators for each State. This
would mean that at alternate elections there
would be six senators voted for on one
occasion and five on the other. It might
prove necessary to have six senators elected
in some States and five in others at the
same election. The possibility of a deadlocked
Senate could be increased, and there
are other factors which, in the view of the
Government, make this a less desirable
course -than the more simple and clear cut
proposal to increase the House of Representatives
to the required extent without
the requirement of a corresponding increase
in the Senate. I think I should observe that,
even if the proposal that the size of the
Senate be increased by six were adoptedand
this could be done without a constitutional
amendment at all-the result would
be that we would be faced with an increase
of some eighteen members and senators in
all. In other words, to provide for the addition'of
twelve or thirteen members of this
House-if that were the number considered
necessary-six senators would have to be
added to the National Parliament, even
though it might be generally agreed that at
the time there was no adequate reason for
increasing the size of the Senate.
There . are ' two things that I want to say
about the position of the Senate. The proposed
amendments of section 24 of the-
Constitution will not, in the view of the
Government, in any way erode the role of
the Senate. Nor will they preclude a future
increase in the size of the Senate, should
that at any time be considered desirable.
As to the first matter, we believe that the
Senate, as ' at present constituted, is well
able to discharge-and to discharge effectively-
the role designed for it by the Constitution.
We are well aware that some fears
are held that the prestige and authority of 
the Senate . may in some manner be diminished
as a consequence of. this proposal, and
that the role it . can perform as a house of
review and custodian of the rights of the
smaller States may be-weakened. We do not
accept these views -as having practical force.
The good sense of the electorate and of the
Parliament will, I believe, provide effective
safeguards against any such weakening of
the position of the Senate.
Moreover, two protections of the . position
of the Senate will be afforded by the present
proposals. Firstly, State representation will
be protected by guaranteeing to original
States-that is, all the existing States-a
minimum of ten senators, in lieu of six
senators guaranteed under the Constitution
in its present form. Secondly, as a guarantee
against excessive increases in the size of
the House of Representatives, the Bill provides
that the number of members of this
House shall be ascertained by dividing the
number of people of the States by a number
determined by the Parliament, but not being
less than 85,000. The 1965 Bill provided
that the number of people was to be divided
by a number not less than 80,000.
On reflection, the Government has decided
that the minimum figure is to be
preferred. Adoption of 85,000 as the population
quota would permit a total increase
of thirteen or fourteen members by about
1969. This, I stress, is. a maximum increase,
not minimum increase. I recall that, at the
time of the First Parliament in 1901, the
average population per electorate was about
50,000. By 1947 it had risen to over
100,000, and the size . of this House was
then increased from 74 members to 121
members. By the .1949 elections the average
population per electorate . was some 67,000;
by 1969, we expect, the average would rise to
a figure in excess of 94,000. I point out that,
if : the Government's proposals embodied
in this Bill become -law, it will be the first
occasion on which the Constitution has
imposed an upper limit on the total number
in the popular House.
I commend the Bill to the House. I
believe . that the proposals contained . in it
should be approved by the people, and
that, if they are, this will constitute a
significant advance in the efficient working
of . our parliamentary system.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Whitlam) adjourned. ( CONSTITUTION ALTERATION
i( ABORIGINALS) BILL 1967
Mr ' HAROLD HOLT .( Higgins-Prime
Minister) move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to make alterations
to the two provisions of the Constitution
which make explicit reference to people
of the Aboriginal race. One alteration-that
proposed by clause 3 of the Bill-is designed
to repeal section 127. An identical proposal
was passed unanimously by both Houses
of the Parliament in November 1965. Section
127 provides that, in reckoning the
numbers of the people of the Commonwealth,
or of . a State or other part of the
Commonwealth, Aboriginal natives shall not
be counted. The Government continues to
believe that this section should be repealed.
The principal reason for including section
127 in the Constitution was the practical
difficulty of enumerating the Aboriginal
population at that time. No doubt in 1900
this was a very substantial problem. It is,
however, no longer a serious difficulty, and
the basis for the existence of the section
consequently does not now exist. I should
emphasise that section 127 does not affect
the qualifications of Aboriginals to vote at
Commonwealth elections. Section 41 has
always guaranteed an Aboriginal the right
to vote at elections if he has a right to vote
at elections for the more. numerous House
of the Parliament of the State in which he
is a voter, and this Parliament itself has
removed all disabilities in respect of voting
at Commonwealth elections so far as
Aboriginals . are concerned. They are now
entitled to enrol and to vote ' and should,
in the view of the Government, ' be counted
as part of the population of the ' Commonwealth,
or : their State . or Territory, for any
purpose. The simple truth is that section 127
is completely . out of harmony with our
national . attitudes . and modern thinking. It
h'as , no place in our Constitution in this age.
The second alteration, ' which -is contained
in clause 2 of the Bill, is the deletion of the
words ' other than the Aboriginal race in any
State' ' from paragraph ( xxvi) of section 51.
Section 51,'( xxvi) of the Constitution reads:
The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution,
have power to make laws for the peace, order and
good government of the Commonwealth with
respect to:-
( xxvi) The people of any race, other than the
aboriginal race in any State, for whom it is
deemed necessary to make special laws. 
Since the Government's earlier proposals
for constitutional alterations were put
before the Parliament, a great deal of
thought has been given, both inside and
outside the Parliament, to the constitutional
provisions relating to the Aboriginal people
and there has been much activity by
Government private members and organisations
concerned with the welfare of the
Aboriginals. In the light of this activity and
the many representations made, the Government
has reviewed the position and has
decided that an amendment of section
51 ( Xxvi), as provided for in the Bill, should
be put to the people, in addition to the
proposal for the repeal of section 127. In
coming to this conclusion, the Government
has been influenced by the popular impression
that the words now proposed to be
omitted from section 51 ( xxvi) are discriminatory-
a view which the Government
believes to be erroneous but which, nevertheless,
seems to be deep rooted.
An effect of omitting these words will be
the removal of the existing restriction on
-the power of the Commonwealth to make
special laws for the people of the Aboriginal
race in any State if the Parliament
considers it necessary. As the Constitution
stands at present, the Commonwealth ' has
no power, except in the Territories, to
legislate with respect to people of the
Aboriginal race as such. If the words
' other than the Aboriginal race in any
State' were deleted from section 51 ( xxvi),
the result would be that the Commonwealth
Parliament would have vested in it
a concurrent legislative power with -respect
to Aboriginals as such, they being the
people of a race, provided the Parliament
deemed it necessary to make special laws
for them. It is the view of the Government
that the National Parliament should have
this power. If the proposals relating to
Aboriginals are approved by the people,
the Government would regard it as desirable
to hold discussions with the States to secure the widest * measure of agreement
with respect to Aboriginal advancement.
1 think 1 should say a few words about
the suggestion . that has been made that we
should include a constitutional guarantee
against discrimination on the ground of
race. Such a proposal was put forward,
in particular, by the honourable member
for Mackellar ( Mr Wentworth) in a private
member's Bill. The recommendation to
include such a guarantee in our Constitution
has the obvious attraction of providing
evidence of the Australian people's desire
to outlaw discriminatory practices of every
kind, but the disadvantages of the inclusion
of such a guarantee are so substantial that
the Government does * not believe that it
should be pursued. Such a guarantee could
provide a fertile source of attack on the
Constitutional validity of legislation which
we, at this point of time, would not consider
discriminatory. The extent of litigation
that has arisen from section 92 provides
a serious warning of the ramifications
of an apparently straightforward constitutional
guarantee. Moreover, such a
guarantee would operate only to limit
government action. It would not affect
actions by individuals. Racial discrimination,
if it exists in a community, is the
outward * manifestation of beliefs rooted in
the hearts and minds of some men and
women. I do not believe -that such beliefs
are to be found on any significant scale
in this country; but even if it were otherwise,
I do not think the position could be
remqedied in practice by a constitutional
guarantee. Accordingly, the Government believes
that the best course, the most effective
course, for the Commonwealth to adopt
is to seek the amendments proposed in
the Bill. It proposes to submit -them at the
same time as the referendum on the nexus
provision-section 24 of the Constitution.
I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Whitiam)
adjourned.
BY AUTHORITY: A. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T.
3211/ 67-2 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 39/ 1967
GOVERNOR-GENERAL TO VISIT BRITAIN
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
With the concurrence of the Government, the
Governor-General and ' he Lady Casey will leave Australia towards the
end of April for a short visit to Britain. They expect to be away from
Australia for five or six weeks.
The Governor -General will report personally to
Her Majesty whilst he is in London.
Lord and Lady Casey will travel to and from Britain
by air but date of departure and other details have not yet been settled
The Government of the Commonwealth will be
administered by His Excellency Sir Edric Bastyan Governor of South
Australia whilst Lord Casey is abroad. Sir Edric holds a Dormant
Commission from The Queen and is the senior State Governor in terms
of years of service in his office.
CANBERRA 6th March, 1967 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 38/ 1967
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO ASIA
The broad itinerary for the visit by the Prime Minister,
Mr. Holt, to Asia has now been determined. Mr. Holt will be visiting
Cambodia, Laos, Taiwan and Korea at the invitation of the Governments of
those countries. Mr. Holt will fly by Qantas to Singapore where he will spend
the night of 28th March. He will then travel by a RAAF Viscount to Cambodia
( 29th March/ 3lst March), Laos ( 1st April/ 2nd April), Hong Kong ( transit to
and overnight stop on 3rd April), Taiwan ( 4th April/ 6th April) and Korea
( 6th April/ 9th April). He will arrive back in Sydney the following morning
This will be Mr. Holt's third visit to Asia since becoming
Prime Minister last year. The main purpose of this journey is to enable him
to visit the four remaining countries of the area with which he has not
previously made some personal contact. Each of these countries has a special
significance for Australia. Mrs. Holt will accompany the Prime Minister. Officials
included in the Prime Minister's party are Sir Laurence McIntyre, CBE,
( Deputy Secretary, Department of External Affairs), Mr. D. J. Munro
( First Assistant Secretary, Prime Minister's Department), Mr. R. A. Woolcott,
( Counsellor, Department of External Affairs) and Mr. F. WN. Jennings ( Prime
Minister's Department). The Prime Minister's personal staff will comprise his
Press Secretary, Mr. T. Eggleton. and his Private Secretary, Miss P. A.
De Lacy. Dr. M. de L. Faunce of Canberra will serve as medical
adviser to the party. Considerable press interest is being displayed in Mr. Holt's
Asian visit and it is expected that a press party of about 14 representatives of
press, radio and television will accompany the Prime Minister, travelling
in a separate aircraft.
CANBERRA, 6th March, 1967
BACKGROUND NOTE: Mr. Holt's two previous visits to Asia were
1. April, 1966: Viet Nam, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore
2. October, 1966: The Philippines ( Manila Conference) 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
HAROLD HOLT, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
7TH MARCH, 1967
TASMANIAN BLJSHFIRE AID
I desire to inform the Wnuse that I have this day informed
the Premier of Tasmania that the Govorrinent has agreed to his
to provide special financial ac-sistanc. to the State of Tasmania L&amp; c. rdance
with the broad terms and conc.. iions sez out in the report b. y Offfcers
of the Tasmanian Government and agrcc~ d to by officials of the ( Comi-n-nowealth
Government, based on the case presented on behalf of the Govera;.; S,, flC of
Tasmania. As agreed, the measures of assistance that will be introduced
will be State measures with the Commonwealth standing behind the State to
provide adequate support for the State's ove: 41al financial position. Ti'is
would accord with the arrangements agree-with the States of New South Wales
and Queensland in connection with assistance for drought measures.
Estimates of the maximum assistance likely to be required by
the State indicate that the total amount that will have to be provided by the
Commonwealth will be about 14.5 m~ illioni dollars. This estimate is, however,
tentative and may be subject to substantial revision.
As in the case of the drought measures, the Commonwealth's
overall financial assistance to the State will be provided partly by way of
interest-free loans and partly as grants according to the proportions in which
the State's own expenditures, under the various measures, take the form of
loans and grants respectively. Loans made by the Commonwealth will be
interest-free and have a term of fifteen years. Repayments will be sought
in twelve equal instalments over the last twelve years of the loans.
The Commonwealth is proposing to provide loans to the State
free of Interest on the understanding that the State will charge interest, where
appropriate, on advanm for housing and loans to businesses and primary
producers. The interest received by the State is regarded as being available
to enable the State to meet any losses arising from bad debts. We also
expect that any excess of interest received by the State over its requirements
should be applied to reduce its dependence on special grants.
As soon as possible a Bill will be presented to the Commonwealth
Parliament to authorise payments of Commonwealth financial assistance to
Tasmania. I expect that the bill will be drawn in general terms to authorise
a grent and a loan to the State of Tasmania for measuires associated with the
f ire. In the meantime, our officers will continue to be in contact on
detailed arrangements. From the outset I have, on behalf of the Commonwealth, assured
the Tasmanian Government and people that the Commonwealth Government
would approach their difficulties in a helpful and, indeed, a generous fashion.
I knew that this would be supported by the people of Australia as a whole. I
am glad, therefore, to be able to report to the House that we have met in
substance the requests which have come to us from the Government of Tasmania
and we hope that this quite substantial assistance will quickly enable the
people of that State to be restored to full economic operation. 



LUNCHEON, CAN3BRRA. A. C. T.
Spech by the Prime Minister Mr. H: Lrold Holt M rch, 1967.
On the 10th Marcr 1967 the Prime inister of
Australia, Mr. Holt, attended a luncheon in the
honour of the National C. pital Plarnin. Cormmnittee
on the occasion of the final meeting oT their
three year term.
Mr. Holt first expressed thanks and appreciation
to the Committee and to . the Chairman, ir. J. U.
Overall the National Capitial Development
Com,.: ijioner.
The Prime Minister then continued
I nm here as a resident a goid part of the time as
an observer now for very many years and ' by their works ye shall
know them'. I think if th: t text is applied to you and the
members of your Committee, Chalirnan, you would get a unanimous
vote of arproval from all around Australia.
Je hve seen uildin here, before our eyes w-ith the
passage of time a truly oeautif l city and a setting hich gives
it an individua ity and marks it out as one of the really l-vely
Capital cities of he world.
I . o buck thirty-one years plus and the transformation
which hai. s occurred, more narticularly over { he recent years, is
to me truly remarkaole. I cmn remeoer when I set off on one
occasion with Jeoff Stc.: et und Jim Fairbairn later to oe killed
in that trugic accident ; hich helped to ive the airport its
name and walked from Parliament House to the National V. ar
Meorial. No., of course I : ould have to take the flippers and
the mask, and snorkel, if I -ere to attempt that journey again
and this is one of the major tr-insformations which have occurred
in the spectacular growth of the city its layout, the actual
pulling together of the outlyipg parts which could not be so
clearly perceived until the ake . as there to jive a sort of
focal centre to them.
but tnia is not . n easy ob which we hatve set you.
It . ould be difficult enough, I thin to plan a lovely city if
you could take your time acout the development of it and if you
had unlimited funds availale to you for your purposes.
Here you don't merely have the sort of restraints
which a responsible 3overnment feels necessary to impose on any
one section of n-tional growth in the interests of others, and'
although It ink re h 4ve treated the Bt-tional C-it 1 by no means
unreasonaoly, I knojz thtt you h-tve felt at times that the
limitations we have placed on you have held dovn the rate of growth
rather more thin you . ould have desired. Yet the performance itself
indicates that we haven't been too nig ; ardly in that regard. At
the thing which really complicates your task enormously, I imapine,
is that you have not merely the problem of ouilding a ueautifui / 2
R. TII'I cArIT:: II)_. L~ C01U. IS0-IOTK 
-2-
C-iital City, but of copin with a city population growing more
rapidly than in any other city of size around Australia.
You have got to satisfy the customers who are there
who feel the need for the engineering services that you've put
in; who want to see tres trow w; here they've selected a fairly
oare site as a building sile; who ' ant to feel they'ce -irt of
a fine city and you've got to do all that for them and at the
same time uild a capital which will be a source of national pride
in itself. And, I think, you have succeeded admirably in bot
these directions. The resident of Canberra must feel that his standard
of service and of accommodation compares very favourably with
that of other parts of the Commonwealth and ri-ht through the
period that accompanies this normal uroan growth. You've got
the ouilding of impressive official buildings, of building up
the commercial centres of the national city and all the rest of
it that goes with w: hat is now, I gather, just on a city of 100,000
souls, and rising, what? 100 or tiereabouts?
Commissioner About seven or eight.
Mr. Holt Yes, we have steadied it down a oit I gather. Anyhow,
that is still a very rapid rate of growth for any city to have to
cope with. You have mentioned one or two things which haven't
altogether pleased your Committee e! emoers. The critic, I suppose,
can always find room for improvement.
I, myself, have puzzled for many years and Sir
Rooert disclaimed any responsibility himselT but I could not
find anybody who would claim any responsibility for the King Jeorge
Statue and I know it is one of Doug's ambitions either to bomb
it or to remove it. Even diurin the earlier periods where there
were threats to Australian security, I could only hope that if
we were so unfortunate as to have an enemy attack, they would
choose their targets skilfully.
And so he will have my moral, parliamentary and
ministerial support in action he takes to restore that sweep,
and that sense of proportion which did previously exist in the
vista between Parliament House and the ' ar i: emorial oy the
removal of this particular excrescence.
I am glad to know that you are so amenable to practical,
sensible suggestion that ooth you and the Minister have responded
so readily to my urgings that we convert the cowtrack from the
Airrort into Ci'berra into something a little more respectable;
and the edging which is now going on again has excited my warm
approval. But to do these things in a ractical way coping
with the growing population providin stndards which will at
the one time be a model to the rest of Australia, but won't oe
so far in advamce of the rest of Australia as to create resentment
and acrimony aro nd the other Capital Cities, is a task which calls
for judgment and discrimination, good sense and a-ain I repeat,
I believe you have achieved these things remarkaoly e. ll
It is not so many yeasa. itht ; ie diplomats
appointed to this country, foud. th it fhe amenities in C.: nperra
were so. lacking, that they / had to oase themselves rather uneasily
either in Sydney or occasionally in LMelbournei 
4 -3-
I think that appointment to the Australian scene was
re. arded almost in the sense of a period of solitary confinement.
How'ever, I am sure the doyen of the Corps would concede that now
there is quite a degree ol competition to secure appointment to
Australia and in particulir to Canberra as the national centre and
undoubtedly not only has the improvement in Canberra itself helped
to attract the Diplomatic Corps to C noerra but the oresence in
Canoerra of the Diplomatic Corps with their ow'n distinguished
buildings has added to the attraction of the capital city itself.
I am told that we are now attracting just on 600,000
tourists a year. It seems an extraordinary figure to me but I
am in no nosition to c-tilene it and, if it is a fact, then I
think it demonstrates not only that Canoerra: itself has developed
great attractiveness but there is a growing pride around Australia
in the National C-pital.
I can recall as even some of my more recently-acquired
collea ues the sort of controversy that used to go on even at the
time . en we were building the lake people resentful of C: tnberra's
expenditures and contrasting this ,. ith our failure to provide so
much for the things they needed in their centre. 3ut that's been
a diminishing factor almost to vanishimn point.
And today one senses a very different spirit around
the country. People are proud of Canberra, they flock to Canberra
and in that process, I think they have learned to take a growing
interest in the national Parliament in Canberra and in all these
directions your activities have helped.
May I say to those you have mentioned who served on the
Committee for the oeriod of nine years how, grateful we are to them
for the contribution they have made and indeed to thank you all
for what you have done in this honorary way eating into your spare
time and dra-in on your professional talets, the skills and the
experience whicH you so ably possess. All this is deserving of the
appreciation of your Xovernment of the . iustralian people.
So thank you very much for all that you have done and
all that you will ie doing for the growth and oeauty of this Capital
of ours and my thanks to you Mr. Chairman for the opportunity to be
ith you to say thank you and enjoy your company.
T 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 40/ 1967
AUSTRALIAN HELP FOR ITALIAN FLOOD RESTORATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Commonwealth Government will provide an
amount of $ 30, 000 to assist in restoration work made necessary by the
disastrous floods in Italy last year.
Australia will undertake the restoration of one room in
the National Library of Italy in Florence together with its contents which
were extensively damaged. The services of a restoration expert will also be
provided to help restore paintings damaged in the floods.
In this way, Australia will be playing its part in
helping to preserve the cultural heritage not only of Italy but of Western
civilization.
CANBERRA, 12th March, 1967 



OIL, GAS AM~ NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
This paper is an abridged version of the speech
by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt,
to a conference of the Australian Petroleum
Exploration Association in Sydney on Monday,
13th March, 1967.
The speech sets the Government's record and policy
in the sea-rch', for oil and gas in the context of its
broad policies for the promotion of national
development, and deals with recent criticism of
certain aspects of its oil search policy.
The speech is supported by two documents to which
reference was matde by the Prime Minister:-
Appendix A
A statement by the Commonwealth Treasurer,
the Rt. Hon. W. McMahon, on the
Government " take" ( royalties plus income tax)
in off-shore oil and gas activities.
Appendix B
Surmmary of a speech at the same A. P. E. A.
Conference by Sir Ian McLennan, Ma~ naging
Director of B. H. P. Co. Ltd. a partner with
ESSO in the successful discovery of off-shore
gas in Bass Strait, Victoria. 
OIL, GAS AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
TO THE AUSTRALIAN PETROLEUM EXPLORATION ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE
13TH ACH, 196
Let me first say that I am fully conecious of the
tremendous importance to Australia of an efficient, well-conducted
and successful petroleum exploration and development industry.
The petroleum industry provides an increasingly significant part
of our total energy needs. It employs directly and indirectly an
important percentage of our-population. Without petroleum, life
as we know it today would be, if not impossible, then certainly
very different. Fortunately, there is not much risk of a world shortage
of petrol. Why then, it is often asked, should we spend so much
effort in Australia in looking for more?
First, demand is rising at the rate of about 10% o a year
in Australia and 9% a year world-wide. Unless new reserves are
being found, over-supply could turn to shortage. Second, there is
always a risk that our supplies could be interrupted by events over
which we have no control. It is prudent to have our own resources.
Third, local supplies would help our balance of payments very much.
Petroleum is our third largest import, following machinery and
chemicals. In 1$ 65-66 we imported 4,854 million gallons valued
f. o. b. at about $ 250 million. There are very great national rewards
if wie can replace much of these imports with local petroleum.
Although the quest for petroleum began in 1892 in the
Coorong area of South Australia, it only commenced seriously in
the years following World War II. Senior officers of the
Commonwealth Bureau of Mineral Resources were among the few who
maintained, despite general disbelief, that a major search was
warranted. The Bureau began basic geological and geophysical
mapping of the Australian sedimentary basin and we, as a
Government, felt that here was a national speculation that was
justified in the national interest.
When Rough Range failed to show significant resources
after the find in 1953, the search had reached a. low ebb by 1958.
The Government, concerned at this decline in interest, introduced
a Petroleum Search Subsidy Act to stimulate company enterprise and
to make generally available the knowledge so gained of the geology
of the basins. We also felt that the Act would demonstrate a
favourable political attitude to petroleum soarch-that would
encourage experienced overseas companies to join in. The Act
has been extended from time to time and is currently effective
until June this year.
In the ten years of its life the subsidy scheme has
stimulated exploration and led to the discovery of oil and gas
in a number of areas in and around Australia.
Active exploration geological, geophysical and drillinghas
been undertaken in the 25 major basins of likely petroleumbearing
sediments. These cover some 1.7 of tho 3.2 million square
miles of land surface of Australia and Papua New Guinea and, about
0.6 of the 1 million square miles of the continental shelf. Total
expenditure by companies and by the Commonwealth and State
Governments to the end of 1966 was about 420 million, but
established reserves total only about 200 million barrels of oil.
We consumed in one year, 1965-66, a total ol 139 million barrels.
Thus our known reserves arc still less than two year's importation.
So you see we still have a lonSg, long way to go on the road to
self-sufficiency, / 2o 
2-
While the discoveries of natural gas will result in
cheaper domestic and industrial heating in some areas natural
gas is ready to pay handsome dividends in some localities in
Australia some of the markets are at a considerable distance
from the supply. It is therefore desirable that the search
should continue in an attempt to locate other fields in closer
proximity to the markets. Incidentally, the current cost of
finding oil in Au tralia of $ 2 a barrel compares very favourably,
I understand, with American and Canadian costs.
Apart from the Subsidy Act, the Commonwealth Government
has provided various inducements and basic technical services in
order to create a favourable climate in which private enterprise
* will provide the greater part of the expenditure required and be
responsible for detailed exploration, development and exploitation.
We clearly recognise the need to maintain continuing incontives.
in this field, and I can safely assure you that the general
attitude of my own Government is to recognise the difficulties
the industry faces because of the long term character of its
investment and the freaks of development wnich are a feature
of the oil industry.
The principle measures taken by the Commonwealth
Government, with which you are all familiar, include taxation
concessions, subsidies to exploration companies, basic surveys and
investigations in the field and laboratory by the Bureau of
Mineral Resources, other forms of assistance such as relief
from duty for essential equipment, accelerated map production
by the Department of National Development and the assistance
of highly qualified consultants.
Despite all this there has recently been a definite
pause in the rate of exploration due to an absence of significant
discoveries of new areas on-shore and delays in obtaining rigs
to drill structural areas off-shore. This latter problem w. ill
be largely overcome late in 1967 when five and possibly six rigs
will be drilling on our continental shelf. As Sir Ian McLenian
has said, the production activity of these rigs, and other
by-products of the mineral oil exploration programme, affect
the economy over a wide range of activities.
I was appreciative of what Sir Ian McLerman had to say
about the co-operative and helpful attitude he had found in the
Governments concerned in his negotiations this, of course, is as
it should be. There have been extensive Comi_. onwealth/ State
discussions on the proposed off-shore legislation, and the
Governments concerned have given their careful consideration to
the views expressed by the companies engaged in off-shore operations.
The object of the Governments has been to reach agreement on a
legislative scheme that would give certainty of title to operators
in off-shore areas who undertake to bear very high expenditures,
and at the same time to avoid wasteful and costly litigation of
a kind which has beset the United States for many years and is
now starting to show up in Canada. We confidently expect that
our legislation will be brought before the Parliament during the
course of this year.
Much interest in the continental shelf has been generated
by the discovery of large supplies of natural gas. Although
natural gas provides only one-hundredth part of one per cent of
Australia's primary energy market, this share could increase to
as much as 10% within a few years. The change from one energy
source to another is an expensive step, but where it can be shown
that it is in the interest of the Australian people to make a
change, my Government will view constructively and in a helpful
spirit any scheme suggested. I am happy to say that through the
Australian Loan Council we have been able to arrange for the
necessary funds to cover the $ 40 million cost of piping gas to
Adelaide. / 3. 
-3
As a background to the changes which your own industry
is bringing to Australia's groviin6 economy, let me mention that
there are now 60,000 factories in Australia double the number
at he beginning of World War II. Employment in these factories
represents an increase of 125% since 1939. Manufacturing now
absorbs 28% of our viaork force and contributes 13%; of the value
of our total exports and that peroentage is tending to increase.
We are now exporting to countries some products which we formerly
imported, including steel to the United States and the United
Kingdom. Our manufacturing nowadays includes some highly
sophisticated products like radio-tele phone eqjuipment,
transistorised airways beacons, the pilotless jet aircraft
Jindivik, the anti-submarine ge-uided missile Ikara and the
anti-tank guided weapon Malkara. These have all found markets
abroad. Another aspect of the changing economic patternreflecting
largely the impact of petroleum and mineral
developments is -the emergence of new towns. Though small
in size, the contribution to national development, and in
particular to development of the north of such towns as Weipa,
Dampier, Mount Tom Price, Gove and Barrow Island, will become
increasingly important as time goes by. This is decentralisation
in a practical way stemming from private industry developments.
We recognise that there is a role for Governments in all this,
but Australia has benefited, and will benefit increasingly in
the years ahead, from the practical decentralisation of activity
and industry occurring through these private industrial
developments, and others like them.
Vast quantities of capital are required for these
projects and in the main this is being found by the firms
themselves. Nevertheless, Government action has contributed
much to the mineral development of the north. Direct financial
contributions totalling 44 million have been made by the
Government towards the Townsville-Mount Isa Railway, the
Gladstone coal loader, the Weipa wharf and township, the Darwin
wharf and railway facilities in the Northern Territory. The
Commonwealth Government has also arranged that, in addition to
the mining activity in the Gove bauxite deposits, processing
to alumina will take place in the Northern Territory. The
Burezu. of Mineral Resources has, in fact, spent 80% of its
annual budget of nearly $ 5.4 million on securing basic data
on mineral resources in Northern Australia.
In all these ways, the Government is helping to shape
the new pattern of economic activity. Vie can also help by
providing a favourable climate for decentralisation, and this
applies in particular to your own industry through the economic
and general policies we pursue. An illustration that comes
quickly to mind oli practical help to areas remote from the cities
is the legislation that brought the price of petrol for people
outside the city areas to a level close to city prices. Other
measures include the amounts to be expended on rural roads under
the Commonwealth Aid Road legislation, the activities ol' my
colleague, the Postmaster-General in ensuring that television
services stretch out as widely as possible, the decentralisation
of air services and the provision of other amenities.
From what I have already said, you will appreciate that
mining and oil development are but a part of the overall story.
May I mention particularly the recent publication brought out
under the aegis of my colleague, the Minister for National
Development. It costs only $ 2 and shows the major development
work under construction in Australia at the end of June last
year to have a value on completion~ of $ 2,327 million. By any
standard this is a huge investment programme with a nation of
less than 12. million people and the to-tal does not include *. 04 
-4
such things as expenditure on housing, hospitals and education
facilities or the Commonwealth's $ 600 million expenditure on
the Snowy Scheme. The publication shows that we now have in
hand investment and developments amounting to some $ 20G0 a head
of our population. New arrangements and facilities for the provision of
capital will need to be devised to help finance this and new
developments, and we have been working actively and earnestly
on the problem for some time. We are confident that we will
find a practical means to achieve this objective.
Nobody living in this country so subject to the haeards
of the seasons and risk of drought, flood or fire, can expect
that the course ahead is ever likely to be easy. But we believe
our plans are soundly laid and that the political and economic
stability we are maintaining is one of the strongest incentive-a
for investment in Australia and provides a favourable environment
for development and growth.
Before I conclude, perhaps I should deal a little more
specifically wftth some of the matters that weore raised by your
Chairman, Mr. Earl Abbott in his thoughtful and extremely
interesting speech. The most serious point I want to take up
with you is the question of the availability of Governments for
consultation. I have no hesitation in stating that there is no
agreement whatsoever among the Governments conccrned that they
will not consult w--ith the industry. Indeed, there have been
several consultations, and I have taken part in two of them
myself. To mention only the more recent occasions, there were
three meetings with the industry last year in Febru~ ary, June
and August, as well as a number of written exchanges.
At the meeting in Febru~ ary there were lengthy discussions
between senior Commonwealth and State officers and representatives
of eleven off-shore companies, many of whom are prominent members
of APEA. At a meeting of Commonwealth Ministers in June, the
. APEA request for permission to send a deputation was granted and
in August five senior Commonwyealth Ministers received a further
deputation which presented a written case and took several hours
in explaining its point of view and discussing it. I therefore
think it is fair to say that the Government has given the APEA
wide opportunity to present its views: it has certainly taken
these into account in determining its policies, and will continue
to do so. Far from our adopting policies which would discourage
the industry or kill the goose that we hope will lay us many
golden eggs, it is our object to assist it in its tasks and to
encourage it to go ahead with its investment, exploration and
development. I did have it in mind to go in some detail into the
percentage of " take" by Governments in Australio. and how this
compares with the percentages in other countries. For lack of
time, I now just want to make it clear th-it we do not accept
and this has been the matter of a quite thorough study the
table of percentages which have been publicly presented as a
basis of comparison for the Australian " 1take" l and that of
countries overseas. Rather than weary you with going over the
ground again, may I direct your attention to the press statement
of 27th January which went out from my colleague, thIe Treasurer.
It is admittedly difficult to find a realistic basis for comparison
between the tax st-ructures of the different countries, but we
have to recognise that the responsible Commionwealth and State
Governments have an entitlement to a proportion oZ the return
from the exploitation of our natural resources, just as have
those who hazard their capital and skill in the effort. These
things are all in our consciousness and I would hope that the
experience of the industry generally can be that we will always
be seeking good co-operation between Government and industry in
the exciting task of the development of our couintry and its resources. 
APPENDIIX A
OFF-SHOIL OIL AIT GAS:
ROYALTIES AND TAX
by
The Rt. Hon. William McMahon, Mi. P.
Treasurer of the Cormmonwealth
of Australia
The petroleum industry has claimed th. t the Government
" take" ( royalty plus income tax) in Australia in the proposed
joint off-shore petroleum legislation by the Cormmonwealth and
the States will be higher than in five of the six other countries
with recent off-shore legislation. The comparative figures that
have been quoted are:-Govt. " take" as percentage
Country of " divisTble profit ( a)
United Kingdom 50.4 per cent
Denmar 45.8
Germany 50.6
Norway 55.2
France 47.72
United States 46.8
Australia 52.8
on a " present-day value" basis.
These figures do not give a true picture the .' orth of
the figures depends heavily on:-
a) the basis on which the calculations of " present-day
values" of " divisible profits" have been made.
( These calculations involve the estimating of gross
sales proceeds and capital and operating production
costs over a given future long-term period, and the
reduction of the resulting figures to a present-day
alue basis by the application of a miscount interest
rate); and
b) the assumptions used in the measurement of the incidence
of income taxation in the respective countries.
The information that has been provided on how the
figures are compiled is very meagre. The starting point is an
a-sumption that, on a present-day value basis, gross sales
procee-s will be double capital and operating production costs
in the case of all the countries mentioned.
This is obviously a very generalised assumption; it
certainly cannot be accepted without question so far as Australia
is concerned. The period and discount interest rate used in
the calculation of the present-'. ay value figures have not been
indicated and the use of different periods and different interest
rates can produce vastly diiferent results in terms of comparative
present-day values.
It is not suificient only to look at tax rates; the
comparisons must have regrd to the taxation laws as a whole of
/ 2. 
2-
those countries. These laws differ considerably in relation to
deductions allowable and the time when those deductions may be
claimed. The tax figures include'. in th.. calc.. lasion of the
quoted percelnt. es for the other countries y be significantly
understated in some cases while the tax fiui. es included in thcalculation
of the ciuote, Australian percentage, o_ the other
hand, seem to be substantially overstated. This is because the
figures take no account of the special deductions allowable under
our income tax lawswhich are designed to free the proceeds from
the sale of petroleum and its products f. om income tax until all
allowable capital expenditure has been f'-lly recouped.
If in tihe present-day value calculations allowance
were made for thic feature of Australian incoime tax law, the
tax figures included in the Australian calculation would be
considerably reduced perhaps even to the point where the figure
for the Australian government " take" would fall below the
percentage figures quoted for other countries.
The only comparison that can be made of any ral
meaning is between rates of royalty and these represent only
o.. e area of government involvement. For instance, the Commonwealth
Government has given special stimulus and assistance to oil
search, at times when the risks are highest by the petroleum
search subsidy scheme, under which the Commonwealth has already
paid out or committed a total of $ 59.6 million; by making
capital subscribed to an oil exploration company by Australian
resident shareholders fully tax deductible, and by fixing a
special incentive price for five years from 1965 for crude oil
produced in Australia.
The standard royalty rate of IO' 1 in th.. proposed joint
off-shore legislation is relatively on international standards.
It compares with rates of 16-2/ 3o and 12-1% generally applicable in
off-shore a;. eas in the Unitea States and the United Kingdom
respectively. IFurt. iermore the industry has been treated more generously
in this country with the proposed legislation on the sizes of
exploration and production areas. Canberra
27th January, 1967 
APPEMIX B
AN USTALIN LOKSAT PETROLEUM EXLORATION
by
Sir Ian McLennan
Managing Director of B. H. P. Co. Ltd.
Petroleum exploration activities in Australia represent
a unique combination of local and foreign private enterprise,
activities combined with effective and practical Government
support in tangible form.
Expenditure on petroleum exploration in Australia had
reached a total of some $ 370 million by December 1965 o * f which
$ 234 million had been spent in thce last 10 years. The current
rate of expenditure is of the order of $ 60 $ 70 million per
annum. These figures are substantial, even alongside the
Snowy Mountains scheme where approximately $ 600 million has
been spent at the rato of $ 40 $ 50 million a year, and the
steel industry where 4794 million has been spent in the last
years. The $ 370 million spent to December, 1965 -was made
up this way:-
Funds provided by Private Enterprise $ 294 million
Dircct Government Subsidies 42
Other direct Commonwealth and
State Expenditure S 34
This is enlightening and shows that while Governments
do play a significant role iLi the matter of subsidies, direct
expenditure and by other incentives, it is still for private
enterprise, to the greatest extent, to provide the necessary
stimulus, funds anC. 1 know how.
The. re is, of course, a further groat stimulus provided
by the Commonwealth Government in the form of relief from taxation,
but I know of no way of putting a precise figure to this.
A ba: cakdown of the $ 70.8 million spent on petroleum
exploration activities during 1965 shows that the major investment
was by overseas organisations which accounted for $ 34.3 million,
followed by Australian private enterprise inves-umont and re-investment
amounting to $ 21.6 million, Goverimrent subsidy of $ 10.4 million
and Direct Government expenditure of approximately $ 4.5 million.
One oi. the intangibles which has not been listed in
the expenditures, but which is very real, is the value which should
be placed on the experience represented by the pkersonnel engaged
in such activities, anc.-the influence that they can exert to see
that Ghe money is spent wisely.
In the field of off-shore legislation in particular
therc. have been many international and constitutional problems
to overcome and many points of view to consider.
This is not just a simple government/ industry relations
problem. Both govern,.ñ ent and ind ustry are working together in
an uncharted field and the degree ol' progress and mutual understanding
is heartening. o 
2-
There is intense world wide competition for capital
for petroleum exploration and the development of petroleum
production capacity. Other countries may offer certcin incentives
in the competition for such capital but in the overall analysis
Australia has a great deal to offer.
The development of the large super tanker and of
pipeline transportation have done much to ease our joint problems
of isolation and small local markets.
In the local scene, Australia is rapidly becoming
industrialised, and its population mobile, with a high standard
of living and increasing demands for energy. Our energy resourees
in black and brown coal are quite significant, but the growth
factor is in the field of readily transportable energy. The
sources of primary energy, for the statistical year 1965-66,
expressed in tons of black coal equivalent, arc:-
Coal 48.7%
Petroleum 44.2%
Firewood 1. 4%
Hydro electric power 5.7%
This clearly shows the importance of potroloum'in the energy
market. Therj are areas whore competition exists between these
sources of primary energy, particularly in power generation and
perhaps in some types of industrial market, and the natural forces
of competition will give each source its place in the market.
However, ther are major sections of the energy market
where the alternative types oi fuel are not interchangeable and
one result is the rapidly increasing demand for energy in the
form of petroleum. The petroleum industry is well aware of the continual
expansion of the demands for its products. In the United States,
for example, the 61% share of the total energy requirements of
the United States helu by oil and natural gas in 1950 rose to
76% by 1965. In Western Europe, the share rose from 15% in
1950 to 52% in 1965 with an expected increase to 72% in 1975.
Is there any doubt that Australia's energy requirements
will follow similar trends?
In Australia we offer stability of Government and have
Governiments fully alive to the advantages which can accrue from
the development of a local petroleum industry. I woul. emphasise
the intangible incentives that stable Government offers, notwithstanding
the va, r ious shades of Government opinion.
The lack of restrictions placed on foreign investment
in Australia, compared with restrictions, both written and
unwritten, which the petroleum exploration and production
industry has encountered elsewhere, reflects an enlightened
Australian attituLe offering considerable encouragement.
In matters such as taxation, remittance abroad of
earnings and repatriation of capital, the attitude of the Commonwealth
Government and the various authorities concerned can only be
cla. sified as highly co-operative. 
-3-
From time to time there may be some criticism levelled
at remittance abroad of earnings and repatriation of capital in
the case of foreign controlled organisations, but usually such
criticism is saved up for those organisations which are succes-ful.
However, there isno doubt, on the ether side of such criticism,
a whole-hearted respect for such organisations and a realisation
of their value to a country like ours.
One very important aspect of Government policies, is no
discrimination between national and foreign ownership in the
application of laws and regulations. Another incentive to the
petroleum exploration industry for continual and expanded
exploration in Australia is tE potential that exists.
Our own experience in petroleum exploration has shown
that a painstaking and detailed step by step programme under
expert and experienced guidance with adequate resources in
capital and know-ho a, can result in discoveries and also maintain
a high proportion of local equity.
I would not venture to predict the anticipated ratio. of
success in both continental and off. shore exploration in Australia,
but I imagine you will all agree that the potential for further
discoveries in the Australian area is good.
I am not sure if we ar doing all we can in Australia
to take full advantage of this petroleum age and our educational
activities will need to be developed further so that our y-ung
people can play their full part in just the same way as they
have in the development of our other industries. We need
geologists, chemicel engineers, construction engineers, physicists,
chemists, and so on, all oriented in their training toward. s the
petroleum industry.
The coming of the petroleum exploration industry and
its prospect of success has brought other developments to Australia
which would not have been contemplated even a few years ago.
Who would have thought that the State Dockyard at
Newcastle would have played a major part in reconstructing an
off-shore drilling rig and who would have thought that at Whyalla
we would be constructing a semi-submersible rig of the most
highly sophisticated nature using very largely Australian raw
materials and Australian people?
The imported content of this rig will be confined to
specialised machinery not made in this country. Further, it is
hoped that soon we will be building platforms for erection in
Bass Strait ; and already there has gone into operation at Port
Kembla a new tube mill capable of producing the very high grade
pipes necessary for gas and oil distribution. These are just some
of the things that have happened and others of course may well
occur and are in fact already under way.
So far very little incone h-. s bjcn derived inAustralia
from petroleum activities. It is all with an eye to the future
and it is most heartening indeed that there arc so many people
prepared to " chance their arm" in an ondeavour to bring the great
benefits of oil and natural gas production to this country.
Surely they deserve their just rewards if success comes
their way. It is essential that these rewards be there to provide
incentive for further exploration because up to the present we
have only scratched the surface. 13th March, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 41/ 1967
VISIT BY THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER OF
MA LAYSIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The visit to Australia next month by the Deputy Prime
Minister of Malaysia, Tun Haji Abdul Razak bin Hussain, will be a
means of further strengthening and deepening the good relations already
existing between our two countries.
Tun Razak will arrive in Australia on Thursday, 13th
April following a four-day visit to New Zealand, and will lea,, e cx.-gain
for Kuala Lumpur on Sunday, 23rd April. He will be a guest ofI the
Australian Government. Tun Razak, who is also Minister for Defence and
Minister for National and Rural Development, will be making his first
visit to Australia. He will go to Canberra and most State capitals and
will have discussions with Ministers. He will also meet some of the
many Malaysian students studying in Australia. My colleagues and I
have been looking forward to Tun Razak's visit for some time. The visit
will give me personally an opportunity to renew the earltier contact I
have made with Tun Razak, the most recent of which was in Kuala Lumpur
last year.
CANBERRA, 13th March, 1967 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
HAROLD HOLT, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
14TH MARCH, 1967
REFEREN DUM
Both Houses of Parliament have now approved the
bills containing the proposed laws to alter the Constitution. The bills
were the Constitution Alteration ( Parliament) Bill and the Constitution
Alteration ( Aboriginals) Bill.
Under the provisions of the Constitution, a proposed
law for an alteration of the Constitution must be submitted to the electors
not less than two months, nor more than six months, after the proposals
have been passed by both Houses.
Before the proposals can be submitted to the electors,
it will be necessary to distribute copies of the arguments for and against.
To this end, the Referendum ( Constitution Alteration) Act provides that
if, within four weeks of the passage of the proposed laws by both Houses,
the arguments in favour of and against the proposed laws are forwarded to
the Chief Electoral Officer, he is to print them and post a copy to each
elector. The Government is presently arranging for the " Yes" case to be
prepared and submitted to the Chief Electoral Officer in the normal way on
behalf of those who voted for the proposals, and no doubt those who voted
against the nexus proposal will be preparing the case against its adoption.
I am glad to say that no vote was cast against the
proposals relating to aborigines.
In all the circumstances, the Government has decided
that the Referendum should be held on 27th May, 1967. The Government
will recommend to the Governor-General that the writ for the Referendum
be issued on 28th April so that, in accordance with the Referendum
( Constitution Alteration) Act, the Chief Electoral Officer may then proceed
to distribute the pamphlet containing the " Yes" and " No" cases to electors
in time for the Referendum. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
HAROLD HOLT, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
16TH MARCH, 1967
ANZAC COMMEMORATIVE MEDALLION AND BADGE
Last March, the Minister for Defence announced that it had
been decided by the Australian Government, in consultation with the New
Zealand Government, to issue a medallion and lapel badge to the veterans
of the Gallipoli Campaign.
I am glad to be ale to announce that arrangements have now
been completed for the production of the medallion and the badge. The
Minister for the Army will be arranging distribution to those wishing to
receive them as soon as possible.
The Government hopes that production of the medallion and
lapel badge will be sufficiently advanced to permit at least some of them
to be distributed by Anzac Day.
The medallion ( with the name of the recipient inscribed) will
be issued to the surviving ' Members of the Australian Defence Force who
served on the Gallipoli Peninsula, or in direct support of the operations
from close off -shore, at any time during the period from the first Anzac
Day in April, 1915 to the date of final evacuation in January, 1916. Next
of kin or other entitled persons will be entitled to receive the medallion on
behalf of their relatives, if the relative died on active service or has since
died. For surviving members, a lapel badge will also be available
for wearing. This will be a replica of teoverse ( or front) of the
medallion and will be about 1" high and 2/ 3" wide the same size as the
R. S. L. badge. The medallion is the work of Mr. Raymond Ewers, the wellknown
Australian artist, based on a suggestion by Mr. Eric Garrett, a
staff artist with the Department of the Army. It has been endorsed by
both the Government of New Zealand and ourselves. It will be approximately
3" high and 2" wide. The obverse of the medallion depicts Simpson and
his donkey carrying a wounded soldier to safety. It will be bordered on
the lower half by a laurel wreath above the word ANZAC. The reverse
( the back) shows a map in relief of Australia and New Zealand superimposed
by the Southern Cross. The lower half will be bordered by New Zealand
fern leaves. The medallion will be cast in bronze and the lapel badge will
be metal of a bronze colour.
For the information of honourable members I present also a
brief statement setting out the conditions of eligibility which will apply to
the medallion and badge and the manner in which those desiring to receive
them should apply. / 2 
BACKGROUND CONDITIONS OF ELIGIBILITY
All members of the Australian Defence Force who served
during the Gallipoli Campaign are entitled to receive the Anzac Commemorative
medallion. The Campaign lasted from April 25, 1915 to January 8, 1916.
The award will be made for service on the Gallipoli Peninsula and service
in support of the operations in an area off-shore eastward of a line drawn
from Yukyeri Point ( lat 39 SCU 40" N long 26 9' 45" E) through a point in
lat 39 53' N long 26 0' E thence to Cape Gremea ( lat 40 35' N long 26 6' E).
The award will also be available to members of philanthropic
organisations and the Press who were accredited to the AIF, and to
Australian members of the crews of merchant ships or hospital ships
which operated in direct support within the defined area.
Note The boundary line would run just off -shore from the land masses
north and south of the Dardanelles, and is estimated to be within about
miles from the beach at Anzac Cove.
Applications Applications by next of kin of deceased Anzacs whose service
conforms with the above conditions will be determined in accordance with
the provisions applying to the issue of service medals. Briefly, these
provide for medals to be issued to the executor or administrator of the
estate or, in the absence of probate or letters of administration, to the
next of kin in the following order of relationship
Widow, eldest surviving son, eldest surviving daughter,
eldest surviving brother, eldest surviving sister.
Al11 applications for the Anzac Commemorative Medallion
should be addressed to the Secretary, Department of the Army, Canberra,
giving as many details of service as possible. This must include full
name ( not initials), service number and unit. In the case of applications
by next of kin of deceased veterans, their relationship to the deceased
should be given, and other eligible persons should provide a reference
to the authority for their claim. 



W E R'S 0^
S2 9 MAR 1967
4-1 AR
OFENINJ OF HONEYSUCKLE CR SA'CAE TRACKIN ST TT. RA
A. C. T.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINIISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT 17th March, 1967.
Senator Henty, Mrs. Henty Dr. Seamans and Mrs. Seamans,
Mr. Buckley, any other distinguished guests here today and
ladies and gentlemen and all associated with this great project:
It is a personal pleasure for me for a variety of reasons
to be here at this time if for no other reason than oecause, like
you I am enjoying this bracing Canberra air and this beautiful
Australian seting. At least, Dr. Seamans you will be able
to report th-t Australia does live up to its' travel brochures
as to its sunshine and the jeauty of its quite urique fauna and
geography as you see it around us.
It is not a very frequent occasion, of course for a
Prime Minister to oe addressing himself to a matter of this kind.
I have done so very rarely. Prime Ministers, if they are to
succeed, are not so much concerned with outer space as keeping
their feet firmly on the ground. Sometimes their onponents accuse
them of oeing up in the air, even their most fervent admirers
are not unkno,. n to say they are out of this world. So I come
before you as one who addresses you with all the valour of
ignorance on this rather esoteric are, of human activity which
is exemplified for us in this rather awesome piece of equipment
under which some of us at least are sheltering this morning.
But it is a notale occasion in a chain of events which have
had consideraole si nificance for Australia and which we hope are
enabling Australia To play a useful and helpful part, not only
in the space ' rogr-mme of the United States itself but in what
has become one o? the happier ventures of mankind in which
politics tend to be submerged and the aspirations of mankind
the achievements of science, can be largely shared throughout
the world. This particular tracking station, so auspiciously
situated and so happily named I think Honeysuckle Tracking
St-ition is a delightful name for an institution such as this.
Attractive in rel-tion to almost any activity. If you were to
come here Dr. Seamans, and say you were tracking square at
Honeysuckle Creek there might be a different interpretation
placed on your activities by Australians who would be familiar
with that vernacular.
iut here we have a new tracking station which is to
play its own useful part in a great human -adventure. This
venture into space is something which an older generation such
as my ow-, n can scarcely comprehend. It's the stuff of science
fiction, of space fiction of earlier times made reality in our
own day and generation. And as , w reflect on these things it
is fitting that w. e should give due tribute and regard to those
pioneers in science down through the centuries, w o have made
possible by their earlier adventures in the human mind and body,
b the achievements of these pioneers of genius. They by their
efforts have givn us the kind of instruments and the scientific
method of experiment which makes this sort of achievement possible.
I mentioned at the outset that it is a happy circumstance
that t lose great powers who have interested themselves in this
Particular area of human achievement, have aproached their
tasks with the objective of oettering mankin s knowledge of its
environment, and of contributing to peaceful purposes and to
an improvement of man's standards of living. This vital
aspiration is shared uy two great po'wers the United States
of America and the Soviet Union, and with amazing technical / 2 
-2-
achievements to be put at the disposal of man's efforts to. shape
his world for meeting his material needs and opening new doors
to his understanding himself and the universe in which he lives,
we owe much to these two great countries.
The United States Aeronautics and Space Act became law
on the 29th of July 1958, less than ten years ao. It was then
stated, officially, as United States policy in That legislation,
that activities in space should be devoted to peaceful purposes
for the benefit of mankind. In a modest way Australia had commenced
to co-operate actively in the International Jeophysical Year in
1957, by operating a tracking system known as Minitrack at Woomera,
and now we have from that oeginning added Carnavon in iestern
Australia Coby Creek in Queensland Voomera in South Australia,
Tidbinbilla, Orroral Valley and now Honeysuckle Creek ( all of these
last three in the The United States has financed the
cost of construction, and by the end of the year the Space Authority
will have spent more than 0100 million in Australia. You are used
to juggling figures in billions, Dr. Seamans, but for Australia this
is a considerable sum to ue spent inside the borders of our
continent for these scientific purposes. The cost of operating
the six Australian stations, apparently, is aoout 8-million dollars
a year. There is an appropriateness, I think that Australia should
be in the picture in this particular field, because Captain Cook's
own voyage of exploration which led to the settlement of Australia,
was made on oehalf of the Royal Society to ouserve a transit of
Venus across the sun almost two hundred years ago. So we feel
that we are appropriately placed to be playing a part now in
another great exploration, that of space.
We have been associated with the United States programme
since its early days as the illustration I gave earlier would
su gest. For nearly ten years now we have joined in facilitating
American space activities. . e have helped to select sites and
construct stations in Australia and their manning includes scientists
and technologists from the Department of Supply and Australian
industry atogether some seven hundred persons from these sources.
The Australian government purchased and made available to the
Space Authority nine hundred acres of freehold land for this
present station. A practicable contribution to the space programme
itself. This station is directly concerned with Project Apollo
which will launch into space three manned capsules as a part of
an experiment which will culminate in a voyage of some three
days duration to the moon, 250,000 miles away. The Australian
group of stations represent the largest complex of Space Authority
stations outside the United States. I think I am correct in saying,
Dr. Seamans, that in the Apollo Pro ect there will be three
tracking stations which will oe following the course of the moon
vehicle oeyond the 10,000 mile limit. One in the United States,
one in Spain and this one here in Australia. And I think we can
feel gratified and take some pride, indeed satisfaction, that in
what proves to be one of the great historic events of man's
exploration of his universe we shall be one of the three countries
right in the picture, literally, so far as the concluding phases
of the flight are concerned.
Some people wonder whether all this vast expenditure that
goes into the space programmes can oe justified. The answers are
not difficult to find. Already we hive peen deriving Yreat oenefits
from the programme of space adventure. If you take meleorology
alone, and there is not a human oeing on earth who isn't daily
concerned with the state of the weather. It is our most familiar
personal greeting when we see each other in the course of the day. 
-3-
-eather can now be viewed on a global scale several times a day.
This can be done regularly in regions of the earth which have
previously defied around-the-clock meteorolofical o* servation.
The poles, the oceans, the sparse areas of the Southern Hemisphere
have now ueen brought into the range of . eather forecasting.
and this also has an aspect which could commend itself to all
of us in enabling us to avoid the worst effects of the havoc of
hurricanes, cyclones and typhoons.
For exa: iple, in 1961 quite early in the programme people
were evapuated from the path of Hurricane Carla as a result of
warnin? data received from the Tvros Satellite. In navigation
satellites can play a helpful role. In international communication
we have already received the first telecast between Britain and
Australia. , e are but at the beginnings of this improvement in
communication, and before we are all very much older the world can
be in television contact as a normal and everyday event.
There has been a notaole contribution to the knowled e of
eography the study of geology. Our understanding is assisted
by the information we receive from the special satellites designed
and equipped for these purposes.
Man's superior ability to explore and record details will
provide valuable information as to measurements, direct photoraphs,
soil and rock samples, a vast array, in short of scientific data.
The initial landing on the moon proposed by 1970, may lead to
longer journeys and wider exploration and culminate in the
establishment of a permanent moon oase. A project which a few, yearj
ago ; ould have been thought quite fanciful even if it were to appear
in the realm of fiction.
There have been other oenefits, already directly attributable
to the space exploration efforts. 4reat advarces in materials such
as ceramics, metals and plastics. Metal alloys specially developed
have led to improvements. For example, they have been found ideal
for the manufacture of artificial parts for the human oody, such
necessary assistance to hip and elbow joints. Special knowledge
of foods developed for astronauts may help the world in its search
for the solution of food problems.
For Australia we have a growin:-numuer of men and women
technically trained to handle complicated concepts and the
complicated equipment associated with space technology. Australia
has found already many benefits to its own technological
development. It may interest you to know that last month Qantas,
with the co-operation of the tracking station at Cooby Creek
experimented in air-to-ground voice communication ob satellite
with encouraging results.
foankind needs the incentive of space exploration in order
to develop to full potential some of these great possibilities.
This vast spurt of human imagination and technological progress
is opening ne'; doors to experience and achievement. It carries
with it at first its own hazards. Fortunately disasters have been
few but we should all rememoer here today the sacrifice made by
Jrissom, White and Chaffey as they were playing their part in this
scientific evolution.
ye welcomed here, and some of us in this gathering will
no doubt recall with -reat pleasure the visit of a-. lter Schiirar
and Frank 3orman and their wives. We nay tribute to the courae,
skill and determination of these brave pioneers of tomorrow, who
make it possible for us to realise the aspirations of this great
verture. Finally, ladies mnd gentlemen, may I refer to this as / 4
L 
-4-
another welcome illustration of the friendly and mutually helpful
teamwork which over the years, and more particularly over recent
years, has been demonstrated oetween the United States of America,
our great ally, and our own country of Australia. This stands as
a symbol for that firendship and for that teamwork and an alliance
which, we hope, will endure for as long as our two countries remain
national entities.
So, as I open formally this tracking station and have with
you a vision of what it can contribute to this protramme in the
future, may I adopt the words of Tennyson as a fitling conclusion:
" Forward, forward,
Let us range
Let the great world spin forever
Down the ringing grooves of change."
I declare this station formally open. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 42/ 1967
VISIT FROM U. N. HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Prince
Sadruddin Aga Khan has accepted an invitation to visit Australia as a guest
of the Commonwealth Government.
The Prince, who was elected High Commissioner for
Refugees by the Gnr. eral Assembly in December, 1965, will be making
his first visit to Australia.
He is expected to arrive in Sydney from Geneva on Saturday,
8th April. After s-p. iding the weekend priw.-r.-'. y Syc e will go on
to Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney, departing tor New Zeaiand on 23rd
April. While in Australia, the High Commissioner will have
discussions with Ministers and off{ ci. s o-rcfi-': meet
represe tatives of the voluntary agencies which are active in refugee work,
and visit resettlement projects.
As a country that has received more than 30G, 000 refugees
in the post-war period, we welcome the visit. The High Commissioner's
two predecessors in office, Dr. A. Lindt and Mr. F. Schnyder, visited
Australia in 1958 and 1963 respectively.
CANBERRA, 17th March, 1967. 



AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF' DIRECTOES? LUNCHEON,
IM LBOURHE
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Halt.
Mr. President and Gentlemen:
I regard that as a somewhat qualified introduction but
I have already been told that you will have to leave at two otclock,
so I shall not be speaking to you either at the length the
Treasurer finds necessary at Budget time, or as Prime Minister
on a leisurely evening occasion such as I felt able to indulge
my audience and myself in just on 12 months ago.
It wias for me a priviledge to be chosen as the guest
of honour at the first annual dinner of the first annual conference
of the Australian Institute of Directors and I look back to that
occasion with a great deal of pleasure. Your reference to having
acquired a proprietary interest over me Mr. President, which in
some other context might not have worked out so favourably, does
not appear to have done me very much harm in the meantime in the
eyes of the Australian electorate. If there was any blur on my
national image as a result of hobnobbing with so many directors
at one time on that occasion, at least the twelve months seem to
have given me time to live it down.
There is in Australia, I'm glad to say, a growing
maturity, a growing sopilhistication, not registered always in
all quarters at one and the same time, but broadly this is a
generalisation I think vie can claim. Where at one time a
prophet was not only without honour in his own country but a
profit spelt rather differently was almost a matter of guilt,
people these days realise that . ic are producing a few Australian
prophets who are listened to at times abroad and can with equal
advantage be heard at home, and that a profit in the well
conducted industrial enterprise is a national dividend capable
of being distributed through the medium of the tax mechanism
through all sections of the Australian community.
In one sense I am here with you as a fellow director,
indeed I think I could claim to be a Chairman of Directors of
the National Corporation. You mentioned my previous incumbency
of the Treasury, Mr. President, that, of course, made me probably
the biggest shareholder in most of the companies represented here
today, so that I feel I have come not only amongst friends I
hope they are still friends but I h ive coma amongst people
whose language I understand and whose problems also I have had
to cope with in various Ministerial capacities.
Now you have enjoined me, Mr. President, that these
busy, alert, brisk, intelligent executives must be springing
from their seats and getting into action on behalf of the
national economy by two o'clock and I'll do my best to distill
such wisdom as occurs to me oil this occasion in the time which
remains available to me.
In the twelve months since I last met the national body
much has happened. This is a continent and a nation in which
much continues to happen. It is-undoubtedly the most stimulating
and exciting period in our national history, and in the course of
the year amongst other things I, a-s a good national chairman of
the board of the National Corporation, found it necessary to give
some account of my stewardship to my shareholders, to several
millions of them who record a vote ( I hope not much more
frequently than every three years) and to give them some account
00/ 2. 
-2
of what we had in store for them over the period ahead.
I think it's a good Chairman of the Board who, while giving
a faithful account of what has occuired, and gives the facts
about what is planned for the future, doesn't try to promiso
too much. Better the people should be agreeably surprised
that you have done rather more than you undertook to do,
than that they should build false expectations on rosy and
glowing promises which are incapable in the result of
fulfilment, and that was the approach I chose to make at
the time of the last national assessment.
Wie set about a programme for the electorate which
we felt was manageable, which would not unduly disturb the
national economy and yet which continued our forward advance
on a number of fronts and I am glad to be able to say that
the Government having come officially and formally back into
office vwe have set briskly about giving affect to those
undertakings. I won't, because of the lim-itation of time,
try to take you through in any detail just what we have already
done and where we stand at present in relation to these mattersthat
will emerge from statements made by my colleagues and
certainly by the end of the current Parliamentary Session,
I hope to be able to give some account of how rapidly we have
advanced in all the directions which we undertook to attend to.
In the fields of education, social services, housing,
water conservation, beef roads, the wool -industry, tourism,
which I specifically mentioned in the Policy Speech, I can
tell you that action has already been put in hand, some are
completed, much of it to be completed by the end of this
Parliamentary Session.
My colleagues and I and vie are in a sense the
Directors of this National Corporation can look with pleasure
and a certain measure of pride at the general state of affairs.
The past year has not beon an easy one, only those of us
and this includes many of you in this room who have had to
grapple with quite abnormal circumstances developing in the year,
realise this because for the most part the public was relatively
unaffected by the problems with which we had to grapple.
Internally we experienced a major drought and the effects of
this are only now beginning to ease. Perhaps I could just pause
there for a moment because I don't think there has been a full
realisation of just what this drought meant to Australia.
If you -look at it merely in terms of farm incomes,
in 1964/ 65 the farm income amounted in total to $ 1,255 million.
In the following, year and normally we would have expected
some reasonable progression in our earnings from farm income
it dropped to $ 902 million. In other words a drop of 37% in
farm income, and if you carry forward as one might reasonably
have been expected to do if you were planninG a business,
what you would have earned h~ ad you retained the stock of cattle
and sheep we possessed at that time, then we could have
anticipated a drop amounting to 40% o below what we had received
in the previous year and certainly much lower even than that
we might have expected in the year which was to follow.
Translating it into rather different terms, if you
take the fall in our sheep population. In Queensland, there
was a fall of 32%, in New South Wales a drop of 15%. Altogether
we lost 18.6 million sheep in that period in thlose two droughtaffected
States. The total of sheep population didn't fall as
much because in other States there was somae Gain, but with
nor= s. l conditions there would have been a gain, of course, in
New South Wales and Queensland too, but in those States alone
there was a loss of 18.6 million sheep. There was . a loss of
just on a million head of cattle. . Here I think we can claim
some credit that the loss was held as low as the statistics now 
-3
confirm, because wie had, as you will be aware, been giving
effect to a programme of beef road construction and this
enabled the rapid movement of drought effected stock from one
area to more favourable areas and so we were holding down that
particular drought effect in relation to a very valuable stock
of beef cattle. You get some indication of the ma.-nitude of this
programme when I tell you that our commitment up to the end
of June this year of beef roads will be of the order of
$ 57 million and we have made offers to the States of a further
million to be spont on the beef road programme over the five
or six years which lie ahead of us. As this programme takes
full effect not only will we open up areas of great potential
value for beef production in a world which is increasing its
requirements of beef, but vie shall also be helping to safegruard
against the effects of drought as it no doubt will occur from
time to time in this country in the future.
But those of you who have to conduct your owin
businesses, if you found a drop in income in a major area
of your resources, from $ 12.5 million to $ 9 million would
know that pretty serious adjustments would. have to be made
and when this occurred at a time whsLn we wveie in the process
of doubling our expenditure on defence and diverting national
resources for this purpose, wheni in the same period we had to
contend, particuliarly in more recent months with the effects
of flood and bushfire, you will I think, be the more impressed
by the relatively even way in which the economy has moved
throughout this period, and on present indications the prospect
is an even brighter one ahead.
We might have been pardoned if wie had regarded the
nation's performance as falling far below what actually occurred,
but in the result we moved steadily forward. In the December
quarter of this year, the post-Budget critics and analysts were
saying that not enough stimulus had been given but there was
actually in that quarter an increase in gross national product
of the order of 8% as compared with thu December quarter of
the previous year, and even then that is reduced in real terms
making full allowance for price changes and matters of that sort,
you get a ye rysignificant increase in gross national product
upwards of The December quarter also saw~ a revival in retail
sales of goods. The value of retail sales was up 5.6% above
the level of sales in -the December quarter of the previous year
and, more importantly, during the September quarter there was
a most notable improvement in the percentage increase in the
sales of the clothing and consumer durables group, an increase
which at very least promises improved conditions for
manufacturers of these particular goods.
Also i~ portant in the December quarter of course
was the rise in the level of motor vehicle registrations.
However it's not always easy to please everybody and some
people have suggested that the most recent figures for
February reflect a falling off in the motor vehicle market.
In fact the February sales suggest an annual rate of sale
of a minimum of just under 400,000 and the industry appeared
to be in an excellent position to move along over that
400,000 annual mark as the year progresses.
Housing. This was an area of expenditure about which
some doubt was expressed at times last year, but at the close
of the year, housing approvals wiere running at an annual rate of
124,000 and commencements at an annual rate of 117,000 which are
very close, both of them, to record levels and present indications
are that a higher level of activity will be maintained in 1967.
/ 4s, 
4-
The other encouraging picture is in relation to exports
in recent months and these have reached record level. In the
first seven months of 1966/ 67 exports have been 107o greater than
in -the same period of -the previous year and as a result, in these
seven months the balance of overseas trade was 157 million dollars
more favourable than it was at the same stage of 1965/ 66. The
strength of our export sales is, of course, largely due to the
improvement of conditions in the rural industries, which I have
already mentioned, and of course to an increasingly important
extent to our exporting capacity of minerals.
Exports of iron ore, oxide and their derivatives are
fast developing into a major item in our overseas trade. You
might be interested just to have a quick glance at the way in
which these export figures have moved, because they have risen
over the last six or seven years from $ 1,851 million value in
1960/ 61 wie reached the highest point in the following year in
our history to $ 2,128 million. There was a sharp jump again
in 1963/ 64 to $ 2,732 million and this year the estimate is
$ 2,900 millions, and taking an informed guess for 1967/ 68
I would say that we could expect $ 3,100 million or $ 3,200 million
in 1967/ 68. No--v going back to 1960/ 61, or if you thin'-that was a
bad year, but it wiasn't a bad year actually for exports. I'll
take you back then to 1961/ 62, which was the previous record
year for export income, $ 2,128 million. If by 1967/ 68 we hit
$ 3,100 $ 3,200 million, which is roughly a 50% increase on the
earlier record figure, you will see that the national policies
have been fruitful in stimulating that most valuable of our
goals, a rising export income enabling us to maintain a good
level of imports and at the same time build up the internal
standards of the country and the living standards of our people.
There is just one cautionary word I'd offer about this
whole picture, because, as you know restraints have been imposed
in the United States and the United Kingdom, on the investment
of capital from those countries, and vwhereas wie had a
phenomenally large increase in the previous year, some of it
is due to abnormal factors of a temporary character. We are
now finding a fall away from those levels, anyhow, to what we
would regard as more normal levels of investment, particularly
from the United Kingdom and the United States. I hope that in
respect of both these countries, this is only a passing phase.
I am convinced that it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction
of thoughtful planners and heads ol" government in those countries,
that it's in their own economic interests, to see Australia
develop. Most of our reserves are held in sterling for a start,
to the extent that wie better our position, wie better the position
of sterling and it is demonstrable that in the case of the United
States, our export earnings, and in particular the investment
of capital from the United States and this country, has been
accompanied by increased export earnings and increased purchases
from the United States of America, far outweighing any investment
total which may come to us from that particular country. And so
we hope thlat we'll have some success in persuading the governments
of those countries that they are taking a short view of the
economic picture if they in any way inhibit the development of
Australian resources.
But quite apart from th _ At aspect we have to play our
owin part internally, and wie knowi that over a period of at least
a couple of years vie are going to face a fall in our overseas
reserves. We are fortunately strongly placed there, and to have
a certain degree of room for manoeuvre, but it behoves us at the
same time to take our own situation quite responsibly and I say
that because our rise in the wiage level last year wias, I think
of an order which it's going to take industry some time to digest. 
If my recollection is correct the total rise was of
the order of and I speak subject to correction but that's
my recollection of it, and anyhow it was of a dimension which
will take industry some time to digest. Faced with problems
for our export industries, many of w~ hom are facing difficult
competitive positions overseas, and faced with a need to digest
an increase of this sort, and to keep the economy in good flexible
supple condition to meet whatever problems we havu to face with
decline in overseas reserves, vie can hope in 1967 that we will
have a year of comparative wage stability. That anyhow is the
view which the Government takes of that matter.
Now I did say something about investment, I'd like
to elaborate on that a little. To reach this stage of our
development, and to carry on our programmes development in
various parts of the Commonwealth, vast amounts of capital
have been and will be required. My colleague the Minister
for National Development has provided a number of detailed
facts about Australia's development programme in a publication
which I recommend your officers secure, which showis that at
the end of June last, major development work under construction
in Australia had an estimated total value of completion of
$ 2,327 million. These works, chiefly those of Commonwealth
and State Governments and their instrumentalities, dont
include such things as expenditure on housing, hospital and
educational facilities, which would of course have swollen
the total very much more, and the figures do not include
expenditure of nearly $ 600 million by the Commonwealth
Government on the Snowy Mountains Scheme. The figures
I have quoted are really on the small side because to keep
the publication to a reasonable size water projects costing
less than a million dollars and railway and road works costing
less than half a million dollars are not counted. Now by any
standards this total is a huge investment programme for a
nation of under 12 million people. We have now in hand
investments in development equivalent to some two hundred
dollars a head of our population.
I spoke of myself as Chairman of the National Corporation
but we don't see that in competition, with the other corporations
and companies repressnted here, ours is a national partnership
with you and it's our responsibility to work in aid of the
development by free . enterprise of the potentialities which emerge
from time to time, whether it's building, railways, improving
loading facilities at ports, establishing wharves and townships
as we are doing now, particularly in the north and over in
Western Australia various facilities in the Northern Territory
and other developmental areas, these are to be carried out to
assist the amazing developments which are occurring in these parts
of Australia. The Government's approach to the developments is
by no means dominated by the view that the project must be big
to be important or worthwhile, and indeed in a multiplicity of
relatively small projects there may be even greater national
advantage than in one or more of the major or more spectacular
developments. Where a n--ed exists and is seen and where it is
clear the Government can make a real contribution then given all
the demands on our limited finances wie wish to co-operate.
I want to say a word about the supply of capital in
order to assist the Australian entrepreneur to take a bigger
hand in the development of our own national resources. This
has been much canvassed and I can assure you a great deal of
work has been done on this matter at our own Cabinet level.
I am hoping that within a matter of days my colleague the
Treasurer will be able to make an announcement on one aspect,
and an important aspect, of this problem vie have been looking
at in Cabinet, not just one proposal nor is one proposal
necessarily exclusive of another or of others, but we do knowi
that our own banking system is here to be helpful in this matter
by some combination of resources and of facilities; wie do know
that there is a willingness on behalf of the trading banks to .6. 
-6
join together for these purposes, and wie have had some fruitful
discussions with them.
The objective will be to assist the Australian
entrepreneur who wants to secure a larger or even the
total Australian equity for this country in these
developments of our national resources, not to be frustrated
by a lack of locally available capital. It may be that in
each case it won't be possible to furnish all. It may be that
there are very good reasons why this should be less than a full
Australian equity participation, but at least we are mobilising
ourselves to do far more in this direction than, vie have found
it practicable to do in the past, and the story doesn't end there.
We are looking at other proposals which could have the effect
of enabling an Australian equity participation to occur in
conjunction with overseas debenture capital brought in by other
interested parties. I can only tell you this in the broad at
this time but you can be sure that as finality-. is reached in
negotiations on these matters statements will be made by the
Ministers most directly conce~ rned.
Sir, my final word is really in the nature of
an appeal to calm judgement and good sense in relation to a
matter which doesn't directly concern you in your conduct of
your businesses, but which does concern us all in the conduct
of the nation. Just as you have to overhaul the machinery of
your business organisation from time to time and make
readjustments in staffing or additions to staff where great
expansion has occurred, so it becomes necessary -although
at very much less frequent intervals in practice -for us to
make some study of the machinery of government, and you will
be aware that wie are bringing forward a referendum which is
designed to break what is known as the nexus between the
House of Representatives and the Senate, regarding the
membership of Parliament.
Nowi we can expect between now and the date of the
poll that there will be a great deal of misrepresentation on
this issue, attempts made to mislead the people as to what is
really involved. Although the leaders of the three principal
parties, the Liberal Party, the Country Party and the Labour
Party have all joined together unanimously, and the vote was
unanimous in the House of Representatives in supporting this
particular proposal, there are opponents and there are critics
including some sections ofthe Press and the Press are able to
present this matter in a way which doesn't either tell the story
fully or give a completely clear account of what is intended.
I say that deliberately because already I've run into situations
where even that august institution the A. B. C. and this has been
repeated in some of the newspapers have presented this referendum
as a referendum to increase the size of the House of Representatives.
This was the way in which the A. B. C. recently led in a new~ w comment
after Itd fixed the date for the referendum.
The referendum to increase the size of the House of
Representatives will be held on May 27th. Well if we just want
to increase the size of the House of Representatives, we don't
need a referendum. We have got full power to do that at this
time. Those people who say we don't want more Members of
Parliament, might very well reflect on our objective, which is
designed to enable from time to time modest increases without
at the same time being compelled to increase the size of the
Senate, which most people regard as being large enough anyhow
for Australia's present and prospective needs. It will have
been twenty years since the last increase occurred by the time
we reach the next Parliament the next election. a 
7-
We do~ put out of range the possibility of
increasing the size of the Senate at some future time,
but we say it's absurd if we want to increase the House
of Representatives by say twelve or thirteen, but on the
present system of voting, we have to increase the total
number of Members of Parliament by seventytwo. That
wouldn't strike you as being good business and it doesntt
strike us as being good sense, and yet without an alteration
of the Constitution, if we wanted to provide a Member of
Parliament for every 85,000 persons ( and that's above the
figure we had back in 1949 when the last increase occurred)
then if we stuck to the pr esent system of voting we would
need to increase the Senate by twonitgfour aud tho ' House of
Representatives by fortyeight. I won't spell out the detail
of it for you now, Just take my word for tiat, they will do
it so well before the campaign comes along. There have been
suggestions that we could alter by having our twelve in the
House of Representatives and only appoint one additional
person to each State in the Senate. Well that would mean
you would have six people elected in one three year period,
five elected in another. The possibility of deadlock would
be about double the present level, and heaven knows we have
enough trouble now with an evenly-divided Senate.
Quite apart from the rather odd circumstance that
on the system of proportional representation those who are lucky
enough to have been chosen in the period when six went out would
virtually have a life tenure of their occupancy of the Senate
without any serious prospect of challenge, but a. o have it in
mind that if we want to make some sort of increase, a modest
increase, not year by year thc, last one was just on twenty
years ago but from time to time then what better time than at
the beginning of a new Parliament, when no one can seriously
argue that in the light of our current majority we are doing
this in order to take some particular advantage of our Opposition.
The Opposition joins us in supporting this, so does the Leader
of the Country Party and his colleagues in the Parliament. The
vote, I repeat, was unanimous in the House of Representatives,
and if you are running a business and knew that when we last
increased to our. ipresent numbers the population of Australia was
just on eight millions, and . when we next meet the electors it will
be just on twelve millions, you'd say it's not unreasonable that
we should have a handful more people to assist in doing the
increasingly complex task that a Government and Parliament have
to carry out.
Well gentlemen more, no doubt, will have to be said
on these matters as we get closer to the event. Some people
have vested interest, one party in particular which can't win
a seat in the House of Representatives, and makes its gains in
the Senate, wants to see a larger Senate, of course, because then
its quota for return in the Senate drops accordingly and becomes
easier, and you'll find it quite vocal. Other people who become
critics have talked about use doing ill by the smaller States.
Well that's not the view of the State organisations represented
on our own political party bodies and I think that 9Qn be shown
to be a very feeble fear. You do get thcase misrepresentations,
some are quite accidental. I read in my paper this morning one of
my colleagues saying that the Commonwealth Government had no
contact with the State Government. When I asked him about this
he said the word was conflict, not contact, and there's quite
a difference in meaning. Then he said he was reported as saying
that the Federal Government is always in a state of flux. What
he said was the Federal Constitution is alwiays in a state of flux.
And again there can be this failure of communications, and our
problem in getting tho story over is to have it clearly and
reasonably understood by our people.
Well Sir, by my clock I am five minutes late.
Sorry to have detained you so long, thank you very much for
your attentive hearing. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967
DEP. ARTURE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD
HOLT FROM MASCOT AIRPORT, SYDNEY 28TH MARCH, 1967
Before departing on his tour of Asia, the Prime Minister made the following
comments to the Press in response to questions
Q. What do you expect to come out of this trip, Sir?
PM: There are s everal valuable purposes, as I see them. First, this
is an area of great strategic significance for Australia. We have been
involved militarily at least four times in the last 25 years in this
area, but my visit isn't primarily concerned with matters of security.
I merely mention that because it reveals how important the area
strategically is to Australia. Secondly, Australia is becoming
increasingly involved in the trading possibilities in the area. Our trade
with Japan, of course, has built up dramatically, and I think this is*
only a pointer to what we can expect to come in the years ahead,
If we cultivate out opportunities skilfully and successfully.
Thirdly, quite obviously in this area, Australia has the possibility
of making and should be making a diplomatic contribution. There
are agencies now developing ASPAC, the Asian Development Bank,
such meetings as the Manila Conference, SEATO, some of them for,
security reasons, others for trade reasons, some for economic
development. I want my visit to emphasise to the people in that area
that Australia is conscious of its own increasing involvement in the
problems and possibilities of the area, and I think it useful Witb all
the reporting that you people are able to do on these matters so well
for Austral ians to know how important and significant these countries
have become for us.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, will you be discussing the Viet Nam war
in all these places you are calling at?
PM: Oh, I wouldn't expect so. I haven't got any specific negotiations
or treaty arrangements or conference proposals or anything of that
sort. No, it is an opportunity to get to know better people and
countries that are closely neighbouring to Australia and to have them
get to know Australia better.
Q. Is it possible that our aid to these countries might be increased
as a result of this visit?
PM:-Well, our aid curve has been a rising one but I would not want to
give any impression that I see any substantial enlar gement of what
we are already doing. Australia per capita ranks high among the
aid-giving countries of the world. / 2 
-2
Q. Will there be any chances for talks on Asian migrants for
Aus trali a?
PM: Well, you know, over recent years there has been a
considerable liberalisation of our policy there. In the years since the
Second World War, some 30, 000 people have come into Australia
who would not have been admissible under the policies that oa'tained
earlier. More than 6, 000 have been naturalised under revised
arrangements in quite recent years. We have got the best part of
12, 000 students from Asia in our universities and colleges. So
there has been, I think, a sensible liberalisation of the arrangements
which previously existed.
Q. Will there be further liberalisation?
PM: Well, I am not wanting to be specific on that. That is a matter
of Government policy, which I wouldn't be in a position to develop here
today. Thank you. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 SINGAPORE
ARRIVAL PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. HAROLD HOLT AT SINGAPORE AIRPORT 28TH MARCH, 1967
PRIME MINISTER: Gentlemen, I thought I'd just speak quite briefly to you and then
leave an opportunity for questions.
My friends from Australia who are coming around with me, I
understand, have agreed to let Singapore have the questions this
time rather than monopolise the time.
But I am very glad that as a consequence of my visit to four
countrias ofl the South East Asian and Pacific region, which I have
not previously visited, I am able to make this short but very
useful visit to Singapore again.
I am, of course, no stranger to Singapore. I'vye been here,
and through here, many times -over the years, but I always find
it both useful and very pleasant, certainly very pleasant to meet
members of your Government again and to talk usefully and
helpfully -with them, and I am looking forward tonight, in the
absence of your distinguished Prime Minister, to meeting an
old friend in the Acting Prime Minister, who very kindly is giving
a dinner for me.
My main purposes on this visit, as I've already indicated, will
be to make contact with four contries of the region, which I've not
previously visited, and I hope in this way to make Australia and
its policies better known in those countries, and at the same time,
because of the coverage which our own press will be giving to this
visit, to make these countries and their significance for Australia,
their leaders, and their people better know n to my own countrymen
in Australia. There is an increasing interest and recognition in Australia
of our growing involvement in the affairs of South East Asia and
the Pacific, of which region of course, we feel ourselves to be
a part. Geography brings us together and, at the same time,
there are mutual interests to be served.
We have an interest, as you do, in the security of the area,
its stability and its peaceful progress, and Australia is developing
an increasing trade with the countries of the area, generally speaking.
So these are all good reasons why we should get to know each other
better,. get to unlderstand each other's problems and, where we can
be mutually helpful, to act in that f ash icn. / 2. 
-2
0 The countries which I shall be visiting all have a special
significance for us. They don't necessarily all pursue the
same policies, but, to takce an illustration, Cambodia,
Australia has a special relationship there in that we represent the
United States' interests in Cambodia, and we represent Cambodian
interests in South Vietnam.
So you will gather from this that my own country is able, in
that way, to act as a useful bridge of understanding and contact
between countries which don't have direct diplomatic relations
w it h each other at the Wres ent time.
I have spoken of stability, of our interest in stability in this
region. I hope that won't be interpreted as meaning some
conservative resistance to change. That is not how we view it.
We have ourselves, as I think we have demonstrated, a
national drive in our own development, and we aspire to rising
standards for our people and the maintencnce of social justice
and we look applaudingly at developments in other countries of
the region which have these objectives, the betterment of affairs
inside those countries and the processes of change which serve
to produce that betterment, but to us stability and security are
necessary ingredients in this process. If you don't have security
and you have instability, then you ca't go ahead in the same way
with orderly and peaceful progress.
But this is of the essence of my purpose on this occasion to
make better neighbours of good neighbours, more understanding
between those good neighbours It is for me an educational tour,
as I am sure it will be for those accompanying me, and, at the
same time, I hope it will not be without some educative process
for countries which have a significance for us and with which we
hope to live on terms of friendship and co-operation, building
our trade and our diplomatic relationships together.
Now having said that, gentlemen, perhaps you have some
questions you wish to put to me.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, when Mr. Bowden, the British Commonwealth
Secretary, recently asked about the Australian attitude to the British
drawdow n of troops here, he said that he believed that the Australian
attitude was that you were less interested in the actual size of the
British presence than in the fact of the British presence. Does this
accurately reflect your views on the subject?
PM: Well, we understand all along that after the confrontation issue
had either ended or substantially abated, that the build-up of British
forces which had occurred to meet that situation would also abate
until you had something more closely approximating the preconfrontation
level of Brit ish forces in the area, an d it is a fact
that in my own discussions with Mr. Bowden I did make the point
to him that we were n ot so much concerned with the size of the
British Military Establishment in the area, but we did feel that it
was important, not so much in our interests we feel that our
security arrangements are adequate in any event but in the interests
of the area as a whole, and indeed in the interests of maintaining
British influence and prestige throughout this area, and indeed
through the world, that continuance of a British presence in an area
east of Suez which, after all, accommodates these days threef ifths 
4 -3-
of the human race was, and remains, important, and so far as
I am aware that viewpoint has been well understood and accepted by
the British Government and has shaped its policies in relation to
this area ever since.
Q. Sir, do you expect to discuss the Vietnam War during your
present trip?
PM: I am not coming for that special purpose. Our own policy is
well known, our participation is well-known in the conflict there,
we ourselves are hoping that there can emerge a settlement which
will leave a just arn d enduring peace and which will enable these
conditions of stability and security I've spoken of as aspirations
to become realities in the area. But I'm afraid there has beaen
no encouragement in the events of recent weeks to support the hope
that there can be an early termination of hostilities or the kind of
settlement that we would hope to see emerge there. I'm not in
any way trying in the course of this visit to make some impact
on the attitudes of others on this Issue. For example, Cambodia
takes a different view of this matter from Australia. We can agree
to differ on this matter, it's not my purpose to attempt to persuade
the Government of Cambodia that they should alter their policies,
they're well capable of making up their own minds as to what their
policy should be.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, will you be taking an opportunity while you
are in this area to visit Saigon this time?
PM: No, I have no plans to visit Saigon. Since I was there myself there
have been other visits by members of the Government and, of course,
by Senior Diplomatic and Service Representatives, and the total journey
I shall be making on this occasion has to be confined in 12 or 13 days,
that involves four countries other than visits such as this which bring
me to Singapore and Hongkong.
Q. On Indonesia is there any chance that you'll go to Indonesia either
at the end cf this visit ct in the near future?
PM: Well, not in the course of this visit and I've made no plans, but
I think it can be assumed that I would welcome a visit to Indonesia
when the Government of that country felt it was propitious for me to
do so. There have been visits by our own Minister for External
Aff airs, Mr. Hasluck, who has, I think, developed a good relationship
with the Government of Indonesia, and even through the difficult period
of confrontation we were able to maintain a line of friendship which I
know was welcomed there and which we were glad to hold out. We
joined with others in looking constructively at the Economic problems
of the country, and we hope that in the years ahead we'll develop
closer, more cordial and co-operative relations, particularly in the
areas of diplomacy and trade with Indonesia. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 CAMBODIA ARo,
TOAST PROPOSED BY PRINCE NORODOM SIHANOUJK
AT GALA DINNER FOR THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT, AT PHNOM PENH. 29th March, 1967.
It is with great pleasure that I welcome this evening the
eminent Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia, the Right
Honourable Mr. Harold Holt and those distinguished personages who
accompany him. May I assure them of the warmth of the welcome that
awaits them, and express the hope that they, for their part, will enjoy
their brief stay amongst us.
I likewise assure you personally Mr. Prime Minister,
of the great significance we Cambodians attach to this, the first occasion
on which the Head of an Australian Government has paid us an offical
visit, and of our appreciation of the opportunity thus afforded us of personal
and friendly contacts between the members of our respective governments.
I would likewise stress that your presence here this evening
constitutes proof that different political options and social conceptions
do not represent an insuperable barrier to the establishment of cordial
relations between governments and peoples, nor do they preclude the
possibility of co-operation to mutual advantage on mtters of common
interest. Indeed, I would even make so bold as to claim that Khmer/
Australian relations provide a world distracted by imperialist ambitions,
and driven by national and economic rivalries with a shining example,
not merely of peaceful but of fruitful and cordial co-existence. Moreover,
the formula we have hit upon to produce such a state of affairs is a simple
one, that of conforming in scrupulous fashion to the principle that all
nations are equal, to that of give-and-take, coupled with a refusal to
intervene in each other's internal affairs.
Another factor which has contributed to the establishment
of these cordial relations has been the provision of aid in various forms,
and of a most practical sort provided unconditionally by your government
including consignments of motorpumps for irrigation purposes, material
for our railways, and equipment for our capital, and for the recently
founded sea port which bears my name.
We may be flattering ourselves unduly in regard to the
assistance Australia has generously sent us in the light of a reward
to the Khmer people for the untiring efforts they have been making
ever since National Independence was recovered, to remedy Cambodia's
formerly backward state and to equip it socially, economically and
industrially with all the appurtenances of a modern nation.
There are good m~ asons for assuming, however, that the
rapid progress Cambodia has been making in every field has not
attracted the attention it merits, and that the belief is still prevalent
in the outside world that our country is a stagnant backwater where
as one Australian newspaper expressed it " last year no industrial
development of any sort has taken place". We have been devoting
much time and energy to dissipating this mistake by providing foreign
peoples with an opportunity to come to th~ eir own condusions in regard / 2. 
-2
zo the-progrmss-azhieved under the '" Sangkum" regime. in the course
of the past-eleven years.
One of the methods we adcpted was the creation cf a
mobile exhibition of Cambodian achievements during the period in
question, and of sending it abroad with a view to dissipating this
mistken impression of our couitry. Visitors to this-exhibition
in the m an y countries where it has opened its doors almost invariably
exclaim " We had no idea Cambodia was so progressive, why it even
boasts national industries and factories. This aspect of the progress
Cambodia has made, Mr. Prime Minister, you will have an opportunity
to verify in person.
It is our sole ambition, however, as it is our passionate
desire to be allowed to complete the task to which we have set our
hand, free of threats to our national independence. For, were the
Khmer people to be robbed of their national independence, they would
be deprived of their present incentive to pursue their efforts, and would
relapse into that state of apathy which prevailed at the time of the French
protectorate, a moral condition which gave rise to the legend that the
Khmers were an idle and obtuse race, lacking the mental capacity to
acquire scientific or technical knowledge of any srt or description.
If the erroneous nature of such an assumption has been
demonstrated today, this should be ascribed to the impetus given by
the recovery of national independence. But national independence
perforce implies the absence of threats to territorial integrity. But
certain great powers are presuming to call in question today the
intangible nature of our present frontiers, obli vious of the fact that
the " shoe is in fact on the other foot", as Cambodia possesses historic
claims to territories at present being administered by neighbouring
governments, We are however, a sensible, pragmatic people, who
have no desire to stir up the embers oi pas-, quarrels or forgotten wars.
All we ask is to be allowed to live in peace within our present frontiers.
National independence likewise places us under an obligation
to resist attempts from an y quarter to reduce the status of our country to
that of a satellite. This obligation, reinforced by our firm conviction that
it must be respected, disproved the " thesis" propunded by those who seek
to disparage our motives to the effect that our neutral policy is biassed
in favour of the" socialist camp" and implen-e nted in suchy fashion as to
cause the maximum of embarrassment to the " free" world.
But such an assumption is demolished by the very close and
cordial nature of our relations with countries like Australia and France,
the governments of which harbour no designs on the territories of their
neighbours and cop~' 1uct their foreign policy in conformity with those
principles of reciprocal respect and some best calculated not only to
safeguard national interests, but to ensure the prosperity and happiness
of the peoples confided to their charge.
And it is with this assurance, and in this belief that I ask
you, your E~ cellencies, ladies and gentlemen, to join me in this toast
to the health of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth Second, to the health
of His Excellency Mr. Harold Holt, Madame Holt, and those Australian
friends of curs present here this evening, to the prosperity of Australia,
and to the happiness of its people ( di) to the friendship to bind our two
countries and peoples together. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 SINGAPORE
DEPARTURE PRESS CONFERENCE 29TH MARCH, 1967
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know that there is anything particularly that I wanted to
add to what I said yesterday. I did mention yesterday, I think,
that these were four countries I had not previously visited. All
of them have a significance of a special sort for Australia.
Cambodia is a country with which we have a special relationship
in that, although we respect the neutrality and non-alignment of
Cambodia we have been able to maintain good relations to a point
where we represent American interests in Cambodia and we
represent Cambodian interests in South Vietnam.
In Laos, there is a strategic significance for all of us who
have an interest in the security and stability of this area, and
I am looking forward to seeing at first hand something of the
situation there and having useful talks.
Then on to Taiwan. Australia has recently decided to
establish an Embassy in Taiwan. We recognise the wonderful
economic progress we applaud the economic progress which
is being made there. There is a growing trade between our two
countries and we have always made it clear that whatever future
arrangement develops in relation to Mainland China this should not
be reached at the expense of the 13 million people living in Taiwan.
They are entitled to a separate national existence if that is
the course they choose to pursue.
Then South Korea, Australia has a special interest in South
Korea. We were the first country, as I recall it, to declare
ourselves alongside the f orces of the United States in helping to
resist conMInU41t aggression in South Korea, and of course we
have been associated with our allied forces in Vietnam. I last
met with President Park at the Manila Conference.
Q. Is there any question of an Australian pull-out from this part
of the world Singapore and Malaysia?
P. M. No, Australia has no plan to withdraw forces from this area
and indeed, as I pointed out yesterday in relation to the British
presence here, we regard the presence of these friendly forces,
which we urd erstand are welcomed by Malaysia and Singapore,
as contributing to stabil ty in the e. and able to add to the
security and stability of the region as a whole. We have no
plans to reduce our own forces.
Q. Do you feel the coming British pull-out will weaken the defence
situation here from the military point of view? 
4 -2
P. M. Well, I don't think that this is the British intention. They
would wish to contribute to security here and, as I said yesterday,
we have known all along that the forces which have been built
up beyond the normal strength to meet the confrontation issue
were likely to be reduced to at least the pre -confrontation level
but I have no recent knowledge on this matter.
Q. There has been much talk of the establishment of a British base
in Darwin and elsewhere in Australia. Do you think that such a
base, a British base, could successfully help to replace Singapore
in the military sense?
P. M. Well, we have made it clear that we would prefer to see the
establishment continued in this area. We have well-appointed
barracks here and the naval base itself of course is a great asset,
a contribution to the joint security of this total area. But I think
if I interpret the British thinking, they were disposed to move to
bases in Australia only if it was found that they were not desired
to remain cii in their existing baces.
Q. One more question, Sir. Do you think that in the 1970' s
Australia could assume the role the British have played?
P. M. Well, we don't aspire to be more than a good neighbour making
a contribution to peaceful progress here, helping in the resistance
to aggression.
We found our own forces involved in a military sense five times
in the last twenty-five years in this area of the world, but they
have always been involved in resistance to aggression and in a
defensive capacity. And that is what we see as our continuing
role in this area of the world. 



ASIAT TOUR 1967. C' 1 TBODIA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mir. Harold Holt at
Gala Dinner at Phnom Penh 29th March, 1967.
Over recent years there has oeen a growing awareness
in Australia of our increasing involvement in developments
occurring in South East Asia and the Pacific. While some of
these developments have related to matters of national integrity
and security, there have emerged also positive and mutually
beneficial developments in the fields of trade and commerce.
This is, perhaps most strikingly demonstrated in the
transformation which has occurred in Australia's relations with
Japan. We fought as enemies in the Second 7orld 1' ar but after
the peace we quickly found a basis for friendship and a rapidly
growing trade between our countries began to develop. This has
moved so quickly that today Japan has oecome the largest
importer in the world in value of Australian exports while we
have become the second or third largest importer of exports
from Japan. This, I believe, is illustrative of the improved
relations and mutual benefits which can flow from the establishment
of conditions of security and stability associated with peaceful
economic progress. " Oherever we look in this general area today we find
that in those countries aule to enjoy the blessings of peace,
rapid progress is being achieved. . e find these countries
absorued in xreat tasks of nation buildin, and growth, and South
Last Asia, which has shaken off its colonial past, is able to
employ to an expanding degree the benefits of modern science
and technology. ie in Australia have done our Dest to assist by
providing materials equipment and techniques. In Cambodia's
case, for example, I understand that the irrigation pumps which
we have been aole to provide have been a considerable success,
and more will oe coming to you. Jie have done this gladly
feeling a genuine sense of cooperation with friendly countries
in the region. We strongly uphold the concepts of sovereignty
national self-determination and national independence. Our own
history as a free democratically governed country leads us to do
so. Sixty-six years ago Australia uecame one nation with a
vast continent to develop, and a population of only three million
people. Today, as our population approaches twelve millions, we
take pride in our national growth and the individual Australian
identity we have established. Ours is a friendly country and
Australians will, I think, be acknowledged as friendly people.
We bring warmth and understanding to the national aspirations
of our neighbours we respond readily to warmth and understanding
from them. ' 7e welcome the fact that national -oals today are
centred on the strengthening of domestic institutions, widening
opportunities for our peoples, the development of national resources,
and a more widely shared prosperity spread by programmes of social
justice. There is, we believe, in South East Asia, a common / 2 
-2-
acceptance of the need for a more stable environment in the region
within which members can live in peace and amity and work together
in harmony. Australia will participate whole-heartedly in efforts
to reconcile national differences and in the fostering of
cooperative relations. see, for example much value in such
instrumentalities of mutual benefit as the Colombo Plan and the
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, and we believe
that Cambodia does also. We see great future promise in the Asian
Development Bank and, as one of ils largest contributors, we hope
to play a full part in its activities. This is Asia's o: n Bank
and w'e believe it will be for the nations of Asia to join together
in making it fully effective.
The harmonious community of developing nations to which
Australia looks forward in the South East Asian region must be
one that is based on general acceptance and respect for differing
national identities, cultures and social and political systems.
For our part Australia has chosen to be a member of
various security treaties relating to the Asian and Pacific areas.
These treaties are defensive in nature, and are designed to
safeguard security and bring stability to the region.
In the pursuit of your naitional interest and the
preservation of your independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, Cambodia has adapted policies of neutrality. Astralian
adherence to the principle of respect for national independence
involves recognition of the territorial integrity of the countries
concerned, acceptance of the particular polilical and social
systems prevailing within their domestic jurisdiction, and complete
respect for the national policies of neutrality, and non-alignment,
which countries like Cambodia have adopted. Australians believe
that differences of culture social systems and national policies
can be reconciled by attitudes of mutual understanding, and active
policies of friendship and cooperation.
The present relationship oetween Camoodia and Australia
is a prime example of the success of such policies. Australia
hopes that, through their application on a broader scale diversity
can become a source not of weakness, but of strength not of
discord, but of mutual advantage throughout the South-East Asian
area. It is in this spirit Your Excellencies, Ladies and
Gentlemen, that I ask you to join me in the toast to the health
of the Head of State of Cambodia, His Royal Highness Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and to Madame Sihanouk, to the government and people of
Cambodia, to the continued progress and future prosperity of
Cambodia, and to an ever-closer friendship oetween our two
countries. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 43/ 1967
QUEENSLAND FLOODS
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
John McEwen
Commenting today on the floods in North Queensland, the
Acting Prime Minister said that as soon as news of the disaster was received,
the Government arranged for Commonwealth officials to keep in close touch
with the Premier's Department in Queensland so that it could be kept fully
informed of developments. At the same time, requests for assistance were
received by the Services which did all they aould to assist those affected
by the flooding. The Acting Prime Minister said that in accordance with the
constitutional division of responsibilities, the provision of relief following
natural disasters is a matter which falls within the province of the States.
However, in recognition of the need on humanitarian grounds to take special
action for the quick alleviation of individual cases of hardship, sudCessive
Commonwealth Governments have adopted the policy of assisting State
Governments in the financing of relief schemes where the damage has beefl
severe or widespread, but the initiative in setting up these schemes rests
with the State concerned. The Commonwealth participates at the request of
the State and on the basis of matching the amount of money which the StateI
customarily makes available.
Mr. McEwen said that a telegram had been received from the
Premier of Queensland on 17th March, requesting Commonwealth financial
assistance and the Prime Minister telegraphed in reply to the effect that the
Commonwealth is prepared to participate with the State on the customary
dollar for dollar basis for the relief of personal hardship. When the Queens
lard Government has forwarded an assessment of damage done to other assets,
the Commonwealth will give prompt consideration to the question of assistance
to the State to help in financing the restoration of those assets.
Referring to suggestions that had been made in some quarters
that the Commonwealth Government had acted promptly to assist in
rehabilitation of the bushfire devastated area in Tasmania but had remained
silent about the Queensland floods, Mr. McEwen emphasised that the Commonwealth
does not enter into this field of State administration unless it is asked
to do so by the Premier of the State. The help which the Commonwealth gave
to Tasmania followed the request from the Premier of that State. When the
assessment by the Queensland Government of the damage done by the
Queensland floods has been received, the Commonwealth Government will
give it the same quick consideration that it did in respect of the request
which it received from Tasmania.
CANBERRA, 29th March, 1967. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 VISIT TO CAMBODIA
ARRIVAL PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
OF AUSTRALIA, THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT MP.
It is my privilege to be the first Australian Prime Minister
to visit Cambodia. I do this in response to the gracious invitation of your
eminent Head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk. That invitation was
extended to me through the intermediary of His Excellency Mr. Son Sann
during his visit to Australia in February. I have taken the first opportunity
open to me to respond to such a welcome invitation.
I have come here to see your country with my own eyes and
to meet in person your Head of State, your leaders and the people of Cambodia.
My desire to visit Cambodia has been encouraged by all that I have heard
about your country including happy accounts from my Minister for External
Affairs who has twice been your guest in the last three years. I am delighted
that with the comprehensive programme that has been arranged for my visit.
I shall have an opportunity to see so much of Cambodia, both the spi endour
of the past and the achievements of the present.
I hope that my visit will be viewed by you as a gesture of
goodwill designed to improve and strengthen the ties between us.
Cambodia is one of Australia's close neighbours. Our people
are becoming increasingly aware of each other. Both our countries are
concerned in the welfare of this area of the world in which we live. We
share, I am convinced, a common desire to contribute to the independence,
stability, progress and prosperity of the peoples of South-East Asia and to
the growth of friendly and co-operative relations within the region.
Relations between Cambodia and Australia are close, cordial
and co-operative. In the words of Cambodia's distinguished Head of State,
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, they offer " an eloquent example of successful
co-existence, not merely peaceful but friendly, between nations which have
made different options in their external policies". The friendship between
our two countries, which has grown steadily over the years, is firmly based
on mutual confidence, understanding and respect.
Australians see Cambodia as a singularly peaceful. united
stable and happy country, intent on developing its own characteristic way.
I would hope that Cambodians will increasingly regard
Australia as a friend, sympathetic and willing to co-operate in furthering
the aspirations for peaceful progress of the peoples of the South-East Asian
region. It is my pleasure and honour to bring to the people of
Cambodia the greetings and best wishes of the people of Australia.
March 29, 1967 



I U AMl1' 9 67
LIRAPi
ADDRESS BY THE ACTING PRII, MINISTER AND ,5INISTER FOR
TRADE AND IITDTJSTRY 17R. JOHN McEWEN, AT THE
AUSTRALIAL'N CEREMOINY FOR THE OPENING OF THE
SOUTH-EAST ASIA COTIUVIONWEALTH CABLE
( SEACOHI), SYDINEY, M,, ARCH,
1967
IndexPa ge
Begun in 1958
Close to Asia
Aid to Others
World Co-operation
New Experience 
ADDRESS BY THE ACTITG PRIE MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR
TRADE AND INDUSTRY MR. JOHN McEVIEN, AT THE
AUSTRALIAN CEREI: ONT FOR THE OPENING
OF THE SOUTH-EAST ASIA COIO7VEALTH
CABLE ( SEACOM) SYDNEY, MARCH,
1967
Thank you, Mr. Hulme. It is an honour to be here
today at the making of telecommunications history.
I offer my sincere congratulations, and I am sure
I can add the congratulations of the Australian people, to all
who have made this possible.
We have today the culmination of a great co-operative
ent erpris e. Here is the end res; Jlt of a tremendous amount of
energy and enthusiasm, foresight and vision, scientific and
technical expertise, and organisational skills.
It is a wonderful thing to know that Australia has
been a major partner in this, under the expert guidance of my
colleague, Mr. Hulme.
I know that Australian enterprise has joined with the
Government and made a very big contribution to this great project.
I am told that Australia has supplied more than half
the materials used for the SEACOM cable as well as an appreciable
amount of equipment for the cable stations.
Our manufacturing industries have supplied a
substantial amount of the telecomiunications equipment.
In these days it is easy to take for granted the
miracles of modern technology.
I know from my own work in the Trade field the
tremendous importance of good communications. 
As Acting Prime Minister, and as the responsible
Minister for Australia's international trade I suppose I am as
big a customer as anyone for overseas communication services.
Communication services are an essential tool of
my office. It makes all the difference to have a service which
is speedy, safe, reliable, and efficient!
BEGUN IN_ 1953 There is an interesting connection between today's
ceremony and a conference which I attended at Montreal in 1958.
This was a Commonwealth Trade and Economic Conference,
attended by M. inisterial delegations from all Commonwealth countries.
I was there as leader of the Australian delegation.
The Conference was reviewing the part the Commonwealth
had played in fostering economic prosperity, both for Commonwealth
members, and the world as a whole.
Against this background we were looking to see what more
could be done towards these goals.
One of the more concrete proposals the Conference had
before it was a recommendation of the Commo-nwealth Telecommunications
Board that an around-the-world coaxial telephone cable
might eventually link all Commonwealth countries.
It had only recently become technically possible to
provide such a cable.
There were still at that time many details to be
worked out. Both, technical problems, and financial questions, had
to be resolved. 
* 3.
Irecall with mnuch satisfaction that this Conference
of Commonwealth 1iinisters, in consultation with their Governments,
decided there and then, that Commonwealth countries would join,
to proceed with this visionary plan.
A way would be found to bring the concept to a reality.
One of the rewards of high Government office is to
have a hand in great new plans, and see them come to fruition.
It is immensely satisfying to be here today at the
opening of the Asian link of the Commonwealth Cable a tanigble
result of a decision taken at that Conference where I spoke for
Australia almost 9 years ago.
From that point my former colleague, Sir Charles
Davidson, took up the running.
CLOSE TO ASIA In the intervening years Australia has grown towards
a closer and closer association in the Asian region.
Our traditional ties with Britain and Europe are
strong. They have withstood the strain of geographic isolation
for nearly 2 centuries.
Just as the shrinking of distances in the modern
world is rapidly reducing our isolation from Europe, so it is
bringing our near neighbours nearer.
Geography has put us close to Asia. The course of
events both in Europe and Asia has sharpened our awareness of
the fact. Our trade and commerce with Asia have been growing
steadily. 
.4.
Today, a third of Australia's total exports go to
Asian markets. In 1958, when vie first discussed the possibility
of this cable, the figure was less than a quarter.
Trade and Conmerce will be helped greatly by the faster
and more effective communications which the SEACOI cable will
provide. We have long had close ties with our Conmonwealth
partners in Asia and the Pacific.
The Prime 1, iinister has emphasi7. ed the importance
that the Government attaches to Asian affairs in his statements
and by his personal visits to Asian countries.
As you know, the Prime Mtinister is at present on a
round of official visits, to some of the Asian countries which
have special significance to Australia, and with which he has not
previously had personal contact as Prime 1 Jinister.
AID TO OTHERS In world affairs generally, Australia is playing a
bi[--er role. We recognise the gigantic problems faced by the
developing countries. We have shown ourselves willing to carry a growing
responsibility internationally helping the advancement of the
less-developed countries of the world, and participating
especially in the economic development of the Asian region.
For example, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development is seeking ways of iiiproving the trade
earnings, and hence the income, of the less-developed countries. 
In 1966, Australia led the world by granting
concessions in the Australian tariff to products of these developing
countries. Australia has become a member of the Development
Assistance Committee, a world " club" of major donor countries in
international aid.
Our performance in official economic aid is recognized
as high by any standard.
And it is constantly improving in contrast to the
performance of many other donor countries.
Currently we stand about 4th among all the nations of
the world, in terms of the proportion of our national income which
we devote to international aid.
Ely colleague, Tir. Hasluck, is at present overseas to
attend a meeting of the United Nations' Economic Commission, for
Asia and the Far East.
Australia's full and active membership of this
organisation gives formal recognition of our place in Asian development.
Wie are participating fully in new Asian economic
organisations such as the Asian Industrial Development Council,
and the Asian Development Bank.
Wie know the important role that industrialization can
and must play as it has in our own country in creating jobs,
diversifying exports, and raising living standards.
We will shortly be exploring with Australian industry
the ways and means by which Australia can help the Asian Industrial
Development Council in its objective of fostering joint industrial
undertakings in Asia. 
.6.
WORLD CO-OPERATION There are many forces at work in the world today
many facilities and organisations bringing together the peoples
of the world in closer co-operation.
In them, we play our due part, and even beyond.
It is oftenn'aid that the greatest successes of the
United Nations, have been achieved by its commnunity activities in
such fields as technical, scientific, and educational co-operation.
Some of the broader international efforts break down
through the sheer weight of complexity and conflicting interests.
However, a lot can be achieved by more limited, but
practical measures, towards specific objectives.
Technical training, training in trade promotion techniques
technical assistance with agriculture and industry, education and
medical facilities. These are some of the scores of fields in which there
have been concrete and effective advances in international co-operation
and assistance. The International Telecommunications Union had its
origins a little more than a century ago.
From its very beginnings, telecommunications broke
new ground in international co-operation.
Certainly, nothing contributes more to mutual.
understanding and help between nations than the breaking down of
physical barriers by modern advances in transport and communicationo. 
.7.
NEW~ EPERIENCE Today we stand at the threshold of a new experience
in communication. One result will be that the lives of millions of people
in Asia will becox.-e involved with our lives as never before.
We set our' course to the future to dedicate this new,
technical, achievement to the goal of the betterment of all the
people who live along its path.
For Australia this new development in communications
comes at a time which is crucial for the future of our own country
and our relationship with Asia.
I have mentioned various unfolding decisions of government
directed towards our association with the countries of Asia, but
in addition we have been adjusting to the political evolution of
our neighbours in Asia.
We will press on with our policies, so that Australia
may further a continuing vigorous and independent relationship
with Asia. We are, as it were, a bridge between 2 ancient cultures
and ways of life European and Asian.
From our shoreso will flow modern concepts of science
and technology, To us will come the enrichment of Asia's cultural
and social aspirations. We have our great achievement of today this new
telecommunications era.
Let us also direct ourselves today, and in all our
tomorrows, in this region of A" sia and the Pacific, to peace,
friendship and plenty. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 CAMBODIA
DINNER IN HONOUR OF PRINCE SIHANOUK GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT, AT PHNOM PENH 31ST miC i_ 1967
FOLLOWING AR. THE MAIN POINTS FROM A SPEECH
MADE BY THE PRIIME MINISTER, 151. HAROLD HOLT:
We near the end of our visit to Cambodia. It is a
visit from which w-have learned much, a visit we have greatly
enjoyed. We are all better inlormed about Cambodia, its
country and its poople&gt; its aspiration and its problems. I
hope we are all wiser also in our understanding of its policies.
A visit of only three days but thoughtfully planned
from Head oL State and his administration to good team work with
our own distinguished Ambassador and his staff which has enabled
us to absorb a widely rcpr, sentative s-ries of features of your
national life. Some conclusions stand out in the mind. I had an
awareness previously that substantial national progrcss was being
made under the leadership of Head of State. What I had not fully
appreciated was the centuries old Khmer culture and tradition so
graphically demonstrated at Angkor and reflected with remarkable
fidelity back to early centuries in the classical royal ballet.
This deep sense of national pride, fierce spirit of
independence associated with the tradition of early civilizations
have clearly influenced your national policy of neutrality and
non alignment. It has also been reflected in features of your
life which have a special Cambodian flavour, your capacity to
marry happily the practical with the aesthetic the ability to
maintain a zestful way of life whilst applying your energy to
the development of a modern economically advo ncing state.
This has been a highly educational visit because
education builds knowledge, builds understanding and understanding
builds friendship. Our relations were warm and friendly before
my visit but I feel that they will be even w-armer and deeper
as a consequence of it.
Your ministers and officials have made it possible
for me to see some of the striking and imaginatively conceived
architectural features of your capital city, to s-e something of
your proud cultural heritage both past and present.
Mrs. Holt and I gr-atly appreciated our audience with
Her Majesty the Queen Mother and I found our own long talk together
both informative and most valuable as well for the understanding
of the Cambodian situation as for a bettor understanding of the
problems of this region.
We have noted the encouragement given to such cultural
activities as your Royal Ballet, your choral and instrumental
music by the Queen Mother and your Head of State. We have seen
convincing evidence of Cambodiat purposeful efforts to achieve
under your leadership the full stature of a modern state.
Industrial developments here ii Phnom Penh, harbour development
at Sihanoukville and the many examples graphically presented at
the State Exhibition wher; His Excellency Mr. Son Sann conducted
us. This was also seen and enjoyed by a great many of my fellow
countrymen. / 2 
I 2-
There is a firm basis to our friendship. It is
founded on mutual respect, a recognition of national identity
and integrity, a mutually helpful and trustful relationship.
We like you wish to be left undisturbed to develop our nation.
We ar-both small nations in terms of population. Aus: tralia
has a vast territory and is rich in resources but tLcse are
not easily gained. We have to contend to an extent unknown to
you with drought, flood and bushfire. We have l. gc t-' acts
of arid desert. We are neither a belligeront nor stic
people but we have contributed where we have thought called
for to goals of security and economic advancement for others.
Since becoming Head of Australian Government it has
been my purpose to become familiar with Australian neighbours
countries in Asia, to meet and talk with their leaders and to
learn at first hand something of their way of life, th,: ir
peoples accomplishments, ideas and problems. This process
has been richly rewarded in Cambodia, I hope the value I have
found in such a visit will encourage your Head of State to
make a visit when he can to Australia. He has the warm
invitation of my Government to do so. We both believe our
countries have a contribution to make to a peaceful and more
prosperous world. May our friendship contribute usefully
to this. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 LAOS
SPEECH GIVEN BY TIE PRIME, MINISTER,-MR._ HAROLD HOLT
AT THE STATE DINNER IN VIENTIANE 1APIL, 197
Your Highnesses, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
First, Mr. Prime Minister, may I thank you very
warmly for the welcome you have given to me and Mrs. Holt
and all those who have accompanied us here to Laos. We
found the warmth of welcome extended to us on our arrival
today confirmed by all the experience which has since come
to us during a memorable day in this capital city of your
count ry. It is something of an occasion for my own country
when for the first time in our history its Prime Minister
makes a visit to this historic country and its notable
capital of Vientiane, and we have appreciated greatly the
ma~ nner in which you have welcomed us here.
We welcome, Prime Minister, your assumption of
the leadership of your country. We were confident that
under that leadership your country would grow in strength
and would attract support and confidence. We ourselves
were confident in that belief and we congratulate you that
this confidence has been so strongly evidenced in the
elections which brought you added strength when they were
last held. This visit I am making reflects the interest of
Australia in an area of the world which previously did not
exercise our attention very much. It is only in comparatively
recent years wie have come to realize how deeply involved our
own future and wiellbeing are in the future and wellbeing of
the countries to our north, our nei.-hbours ol' the countries
of South East Asia in particular and of the Asian and Pacific
regions generally. It is particularly gratifying to me that you should
have admitted me, as I understand th 3 first visiting foreign
Prime Minister, to be allowed to enter your Cabinet and have
talks there in confidence with you and with your colleagues.
We have greatly valued this discussion. We feel that this
has led to a better understanding of the problems of your
country. kWe believe that it will be of assistance to us in
the decisions which wie shall be making in future as to how
we can best bring assistance and encouragement to you.
Vie respect the neutrality which is the officioal policy
of your country and which has been assured to you if others
observe that assurance under the Geneva agreement. We know
that, like ourselves, you have an urgent desire for a stable
and continuing peace, that in a condition of peace you hope
to be able to develop a country which has knowun so ma,, ny rzivages,
both fromi nature and from man in years that have gone by. We
know that, because of the security probleLm you face, there is
only a fraction of your budget that you can devote -to
constructive purposes, cons-1r'uctive works th:. tU will help to
build a better life for your people. a s 
-2
Australia is well aw,-are of the inroads which defence
expenditure makes upon the national resources of finance and of
manpower and we have found it necessary in our contribution to
our own security and that of others in the area in which we live
to double our expenditure on defence over a period of four years,
and this Irs meant that less money is available for our own
development, less money than we would wvish to see applied is
available for the assistance of others. But despite these
demands we have done what we could to bring assistance to others,
and I was delighted to find the ready recognition on your own
part of the value which this assistance has meant to your own
country. It is fashionable for some who do not wish you well and
do not wii-sh us well, to describe this process of assistance as a
new type of colonialism, the neo-colonialist of the propaganda
which you and I read about so often. So far as Australia is
concerned, we emphatically reject any such interpretation of the
help we have been trying to give. For our pa-. rt this is genuine
help, help designed to assist others to a better way of life.
Of course every country which gives assistance has a
motive of self-interest, one sort or acnothler, but thu self-interest
which I believe is uppermost in the minds of those giving
assistance around the world at this time is a sincere desire to
build a better world, to enable countries less fortunate, less
able to make provision for themselves because of military threat
or because of poverty of resources, to ca-rry on the work of
progress in their country as a consequence of the aid which more
fortunate countries can bring to them.
a basis oAf nylo aanid, wn, o* th ichi t'Auuh st) r. nayl icao nidsit iaobnl, e ntoo t giwviet h iasn yg iovebnl ignoatti oonn
on the part of the aid receiver. It is gladly given in the hope
thalt this will help to make a better life for the people of that
country. We recognise the problems and the difficulties which
face your owin country. We have admired the courage of your
Prime Minister in leading the country with such distinction and
in uniting the Laotian people in the face of tremendous
difficulties. We have also admired the progress that your
Prime Minister has brought about and the stability he has achieved.
I am very pleased that under his leadership the bonds of friendship
have grown to such an extent between the, two countries. This kind
of friendship, I hope, will continue in the future. 



\ 1F R'S 104
ASIAN TOUR 1967Q IAPR961
VISIT TO LAOS Q18RAg"
ARRIVAL PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
OF AUSTRALIA, THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT, MP'.
I welcome the opportunity to make personal contact and
discuss mutual problems and interests with the Prime Minister, His
Highness Prince Souvanna Phouma, and the members of the Royal Lao
Government, and to see what I can in the time available of the Lao people
and their country. I am grateful for the invitation of the Royal Lao Government
to visit Laos which enables me to do these things.
I am also most grateful, as well as honoured, that His
Majesty the King has seen fit to accord me an audience and a luncheon
tomorrow at Luang Prabang.
We were glad to receive His Majesty's son, the Crown
Prince, in Australia on a State visit in 1965.
His Majesty's brother, as Charge d'Affaires in Canberra
has, of course, kept me and my government informed of developments in
Laos and I might add, has told me of the beauties of Luang Prabang.
My visit to Laos fits into the pattern of visits which, as
you may know, I am paying to Australia's neighbours. We have come to
realise how clesely and inextricably our fortunes are bound up with those
of our neighbours, and we are now making further efforts to come to
understand these neighbours better. In recent years, Laos and Australia
have developed close and continuing contacts with each other through our
Embassies in each other's capitals, as well as through our co-operative
ventures under the Colombo Plan, in ECAFE and the Mekong Committee,
and in the Asian Development Bank, to mention only a few organisations.
I believe it essential for Australia and its neighbours such
as Laos to maintain and improve their contact and mutual comprehension,
and jointly to tackle the problem of more rapid development in the area.
On the basis of the experience we have had and the skills we have acquired
in Australia, we have tried to assist within our resources to help Laos'
efforts to develop as quickly as possible.
Our aid under the Colombo Plan has been varied.
Communications are, of course, a basic problem in
Australia, and it was fitting that our first project immediately after the
independence of Laos was the provision of substantial quantities of roadmaking
equipment designed to assist in the re-opening of the road systems.
More recently, we have continued this interest in communications with
the provision of radio receivers and of material for the Lao National
Radio and the two transmitters and mast for the Luang Prabang station
which will be arriving shortly. / 2 
-2
For the rest, our aid, which last year was in the vicinity
of $ US 1, 300, 000, comprises especially our participation in the
financial-stabilisation programme, including the Foreign. Exchange
Operations Fund and our Commodihy Tmport Programme, the development
of our livestock improvemaent project at Na Pheng, tlhe provision of the
bulk of the school supplies required by the Lao primary schools, our
financial contribution to the construction of the Nam Ngum Dam, and the
provision of some 35 scholarships a year in Australia and of some experts
here. We are also acutely aware of the military problems of the
area, including those of Laos.
In 1962, the proud, free, peaceful peaple of Laos accepted
neutrality internationally through the Geneva Accords. Though we
ourselves were not a party to those Accords, we nevertheless accepted
them and have respected them. We respect fully the neutral status of
Laos. We shared the Lao disappointment, not long after the Accords
had been signed, to find that one signatory, North Viet Nam, had not withdrawn
its troops but, on the contrary, and particularly as its aggression against
South Viet Nam increased, was violating Laotian territory both in order to
infiltrate thousands of troops through Laos to South Viet Nam and in order
to dominate certain areas of Laos,
We hatve watched with admiration the response of the Lao
people to this Invasion.
We are aware of the burden which the maintenance of its
defence forces imposes on Laos in terms of manpower and finance.
We are aware of the toll of soldiers and civilians, and the
suffering of the wounded soldiers and injured or dispossessed civilians.
We have admired the progress which the Lao Army has made
over the past two years or more in clearing out the enemy from Governmentheld
areas and creating a protective screen behind which the economic
development of Laos can proceed.
Mrs. Holt and I are looking forward very much to our visit.
We shall meet again at the press conference arranged
towards the end of my visit when I shall be glad to deal with the questions
you may wish to put to me.
APRIL 1st. 1967 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 LAOS
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HAROLD HOLT,
AT DINNER GIVEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN Ai1ASSADOR
AT VIENTIANE 2ND APRIL, 1967
Altesses, Excellences, Mesdames, Messieurs and that will be
the end of my French for tonight! I am not obliged to continue
in French, as the Australian Ambassador seems to have performed
this function for me already.
First, let me say how happy my wife and I are to be
among such a distinguished gathering tonight. Before I put
the toast to you, may I say that it is with much regret my wife
and I and our party come close to the end of this memorable
first visit to Laos.
We have not only greatly enjoyed our visit, we feel
we have learned something which will be helpful to us and we
hope will be helpful to you. We've been greatly impressed by
the number of people we've met, Laotians and others from other
countries here, who all seem to manifest a spirit of dedication
and enthusiasm for what they are able to accomplish in this
country. It is an inspiring experience which we shall take
away with us. It is in the spirit of the warmest friends hip, of
admiration for your distinguished leadership in His Majesty
The King and the Prime Minister and his colleagues of the Cabinet,
supported as they are so strongly by the people of Laos, that
I ask you to join with me and assist an Australian Embassy and
an Australian Prime Minister to honour the toast of His Majesty
The King and the Prime Minister and the people of Laos. May
our friendship ever deepen and increase. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 LAOS
JOINT AUSTRALIAN/ LAO COVIvUNIQUE ISSUED AT VIENTIANE 2ND APRIL, 1967
At the invitation of the Royal Government of Laos
the Right Honourable Harold Holt, Prime Minister of Australia,
in the course of his tour of Asia, paid an official visit to
Laos from 1st to 3rd April, 1967.
The Right Honourable the Prime Minister of Australia
and his party were the object of a warm welcome on the part of
the Lao Government and people.
The Australian Prime Minister, Mrs. Holt and those
accompanying them were received on 2nd April in Luang Prabang
by His Majesty the King Sri Savang Vatthana and Her Majesty
the Queen, who were pleased to offer them lunch after the
Royal Audience. The Right Honourable Harold Holt, Prime Minister of
Australia, and His Highness Prince Souvanna Phouma, Prime Minister
and Head oi the Provisional Government of Lao National Union,
proceeded to a frank and friendly exchange of views on the situation
in Lads and on international questions of common interests. These
discussions took place on Saturday, 1st April in Vientiane in an
atmosphere of frank cordiality and mutual comprehension.
The following were present these discussions:
On the Australian side:-
1. The Right Honourable Harold Holt, Prime Minister.
2. His Excellency Ambassador Barrie Dexter,
Australian Ambassador to Laos.
3. His Excellency Sir Laurence McIntyre, C. B. E.,
Deputy Secretary of the Department of External Affairs.
4. Mr. D. Munro, First Assistant Secretary of the
Prime Minister's Department.
Mr. F. W. Jennings, of the Prime Minister's Department.
On the Lao side:-
1. His Highness Prince Souvanna Phouma, Prime Minister,
Minister of National Defence, Foreign Affairs,
Veterans Affairs and Rural Development.
2. His Excellency Leuam Insisiengmay, Vice Premier,
Minister of National Education, Fine Arts and
Sport-South.
3. His Excellency Pheng Phongsavan, Miuistar of the
Interior and Social Welfare and in Charge of the
Ministry of Public Health.
4. His Excellency Sisouk Na Champassak, Minister of
Finance.
His Excellency Inpeng Suryadhay, Minister of Justice
and in charge of the Ministry of Planning and
Co-operation.
6. His Excellency Chao Boun Om. Na Champassak,
Minister of Religious Affairs.
7. His Excellency Keo Viphakone, Secretary of State
for Social Welfare. a. / 2. 
2-
8. His Excellency Soukan Vilaysane, Secretary of State
for Veterants Affairs.
9. His Excellency Ouday Souvannavong, Ambcssador of
Laos in Canberra.
Mr. Tianethone Csantharasy, Secretary-General of
Cabinet.
His Highness Prince Souvanna Phouma expressed the feelings
of profound gratitude of the Lao Government and people for the
positive an-constructive aid being given by Australia to Laos,
and in particular its substantial contribution to the maintenance
of the stability of the KIP.
His Highness also emphasised the desire of the Royal
Government, not withstanding the state of war, imposed by a foreign
country, which prevails over the territory of the kingdom, to
exploit the natural resources of the country in order to become
progressively self-sufficient, and he re-affirmed in conclusion
the policy of neutrality which the Royal Government desires to
pursue in accordance with the Geneva accords of 1962.
The Right Honourable Harold Holt expressed his and
Mrs. Holt's gratitude to the Royal Lao Government for its
invitation which enabled him to make personal contact and
discuss mature problems and interests with their leaders and
to see something of the Lao people and their country.
The Right Honourable Harold Holt emphasised that the
Australian aid is accorded without conditions, and that Australia
will continue to make its contribution to the economic development
of Laos and the stability of its currency.
The Australian Prime Minister congratulated the Lao
Government, Army and people who, under the courageous and
enlightened leadership of His Highness Prince Souvanna Phouma,
succeeded in surviving despite the repeated attacks by a more
pow., erful neighbour against the sovereignty, the territorial
integrity and the neutrality of Laos.
The Australian Prime Minister invited His Highness
the Prime Minister and Prince Souvanna Phouma to pay a state
visit to Australia at a mutually convenient time, His Highness
Prince Souvanna Phouma accepted this invitation with pleasure.
The statement expressed the hope that all countries
signatory to the 1962 Geneva accords on Laos would scrupulously
observe the arrangements foreseen in those accords, such
observance would help bring back peace not only to the countries
of the Indo-Chinese Peninsula, but also of South East Asia. 



07 t'
ASIAN TOUR 1967 LA OS
PRESS CONFE2RENCE GIVEN BY TIM PRIMEl MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT AT VIENTIANE 2ND~ APRIL, 1967
Ladies and Gentlemen:
There will be a joint coiimnunique released by the
Prime Minister of Laos and myself, the terms of which we
agreed on. That will be distributed to you later, maybe
by the time we finish here.
I don't know that I need to go into detail on it
because it deals with a number of items which you would
predictably expect to find in this communique the fact
that we had a very frankc and friendly exchange of views on
the situation in Laos and on international questions of
common interest, this was particularly the case of course
in our discussions in the Cabinet Room, althoujgh I have had
opportunities additional to that of talking with the Prime
Minister and also some very interesting discussions a little
earlier today with His Majesty -the King, who of course keeps
himself very fully informed on all that is happening inside
his own country. In the Commiunique you viill find the Prime Minister
expressing feelings of gratitude of the Lao Government and
people for the positive and constructive aid given by Australia
and in particular its substantial contribution to the
maintenance of the stability of the KIP.
One aspect which has interested me very much while here
has been to learn how vital to the economic wellbeing of the
country and its capacity to engage in work of development
is the stability of this currency fund or the stability
of the currency assisted by this fund to which Australia is
one of a group of contributors. At a distance it is not
easy to understand why so much importance was attached to
this in this country but both the Prime Minister and the King
are emphatic that this is vital to the wellbeing of the nation
at this time, although of course they hope that, notwithstanding
the state of war which is being imposed on them by a foreign
country and part of their territory being held in enemy hands,
they still aspire to exploit the natural resources of the country
in order to become progressively self-sufficient.
And the Prime Minister of Laos reaffirmed in conclusion
in the Communique the policy of neutrality which the Royal
Government desires to pursue in accordance with the Geneva accords
of 1962. There is, perhaps, an aspect of the Communique which
I might elaborate to a degree for you because it will, I think-,
amplify what Ii~ aid very briefly last night when speaking about
what has come to be known as the new colonialism. The process
of support, whether defence support or of economic assistance,
which some free world countries have given to those under
threat or actual aggression, the economic assistance which they
have given them in order to better their way of life, has become
I* course and understandably an object of attack by those who
hold a very different philosophy and who see the future of the
world in very different terms from those which we hope for
ourselves. .0 0/. 2. 
-2
But all the propaganda seems to me to run the one
way, and I think it not inappropriate, and certainly it could
fittingly be said in this country, that the interpretation
which we in Australia, and I believe, people of good will
everywhere, place on these processes of military support and
economic aid that interpretation can take in reality and in
all sincerity a very much more commendable aspect.
Nowi I can illustrate that in relation to this country
and as from Australia. Such aid as Australia gives is given
without any conditions attached. We make no loans any funds
we make available are made available by way of grant, they
require no obligations on the part of those who receive the aid.
And you may well ask has not Australia some self-interest in this
nmatter, as indeed other countries which give their aid either
the military kind or of an economic kind. And of course we have
a self-interest in this sense, that we are looking towards a
world order in the future.
The progress towards that may be painstakingly slow,
and at times difficult. VWe may have our setbacks but if we are
working together for that better world order, then those of us
who are more favourably placed by reason of a wealth of natural
resources or the prosperity we have managed to create ourselves,
if wie can give assistance along the road to better standards and
greater security to others, then not only are we able to do
something useful and indeed valuable and helpful fox' them, but
we are helping to build the better kind of world in which I
believe most people in the world today, certainly people of
good will and of thoughtfulness, wish to see established.
Here is a country in w~ hich vie find, as I said last
night, both the ravages of nature and the ravages of man
which have held back its development and the standards of its
people. It is led by men of intelligence and courage. But
its progress will be painfully slow unless it can look to others
to help botn in securing its national integrity and identity
but also in enabling it to make better progress along the road
to a better standard of life.
This is a very strong reaction which has developed
within me as I studied, even in the brief time here, the
circumstances of' this country, have pondered over what we
and others are trying to do to help and have thought of this
against the background of these propaganda attacks. The new
colonialism, I would allege, is the policy line which denies
the underdeveloped countries of the world means of a modern
techinological assistance which would have them chained to the
age-old enemies of mankind down through the ages, of ill-health,
disease, illiteracy, poverty, lack of' national security,
instability in a financial sense these are things which so
many people of the world have had to live with down through
the centuries, and those who are charged today with being
neo-colonialists are, with good will and of sincere purpose,
trying to improve this situation. So I must throw back in the
teeth of those of the propagandists their charge. They are
the people who, by denying these opportunities and this security,
would be keeping chained to the past, not merely a colonial past
of a superior power, but a colonialism in the sense of these
deficiencies of the past the ill-health, the illiteracy and
these other matters of which I have spoken.
Now, you wouldn't expect me in two brief days here
to attempt to comment, nor would it be proper for me to do so,
about domestic matters of this country, but there may be sorie
other matters you would like to put to me by way of questions,
and I invite you to do so. o/ 3&amp; 
-3
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, do you think that your two days her'e
have brought home to you the need for action to correct these
deficiencies? That means do you see a need for Australia to do
more about it, and so are we going to do so?
P. M. Australian aid has taken particular forms which have
been sought of use by the Government here and I stress the fact
that this particular kind of aid is helping to keep the currency
strong we regard as of vital importance. As you will be aware
Australia has an aid programme which extends over many countries,
some of the Colombo plan countries and others who are not covered
by the Colombo plan.
Contrary to the experience in several other aid-giving
countries of the world, our aid donation is on a rising curve,
where as it has either been relatively static or has tended to
recede in some of the industrialised countries which have been
looked to as large aid givers. So that Australia can rightly
claim that, considering that w., e have our own problems of
developing the continent, that today we have a substantial
contribution to make to security problems of the area and actually
double our defence programme over the period of the l--st four years,
that we ourselves are still a capital importing country.
The fact that -we rank amongst the first four or five
countries of the world in per capita aid giving, I think establishes
our good faith. Just what total provision vie shall be making for
aid in the period immediately ahead will be resolved when -we come
to consider the other requirements of the Budget. But wie shall be
doinc, what wie can to help this and other countries who have been
in receipt of aid from us.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, I wonder if you like to say, on the
results of your visit, your trips thus fa-r, if you see co-operation
between Australia and the countries of South East Asia extending
from aid and economic ties into the political field?
P. M. . Well, there are some instru~ mentalities of course already
in existence which enable close co-operaction in various fields.
There is ASPAC, there is a kind of co-operation which a group of
us evidenced at the Manila Conference, there is the positive economic
development which the countries who are covered in the scope, either
as contributors or as beneficiaries, of the Asian Development Bank.
These are all, I believe, significant developments
occurring over a comparatively short period of time. And I find
a growing disposition on the part of leaders of governments in
the countries of this area. to work more closely together to build
friendships one . iith the other. Whether they are of one pa-rticular
school of thought, or whether they belong to a particular grouping
of nations in their foreign policies, or whether, as in the case of
Cambodia and Laos, they are countries whose neutrality has become
internationally recognised, there is still amongst them all this
disposition to co-operate more closely together.
Just what forms that takes will vary and in some of
the directions I have mentioned. It may be there is roori for
others. We have yet to see for example, clearly what will emerge
in Indonesia, and I would expect it, with the very rapid and quite
dramatic growith of the trade of Japan that Japan would be found
taking a more active role in political developments in the area. 



7 ER'S 1
I J APR 1967
ASIAN TOUR 1967* LAOS I1R8 10 ' A
FAREWELL SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
AT VIENTIANiE AIRPORT 3RD APRIL, 1967
Prime Minister, Your Highnesses, You~ r Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
There is always a sadness when one parts from good
friends, and that is how Mrs. Holt and I and, I am sure, others
of my party are feeling this morning.
We came to Laos as a good friend of your country
but in the short time that we've been here wie have found it
sufficiently lone. to bave built some personal friendships
which we sincerely hope will endure.
We came to learn something of the problems of your
country and to meet your people and see them in their own
native land, and this to us has been a richly rewarding
experience iii knowledge and in a deeper understanding.
We fully appreciate, Prime M~ inister, the importance
to you and, indeed, to your friends around the world, of a
neutrality which will be faithfully observed by other countries.
We hope that countries of good will, whatever their
general political character may be, will join in the efforts
to which Australia will gladly subscribe in promoting the
security, the peace, the progress and the prosperity of the
people of Laos. I look foraiard to welcoming you and Her Highness
to Australia, I hope perhaps even later this year, when you
can find it convenient to come and visit us. It will give
my countrymen great pleasure to join in the expression I now
give you of good will from the Australian people. May Laos
long endure in peace, w--ith progress and prosperity and security
for its people. 



( State me-nt,' by Z': m iiterst
and Minis,' JT for Trar 1,1L us r.)
The ñ iU7OAL. Cp
ofth Ast iraIicn:--sys te o f for, selected
manufactured and smL:' C. r-, oi. teo2A less doveloped
countries Mr J, œ ii. and Mirister
f or Trade and lnC' Str;,' C. 11U-."' L U02)' y.
wfaiss X inrdc.' d~ i; pr efer 2nce s
a~ waiver uwniana, r . oe rS f tdhi ue r sCt ! m12c .~ . ai:? sand had oT brtaadinee. d
It would bec nece3siary c -iLt O'U-1i srtion again before
the additional -preferi. nce., ~ r :. 7,) ueJ
Th.-in-. Lo e' u-ii s as to
-ited uul-tc SL-a 7; etul-ed and semi-
? 2afufacturod o-r~ 2-V pr f rences.
As a result the .7Qr~-c 1 auot~ s would
be un craSseC~( ) w&gt; 1~ cx 2X aVdit1 onal products
for inclusi-on -Cne ~ yi-i r: i' cfthad been paid
to suggestions iby las:: cev.;' 6c., tre themselves
all such suy gotionc v 1qc orilr c d, Mr McEwen
said. Althoape it. aucc t the long term
benefits which . Li ( Correa dorive frrom the
Australian profo-nnc ss-; e u. 1-e-r ra'e,. dy indications
. Iiaat it hr d stmia-e rco1&gt; ath Imoducts
t o vv hico h ffrc z i&amp;&gt; s I-J . c ri ont
h a s, h ov,' ev er, a ot v: LweCc ai -L 6h.. context of the
limited Au--2' 1j. 3-ir' 1 O t 1_ r hat its action
might als~ o -, erve as a Icatc to oV' 1c2CtQ c
It -wiuiJ s-ylrls: P o to be introduced
to give oifect toc the nevi ! tIro ncer, . D-cils of the commodities
involved aynl ote dinsr-i yica-s ., ou'J be available
when this legislation s rodc.
CANBERR~ A T.
3RD APRIL, 1967? 21/ 67T 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 41~
HONG KONG 10AR16
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY TIM~ PRIMAE MINISPER9 QSIRAOV
MR. HAROLD HOLT 3RD APRIL,,_ 1967.
PRIME MINISTER: I think most of you are aware of the reasons
particula reasons anyhow why I am making this journey. It will
include, apart from this visit in transit to Hong Kong, the visits
I have already made to Laos and to Cambodia and from there we
proceed to Taiwan and South Korea.
Australia over recent years has become increasingly
involved in the affairs of this region of the world in a commercial
and trading sense particularly since the dramatic growth of our
trade with Japan. As striking evidence of that, vie have now become
the second or third largest customer for the export of Japanese
goods and Japan has now outstripped the United Kingdom as the
largest purchaser in value of Australian exports. But it is in
the military and diplomatic fields that we are also finding ourselves
increasingly involved in the affairs of the region and so, since
becoming Prime Minister, I have tried to develop a closer and better
knowledge of the countries, the leaders and the peoples within the
area and to manifest Australia's growing interest by my own presence
and that of members of my official party,
Last year, I went to the centres where Australia had its
own forces operating, whether in South Vietnam in direct military
operations or in other places such as Malaysia, where we have
people on station in the strategic reserve, or in Borneo where,
at that time, they were serving in aid of Malaysian forces in
coping with the Indonesian Confrontation Policy. This year I
have sought to round off that sariee of visits by including the
countries which I have not previously visited in this area, and
once I ha, v e completed this tour, I think, with the exception of
Mainland China, I will just about have covered the field. But
there is no specific political purpose, I mean I am not here to
negotiate treaties or enter into any special agreements
with any of the countries concerned, as you will gather from the
composition of the two countries pursuing official policies of
neutrality, and South Korea which has joined with us in forming
part of the friendly forces engaged ini support of the South
Viotnamese, and Taiwan with which Australia has had a long
friendship and a growing trade connection.
So it is, as you will gather, not a simple uncomplicated
pattern of visits, but the prime purpose is to get to know the
countries better, make Australian policies better known to them.
An,* there is, I think, an indirect consequence which is of
considerable value to us. Thanks to the assistance we received
from people like yourselves, the countries and peoples and their
problems are made increasingly known to my fellow countrymen in
Australia as a result of these visits.
Now, perhaps having said that I could try to cope with
any questions you may have.
Q. Mr. Holt, would you say it is safe to say, that
Australia is becoming now, more and more Asia conscious and
possibly might even want to get into Asia in a way of speaking?
P. M. Wiell, vie are in Asia in a very practical and realistic
fashion. We are not only in Asia geographically and a certain part
of South East Asia, but the ullustration I have given of the growth
of Asia, the involvement of military forces, the increasing
participation of Australians in the various instrumentalities such
as ASPAC, the Asian Development Bank, SEATO, and ANZUS treaty
arrangements these are an i'llustration of active Australian
particiaation in the affairs of Asia. So it is not so much a case
/ 2. 
-2
of becomiing involved in the work for the first time there has
been an increase in the degree of participation. This doesn't
imply that vwe have diminishied our interest in other areas of the
world. Later in the year I shall be making visits to Canada for
the Australian participation in Expo 67 and in the course of that
will be making a visit to Washington and also to London
Waahington and London still being, of course, the principal centres
of diplomatic interest for my country.
Q. You put a great deal of stress on trade but a number of
people in other Asian countries are somewhat disturbed by what is
referred to generally as the White Australia policy I refer to
immigration.
P. M. Well in my experience, that conccrn is manifested more
by representatives of the press than by representatives of the
government concerned. I find on behalf of the governments
concerned, an intelligent appreciation of Australia's attitude and
the basis for its policy. I think too, there is an inadequate
realisation of the liberalisation of the policy which has occurred
over recent years. Just to illustrate that, there are some thirty
thousand people who have come into Australia in the years since the
war and -\: lould not have been eligible to enter Australia under the
rules and arrangements which applied prior to that time. There
are at this time some twelve thousand students from countries of
Asia in Australian universities and colleges. Same six thousand
Asian citizens over recent years have become fully naturalised
Australian subjects. Any Asian who marries in Australia several
do they enter Australia with full rights as residents, their
children are full citizens of Australi. So there refmains a
degree of misconception about the policy and its operation. And
the liberalised arrangements make provision also for people to
be admitted ,. ho can make a contribution to Australia's growth
development I think that when one considers the numbers involved
and the manner in which citizens of Asia are currently received in
Australia, it will be seen there has been a considerable liberalisation.
It was said not long ago in my presence, and I think it
is a fact, that there is no country in the world in w--hich a citizen
of Asia or a citizen of a country in Africa would find themselves
better or more comfortably treated as they would in Australia,
outside of their own country. This would be their experience and
this is echoed by the students and others who come to the country.
We find that on their return they are the best ambassadors we can
hope for in building better relations with my country.
Q. Prime Minister Holt, during your talks with Prince
Sihanouk did he give you the impression that Cambodia might be
willing to re-establish diplomatic relations with the U. S.?
P. M. Well, my talks with Prince Sihanouk were private and
confidential talks. It is not part of my purpose to narrate
publicly what passed between us. If he wishes to make any
comment about the talks, that of course, is within his province
to do so, but I regard the discussion as a confidential one and
I wouldn't feel free to narrate.
Q. W~ ell, did you get the impreosion that Cambodia might
now be willing to resume contact a~ ith the U. S.?
P. M. Well, I don't think this is other than trying to present
the question in a slightly different form, as you have done.
Prince Sihanouk has made it publicly clear that his country pursues
a policy of neutrality and non alignment. I believe he wishes to
proceed on a basis of friendship and peace with other countries of
the world, but I don't want to put into hiis mouth, words which he
is quite capable of expressing himself. e s/ 3 
-3
Q. Acting in the interests of the United States, which you
did in Cambodia, were any messages exchanged throui'i the Australian
Embassy or throughi yourself?
PM. If you mean, did I purport or attempt to convey messages
from any other government, the answer is a simple no, and I don't
want to go any further than that in any reference to what passed
between Prince Sihanouk and myself. We had a most valuable and
interesting talk together running over an hour and three quarters.
I am quite certain that he w4ouldn't have talked as freely as he
did unless he felt confident in what passed between us. He
expreased a basis of respect of mutual confidence and that is the
basis on which I wish to treat it.
Q. Mr. Holt you canft consider giving us detailed information
about your talks in Cambodia. What about the other countries you
did visit, did any really significant, really important points
emerge7
P. M. Well, I don't want to imply that nothing really important
emerged in Cambodap. It was a most important visit, a very valuable
one. I came away myself with a much clearer appreciation, I believe,
of the basis of policy in Cambodia. I hadn't realised previously
the intense feeling in -the country for the retention of the Khmner
tradition, the separate identity of Cambodia related to a historic
past goin,~ back over many centuries, and it became more readily
understandable to me why Cambodia had been following the particular
line it has in its foreign policies over recent years.
The only other country so far that I have visited has
been Laos, and -there we had a special interest based on the strategic
importance of the country in relation to the security of South East
Asia generally. The fact that Australia has been a contributor of
aid in useful diroctions there, has been a good basis of friendship
between our two countries and I was glad to build on this by the
personal contacts I made with the King and Prime Minister and other
leaders of the country. The impression gained there encouraged me
to say something on this aspect of propa, anda, which we have to face
so frequently from communist sources, that the programmes of aid
and processes of aid are those producing a brand of neo-colonialism.
And I attempted to deal with that directly by referring to the
situation of Laos as illustrating the importance and the values of
these programmes of aid. Here is a country which is able to preserve
its identity, is able to improve its material circumstances, is able
to make itself more secure in a military sense because friends with
goodwill and of no ulterior purpose have made resources available
to them, and given them support.
Here is a country which haj had to face the ravages of
man and the ravages of nature under conditions of great difficulty
for many years. And without this kind of aid, then the oldest
colonialism of all, the enslavement to the age-old enemnies of
mankind of ill health, pover ty, illiteracy, lack of securitsy
in onets national affairs these things would be perpetuated,
I believe, as a result of the kind of aid that countries of
goodwill are giving to Laos, vie will help to overcome what
otherwise would be an enslavement to the past and a chaining
to these backward destructive processes.
Q. Mr. Holt, speaking of Cambodia there waa a story
in the press to the effect that Prince Siliianouk had more or less
admitted to you the fact that North Vietnam was flying troops and
materials to South Vietnam through the country of Cambodia and
that he, or his government, would make efforts to cease tjaat.
Is that so?
P. M. I can see that you won't take no for an answer, because
I have already said I have no intention of publicly indicating
what passed privately between us. 0 0/ 40 
4
Q. How would you account for that story getting out then?
P. M. I would have to be accountable for every story which
appears in the press relating either to myself, my-discussions
or those of other people. I learned with some amusement shortly
after leaving Australia that I was limping my way through my
Asian tour as a result of some injuries I sustained in the water
in Australia. I had a couple of abrasions but I thought I was
getting along without noticeable defects in my pedestrian,
Q. Excuse me Mr. Halt, would you be interested in the
possibility of increased armed commitment in Vietnam and
particularly after Air Marshal Ky's visit to your country?
P. M. We have already indicated publicly the extent of our
military participation and we have no plans to increase that at
the present time.
Q. Don't you find it rather embarrassing, Mr. Holt, that
while Australia is committed in Vietnam, her racial partner
Britain is not committed. Whereas Britain seeks American support
in Europe. Is it not embarrassing? ( The main portion of the
text of this question was unintelligible due to badly spoken
English).
P. M. No, I don't find it embarrassing. Australia is an
independent country capable of adopting independent attitudes
in its foreign policies as of course is the United Kingdom and
Canada, India and other members of the Commonealth of Nations.
Australia, in pursuit of its own interests and in support of
principles which it has supported by military participation in
two world wars, in Korea, in Malaysia in resisting Indonesian
Confrontation, has come with other fitiendly forces in support
of the South Koreans ( Vietnamese?) in resisting what we believe
to be a communist inspired agreesion in that country. Our
reasons, I think, have been made clear enouGh for the
participation. The Australian electorate wihere this was foughtas
an outstanding issue of the last eledtioa campaign
overwhelmingly endorsed the Government's policy in this direction,
and the visiting Prime Minister Ky highlighted not only issues
but the fact of Australian support for South Vietnam.
Yes, but it is said that Britain is interested in
retaining American support in Europe so is Australia interested
in retaining American presence in Asia, this is in direct result
of her maintaining her military presence in Asia. Do you
subscribe to this view?
P. M. Well, I find it rather an involved question. I have
tried to indicate why it is that Australia is participating.
I repeat, we are quite capable of making up our owin minds as
to what we should do on these issues, and each country of course
consults its own interests. But in Australia's case, our own
interests also include our presence in what we hope would be a
more peaceful and more secure world. We have not waited for
these threats to come to our shore in the past, if we felt the
peace of -the world w.. as threatened. We fought in two world wars,
as you mentioned, many thousands of miles away from our own shores.
Much of the fighting in which we have participated since has been
conducted a long Way from Australia.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, are you encouraged by the free
world's military position in Vietnam' 4
P. M. I think it has greatly improved, yes, even since I was
in Saigon myself. At that time I came back and expressed my
confidence that the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese could
not win the military confliat there. Events which have occurred
since then, I think, have produced a considerable improvement in
the position of the South Vietnamese and those supporting them.
ot. / 5 
Q. By this do you imply Mr. Premier, that you expect a
political solution or a military solution. The Viet Cong won't
win militarily, that means they won't be defeated militarily.
P. M. I have always felt that for a satisfactory solution
which had any prospect of enduring, there had to be a political
solution, I predicted when I came back from Saigon about a year
ago, that as the Viet Cong were forced either into a retreat or
were defeated in the military sense, they would tend to concentrate
more on guerrilla activities and put pressure perhaps on other
countries outside of South Vietnam itself. And I based that
judgement on what has occurred in Malaysia where, for ma~ ny years,
a comparatively few guerrillas wiere able to occupy the attention
of very much larger forces at very great expense. So that to
achieve a military victory or a series of victories against massed
and organised military forces of Viet Cong and North Vietnamese
would not produce the abiding solution unless as a result of this,
or accompanying it, there were a political solution also.
Q. ( Indistinct, but concerning peace talks for Vietnam)
P. M. It is true that attempts have proved abortive but that
doesn't mean that the attempts should be abandoned. Australia
has supported thle attempts made to find a solution which would
produce a just and enduring peace. In my own experience, which
is not only in the external field, but as a former Minister for
Labour dealing with communist led unions, I found that, although
you seem to be up against a brick wall in negotiation and it
becomes an impasse, once the communists themselves come to the
conclusion that it is no longer profitable to pursue their tactics,
you can get a quite dramatic switch you know, without regard to
consistency or logic or anything that has been said previously as
to where they.-stood. And contemporary history is studded with
instances of this kind, from the Berlin crisis onwards.
Q. ( Indistinct but -to the effect,: Do you expect a shift
in American policy as a result of the Presidential Elections or a
dramatic change in the military climate?)
P. M. I don't see that the American elections should affect
the basic situation because, after all, there have been three
American Presidents in succession and coming from different sides
of the political spectrum in the United States who have all
consistently supported American involvement in support of the
South Vietnamese. I would think that any American Presidential
Candidate who stood on a platform of abandoning the South
Vietnamese or retreating from the conflict before a just peace
had been discovered would poll very poorly in the United States.
Q. Mr. Holt, do you think we might bring Hanoi closer
to the conference table a little quicker if the air war against
North Vietnam was escalated.
P. M. I am not offering a military judgement on these matters.
We have supported the tactics pursued by those who are more expert
in the military field and I don't wiant to offer a technical comment
on a technical point of aspect.
Your External Affairs Minister made the point here last
week that the bombing of North Vietnam was a question of military
necessity. Do you imply now that military pressure would mean a
military solution ( rest of questio,:, indistinct).
P. M. I think a military solution is much more likely to lead
to a political solution than the absence of military pressure.
This could drag on indefinitely unless the other side were to
Comes to the conclusion that the game wasn't worth the candle. / 6. 
-6
Q. Thailand announced recently that they were going to take
a more active part in the war. To what-degree has this move been
prompted or even pressed by the allies.
P. M. Again, the Thai people are quite capable of making up
their own minds as to the course they should follow. Itve had
some interesting~ discussions myself in Thailand and at the Manila
Conference and in Australia, where we had a visit from the Prime
Minister of Thailand, his Foreig.-n Minister and one or two of his
other colleagues last year, and Pote Sarasin, and I am well aware
from these discussions that Thailand is very conscious of' the
threat of communist expansion it has to cope with itself, with
communist guerrilla activity within its own borders, and it believes
the policies being followed by those supporting South Vietnam are
policies more likely to produce peace and stability, economic
development in South East Asia, than surrender to the pressure of
the communists.
Q. How do you expect SEATO to function when it has fallen
flat on its nose thanks to its ( word indistinct) How do you account
for this?
P. M. I find there is still considerable value in SEATO and
discussions together with those -who participate in SEATO have
produced valuable exchanges of views and can lead to co-operative
action in various directions. I don't think that it should be
assumed there is no continuing virtue in SEATO. That is certainly
not the view of my Government nor would it be the view of either
the American or British Governments.
Qb When do you expect the next escalation in the Vietnam
War will be? I wouldn't like to offer an opinion on this. These are
matters largely of military judgement. We respect the judgement
of our military advisers. Theirs is th responsibility of securing
the necessary degree of military victory to produce the result.
Q. Do you think it could be the bombing of power plants in
( word indistinct Haiphong?).
P. M. No, I don't propose to speculate on that. These are
matters, of course, which are discussed between governments
and I have no desire to conjecture publicly.
Q. There have been repeated calls that the bombing should
be stopped and even this would be a stimulant to peace. Do I take
it Sir, the bombing would produce this stimulant?
P. M. We have had no encouragement frora past experience when
there has been a cessation in thie bombing. The other side have
employed these respites to build up their own supplies, accelerate
the movement of troops and President Johnson has made it abundantly
clear that the bombing would be stoppedL if Ithere was a sign of
genuine willingness on the part of the other side to abandon their
aggression, to cease infiltration, to cease the movement of supplies.
But so far there has been no encouraging signs that this would occur.
Q. How about your trip to Taiwan? Is this the first time
you have been there?
P. M. The only other visit to Taiwan was purely incidental,
almost repeated on this occasion by bad weather. I was en route
to Tokyo and scheduled to land here iii Hong Kong but bad weather
caused us to be diverted and I didn't leave the airport, so I can
hardly say it was a visit to Taiwan. For all substantial purposes
this will be my first visit to Taiwan. 0 
7-
What will be your talks with Gover'nment officials?
Will they be more on trade or more politioal2
P. M. The princoipal purpose from my point of view, as I said$
earL. 4r, is to inform my own mind, to get to kniow the leaders of
these countries that I am visiting personally, to concentrate a
certain degree of' attention by my own countrymen on these conries
and their problems. This is a consequence of the visits, but there
is no special purpose, no concealed purpose as far as I am concerned.
Q. What are your vieww on U Thant's proposal on unilateral
cease fire in Vietnam?
P. M. I thought I had already indicated that we fcmxd no
encowmgement from our past experience to adopt such a course, in
the absence of an expressed willingness on the part of the other
side to reciprocate.
Q. Is Australia " All the way with IL. B. J."?
I would just like to comment on that, because it suited
my political opponents to give a -twist to that statement which of
course w~ as never intended. We have been consistently with America
in relation to South Vietnam. On other matters Australia has its
own independent mind, and follows its own mind. 



VEPt
AS 19R197OA1P R 1967 4
ASIAN TOUR 1967 L iB R
TAIWAN
ARRIVAL STATE1ffENT BY THE PRIMfE MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT AT TAIPEI 4TH APRIL, 1967
It. gives me great pleasure to make my first visit to the
Republic of China, and to be the first Prime viinister of Australia
to have made such a visit in that capacity.
I greatly look forvard to meeting the distinguished
President of the Republic, and to having the opportunity of
discussing with him the many matters in which we have a common
interest. These include importantly the menace of communist
expansion in the Asian and Pacific region, a threat of which
the Republic oi China has a long and intimate knowledge.
Relations between the Republic of China and Australia
have long been warm and friendly. Australia has consistently
supported the position of the Republic of Chi. na in the United
Nations and its agencies. The Chinese Embassy is one of the
oldest diplomatic missions in Canberra, and Australia has recently
re-established its own embassy with the Republic of China. Trade
between our two countries has increased substantially over recent
years. In addition to establishing personal contact with the
President, his Ministers and other leading personalities, I hope
during my visit to see something of Taiwan's impressive economic
progress, about which we have had enthusiastic reports. I am
particularly looking forward to visiting some of your modern
industrial plants and port installations.
We in Australia share goals of peace, stability and
prosperity so widely held in Asia. We believe the Republic of
China, with its growing economic strength and the resourcefulness
of its people, can play a highly significant part in the combined
e forts of all like-minded countries to satisfy these longings.
We recognise that the Republic of China is Alre ady making a
considerable contribution in thc form of its economic and technical
aid to other countries. We likewise have been increasing the
volume and variety of our economic aid.
We are glad, also, to find ourselves fellovi-members with
China of two new Asian organisations, the Asian and Pacific Council
and the Asian Development Bank. Vie confidently anticipate further
profitable co-operation between our two countries in both of them.
i* 



\ 1ER'S D&amp; O
a-10 APR 1967
PRESS RELEASE LisRAF~ 44
GRANTS FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
( Statement by Mr. J. McEwen, Acting Prime Minister and
Minictc: for Trade and Industry)
1. The Acting Prime Ilin-Lster and Minister for Trade
and Industry, Mr. McEwen, today announced some further details
of the scheme for Government grants for research and development
mentioned in the Treasurer's Budget Speech of 16th August last.
2. Mr. McEwen said that complete details would be
contained in the legislation which would be introduced shortly.
However, he thought it woul i ceu in . thm eantime to inform
the business community of the broad outlines of the scheme so
that they could organise their affai. rs to derive full benefit
from the incentive.
3. The scheme will operate with effect as from 1st July,
1967 until 30th June, 1972. Before the latter date is reached
the Government will review its ooeration,
4. Mr. McEwen explained that grants would be made only
to manufacturing and mining companies incorporated in Australia
Grants, which will be taxable in the hands of
recipients, will be payable in respect of additional expenditure
on research and development work undertaken by a company during
the currency of the scheme. For these purposes " research and
development" will be defined along the following lines
Systematic experi.'. je: italion or analysis
in the fields of science, engineering
or technology to acquire new knowledge
or to develop new or improved material
products or processes associated with
the production or use of such products. 
2.
6. The following activities would not be regarded as
falling within the scope of the above definition
* Market research
* Sales promotion
* Feasibility studies
* Technical service to customers
0 Management studies
0 Labour efficiency surveys, investigation
into incentive wage systems etc.
* Methods engineering
* Operational research
* Routine q~ uality control and routine
materials testing
* Mineral exploration and prospecting.
7, j Mr. McEwen added that the full definition of research
and development which will be contained in the legislation will
exclude the following categories of design work from eligibility
for grants, Design work which arisea from the need
to meet the individual requirements of a
particular user of the product or process;
Design work which is primarily directed towards
styling as distinct from an improvement in the
functional characteristica ( including the
reduction of costs) of the product or process.
Mr. Mc~ wen continued
8. The scheme will apply only to companies which
increase their research and development in Australia as compared
with a base period, For this pu~ cpose, the base year will be the
financial year 1965/ 66. 
V 3.
9. Firms must apply for grants and in the first instance,
will be required to establish the extent of their eligible
research and development activities in the base year. Where a
firm was not engaged on research and development in the base year,
its base will be nil.
Grants will be administered in two ways. A firm which
satisfies the administering authority that it has increased its
research and development work as defined, will automatically
qualify for a percentage grant in respect of eligible additional
expenditure up to $ 50,000 a year.
11. A firm which wishes to receive a -Trant in respect
of eligible additional expenditure beyond $ 50,000 a year will
need to obtain individual ( but not necessarily prior) approval
on a selective basis in respect of the excess. Applications
will be assessed in the light of the extent to which the research
and development appears likely to contribute to the following
objectives The development and use of Australian
physical resources;
The expansion of exports;
Import saving and the ability to compete
with im-port s;
Productivity and cost reduction;
Defence capability.
12. The g-, rants will not be paid in respect of all
components of research and development costs. They will be
limited to expenditure on wages and salaries, plant and equipment,
and contracted research and development. Two of these components,
expenditure on wages and salaries and expenditure on contracted
research and development, will be treated together in estimating
their eligibility for grant purposes. The other component,
expenditure on plant and equipment, will be treated separately. 
V 4.
13. Wag-es and sala-ries will qualify only in respect
of Drofessional and technical staff engaged in Australia wholly
on research and development. " Professional" staff will be those
who have completed a university degree or technical college
diploma in a branch of science or engineering which admits to
membership of a professional institute. " Technical" staff will
be those % 7ho are directly assisting, in a technical capacity, the
professional staff enga,-ged on research and development. The
wages and salaries of certain other staff categories, such as
secretarial staff, librarians, cleaners, etc., even although they
may be employed wholly in a research and development establishment,
will not qualify for the grant.
14. Grants will be payable in respect of the increase
in eligible via. ges and salaries over the base year 1965/ 66.
In calculating the wages and salaries component in the
base year, firms will be required to include the appropriate
proportion of the salaries of staff during periods when they
were engaged part-time on research and development.
16. In a " g rant year", however, only the salaries of
staff wholly engaged on research and development will qualify.
17. Where ap) propriate, the administering authority will
make an adjustment to the actual amount of increase in a firm's
eligible expenditure on research and development salaries so as
to offset the effect of inflation of salary levels. The adjustment
will be made by recalculating the base year expenditure figure
so as to reflect what that figure would have been if the salary
levels ruling in the grant year had also a,;: plied in the base year.
The adjustment will not a-.-ply in -the case of a firm starting
research and development afresh. In the case of firms already
engaged in research and development, the adjustment will be made
only in respect of staff who were employed on research and
development in the base period in respect of research and
development positions which existed in the base period. 
18. For contracted research, firms will be eligible for
grants in respect of increases ( above the 1965/ 66 base) in
payments made to " outside" organisations which have been approved
by the administering authority.
19. Plant and equipment to be eligible must be used solely
for research and development. The aggregate amount of this
component of a firm's grant from the inception of the scheme may
not exceed the net aggregate of the eligible wages and salaries
and the contracted research and development components. This
means that expenditure on plant and equipment will qualify for
grant purposes only when and to the extent that there has been a
qualifying expenditure in the sector comprised of salaries and
wages and contracted research and development. There is a
further condition that no grant will be paid in respect of
expenditure on plant and equipment in any grant year if the sum
of the expenditure on wages and salaries and contracted research
and development is less in that grant year than in the base year.
Subject to these provisos, the method to be adopted in calculating
grants in respect of plant expenditure is as follows
purchases of new research and development plant
and equipment will be eligible for grant purposes
even if the firm's expenditure on this component
is lower than in the base year. That is to say,
expenditure on research and development plant and
equipment is not tied to base year expenditure.
the plant and equipment eligible for research and
development grant purposes is to be regarded as
identical with that research and development
plant and equipment which is allowed by the
Taxataion Commissioner as eligible for
depreciation over three years as provided in 
1 6.
Section 73A of the ILncome Tax Assessment Act. It
is to be noted that although Section 73A
refers to " scientific research" this term
embraces many phases of product research
and development.
The rate of grant applying in the automatic cases
will, at least initially, be 50% of the increase in eligible
expenditure. This rate will be the same for all companies.
The rate for selective grants will be determined in each case
by the administering authority but will not exceed 50%. The
rate may vary from one firm to another in the same year.
21. Firms will, of course, be required to substantiate
their claims for grants. It would therefore be advisable for
firms currently engaged in research and development to establish
by 1st July a system under which eligible research and
development expenditure is separately recorded and properly
documented with explanations. It will also be necessary for
firms to keep records of the work upon which professional and
technical staff are engaged so that those wholly engaged after
1st July on research and development can be separated from
those doing work which does not constitute research and
development as defined.
22. MVr. McEwen said that the Government intended to
introduce the legislation during the current session of
Parliament. No grants would be payable until after the
legislation is enacted and the administering authority
established.
23. Mr. MvcEwen added that the scheme would be administered
by an authority responsible to the Minister for Trade and
Industry. 22/ 67T.
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
4TH APRIL, 1967. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 TA IVIAN
TEXT OF REMARKS MADE BY VICE PRESIDENT C. K. YEN
AT A DINIMR IN T AIPEI APRIL,_ 9
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Holt, Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
On behalf of the Government and the people of the
Republic of China, I wish to extend to Prime Minister and
Mrs. Holt a warm and sincere welcome.
Prime Minister Holt is not only an outstanding political
leader in his own country, he has also won wide acclaim as a
world statesman. Since his assumption of office as Prime Minister
he has contributed in a significant way to the taintenance of world
peace and justice and to the economic and other developments in
his own country. On several previous occasions I have had the
pleasure of meeting Prime Minister Holt at International Conferences
while he was serving as Treasurer for his government. It is,
therefore, a great pleasure to renew his acquaintance here in Taipei.
Mrs. Holt, as we all know, is an accomplished lady in her
own right. Her dedication to the welfare of her country and the
valuable assistance she has rendered the Prime Minister is truly
worthy of admiration. We are very pleased to have her visit us
and I wish to extend her a special welcome.
Since the end of World War II, Australia has been taking
an increasingly active part in international affairs. She is an
active partictant in programs of economic and technical co-operation
with the Asian countries. A member of the South-East Asia Treaty
Organization, she is also an active member of the Asian and Pacific
Council. Today, Australia is actively helping the Republic of
Vietnam in resisting communist aggression. All these activities
are eloquent testimonials to the wisdom and far-sightedness of the
Australian Government and its political leaders.
The Republic o. China and the Cornnonaealth of Australia
have lon5 enjoyed friendly relations and close co-oparation in
international affairs. Our two peoples are similarly dedicated
to the noble ideals of freedom, justice and peace. With the
re-opening of the Australian Embassy in the Republic of China,
I am certain that the friendly relations betwe. n our two countries
will be furthur strengthened.
I appreciate very much the fact that, despite their heavy
schedule, Prime Minister and Mrs. Holt have oome to visit us. I
am particularly pleased to have the opportunity to have an exchange
of views wiith Prime Minister Holt on the world situation and on
matters of common interest to our two countries. His visit, I am
sure, will be a new milestone in the history of Sino-Australian
relations. Ladies and Gentlemen, I now request that you join me in
a toast to Her Majesty the Queen.
Ladies and Gentlemen, may I ask you again to join me in
a toast to Prime iinister and Mrs. Ilt and the prosperity of the
Commonwealth of Australia. * X x * X 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 TA IWIAN
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, IOR. HAROLD HOLT, AT STATE DINNER
GIVEN BY VICE PRESIDENT AND MRS. YEN IN TAIPEI ARIL, 197
Mr. Vice President, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
First I must apologise because my speech will be rather
longer, or at least I am afraid it will seem longer, than that
of His Excellency, -the Vice President, not only because the text
is longer, but it is longer because I really have much more to
thank him about than he has to thank mie about, and I have seen
so much and done so much in this short time here, about which
I wish to make some references.
And so, Mr. Vice Pmsident, I must first of all express
the grateful thanks of myself of Mirs. Holt and all members of my
party, for the very warm and cordial welcome we have rcceived
wherever we have moved on our visit here. VWe have felt that we
have been particularly privileged and honoured to have been received
and entertained with such gracious hospitality by His Excellency
your distinguished President Chiang Kni-Shek and Madam Chiang.
I have valued the opportunity which came to me last night for my
first discussion with your President and I look forward 8 eatly to
talking with him again as wie have arranged before I leave tomorrow
morning. I must also thank you, Mr. Vice President and Mrs. Yen,
for many things. Virstly, for the warmth of your welcome the
intimate and frank discussions we were abl.--to hold together both
in your Cabinet Room and as wie have moved about together. The way
in which you have sacrificed your own time and convenience to
accompany mie as I have moved about your industries this morning
and finally, but by no means least, for according us this magnificent
dinner this evening in such a memorable and glorious setting, and in
the company of such a large anE distinguished gathering. It gives
mie particular pleasure, as I am sure it does to all of my company
to be feted in this splendid hall, dedicated to the memory of
Dr. Sun Yat Sen, the father of modern China. I feel I can take a
certain pride in being the first Prime Minie'ter from Australia to
visit the Republic of China and I interpret quite confidontly the
reception that you have given me as a true reflection of the
tradition of friendship between our two countries.
Our Australian Embassy shared with you the hardships and
rigours of war-time days in Chungking and I am pleased that my own
government was recently responsible for re-establishing our mission
here in your present capital. Your own embassy in Canberra is one
of the oldest diplomatic missions in our capital city.
In the yea-rs since we first became associated our
countries have both been through crises and je still live in
turbulent times, but we both pursue courses of action designed
to promote the things we believe in peace, social justice,
individual liberty, the advancement of human wellbeing and the
right of all peoples to determine their own future and to defend
their sovereign independence. Vie in Australia, espousing as we
do all these causes in the United Nations and elsewhere, have given
you our constant support to the Republic of China in the Security
Council, the General Assembly, and all organs of the United Nations.
0 0 2 
-2
Mrs. Holt and I and mly party will leave Taipei tomorrow
morning with very happy recollections of our brief stay with you,
but, although this visit has been short, thanks to the care,
Mr. Vice President, that you have taken in arranging our programmie,
we have learned much from what vie have been told by you and your
Ministers and officials, and froL all that vie have been shown,
and what we have been able to see as wie have moved around, vie have
been particularly impressed by wvhat have seen of the rapid
economic grovith, the prosperity, the wellbeing of thij province and
the evident happiness of your people.
Your achievements in agriculture were apparent as wie flew
into your city, since then we have seen your large petroleum
and alumainium. plants, your iriagincative export development complex
at Kaohsiung with its new industries, somie of them highly
sophisticated, and we have noted the emphasis you give to encouragement
of private initiative and to investment from abroad. The enthusiasm
and efficiency which you are making and displaying are an obvious mark
of this project and thcese things provide a striking illustration of
what can be achieved in a free country where effective planning
goes hand in hand with the provision of suitable incentives to
private nitiative. As for the growing trade between us, we hope and confidently
expect that thio will steadily expand. We've watched with interest
and admiration what the Republic of China is doing to assist less
developed countries, particularly in Africa, and particularly in
the field of technical skill. Your api. roach to the provision of
training in agriculture is obviously sound as is shown by your
achievement in raising productivity by as much as ten times per
hectare in some cases in the countries you've assisted. We fully
endorse your conviction tha-, t the only sure-way of instilling efficient
and modern techniques is by sending out experts who are practical men
and women and who are willin, to prove the effectiveness of these
techniques by their own physical efforts, whether knee deep in mud
in a rice field, or covered in grease underneath a bus. We have
ourselves, found that our best successes in the field of technical
aid have been gained by expe rts who were able to teach by their own
example instead of merely by oral or written explanation.
Finally, I have had the pleasure this afternoon, as has
Mrs. Holt and others of our party, of examining some of China's most
ancient and precious treasures, and this has been a fascinating
experience, even though necessarily a short one. There are many of
my fellow countrymen who would give a great deal to be able to share
this experience Mr. Vice President. I know there would be practical
problems, but is there the possibility of mounting at some time an
exhibition of some of these magnificent pieces in some of our
Australian cities? It would be assured of very great interest and
applause from my countrym.-en.
This tour I have been making, Mr. Vice President, has been
in the nature of an educational process for mie. I believe that
education broadens knmowledge that knowledge in turn encouragee
understanding, and that understanding builds friendship, and I am
sure that this particular visit not only has added by wany of
eaucation to my knowledge and hias increased Liy understanding of your
people and your problems, I am sure -i* c has also given new warmth,
or added warmth, and greater depth to the friendship between our two
countries and between those of us who have the responsibility of
leading -these two countries.
And because I value so grelatly this process and the
contribution that you and your colleagues hc: ive made to it, and in
that spirit that I do ask you to rise and join with me first in
honouring the toast of your great President Chiang Xai-Shek and
Madame Chiang, anJ then the toast to the Vice President and
Mrs. Yen, and all your colleagues of the government, and finally,
the people of Taiwan Liay they go on in security, prosperity and
hapliness and may the friendship of the Australian people contribute
to those felicious purposes. I give you the toast. 



-ASIAN TOUR 1967 KOREA
. ELCOMIN ST. aTEMENT 3Y PRIE MIFISTER OF SOUTH KORT
AT K" IPO AIRPORT, SEOUL 6TH APRIL, 1967
Your Excellency Prime Minister Holt, Mrs. Holt,
distinguished members of the entourage and dear fellow citizens.
On behalf of the Government and neonle of Korea I
wish to extend my warmest welcome to Prime : inister and Mrs.
Holt, who have come a long way from Australia, one of our closest
allies. The Korean people vividly recall how the Australian
people came to our aid in our time of dire need. Je are also
fully aware of the great contrioutions Australia is making in the
cause of peace and progress in the Asian and Pacific re. ion. When
our independence and future were at stake on accoint of the
unprovoked communist invasion in 1950, Australia was among the
first free nations to dispatch combat troops of ' round, naval
and air forces to this country to help us defend our Republic
from external aggression.
Indeed, we feel forever indeated to those memoers of
the Australian armed forces who, despite enormous hardships,
valiantly fought in an alien land in the cause of freedom and
justice, marking brilliant records in the annals of the Korean
ar through their noble sacrifices. At the time when the comiunist
forces launched a full-scale offensive in the spring of 1951, the
all'ant Australian soldiers in the now famous battle of Kapyong,
though greatly outnumoered and under adverse conditions, held t
their positions to the last, helping the allied forces secure
their vital positions and finally frustrate the enemy's offensive.
Their gallantry and heroism are still fresh in our memory.
Through various United iations relief programmes the
Colombo Plan and the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia
and the Far East, Australia has helped us in the rehabilitation
of the war-torn country and the achievement of social and cultural
pro ress. As a memuer of the United nations Commission for
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea Aust-ralia has also been
working strenuously toward our goal of bringing about a unified,
democratic and independent Korea.
Our hearts are overwhelmed today with deep sentiments
in welcoming Prime Minister Holt, the great leader of the Australian
people who have done so much for us.
Mr. Prime Minister, the Australian people have overcome
many an obstacle including adverse natural conditions to brin about
abundance and wealth, prosperity and welfare for themselves. Now
they are sparing no effort in helping other free Asian nations
overcome their adversities. Australia has also taken active part
in SEATO, ANZUS, ASPAC, the Manila Summit Conference and the
Asian Development 3ank, thereby contriouting greatly to the
progress and prosperity in the Asian and Pacific region and to
the collective security of the free nations in this part of the
world. the Korean people, have great admiration for your
people's courage, resourcefulness and the spirit of co-operation.
In Korea, we have been able to attain remarkable / 2 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 KOREA
ARRIVAL STTEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
6TH APRIL, 1967.
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Chung, Distinguished Guests:
I thank you for the warm welcome you have given me
Mrs. Holt and my party on this our first visit to Korea It is
indeed the first visit ever made to your country by an Australian
Prime Minister. I hope this fact alone will be some assurance to
you of the interest my country has in Korea and its people, and
will ue accepted by you as an expression of our oodwill towards
you. We look forward to learning over the next few days more
aoout your country and your people.
Australia has folloed your fortunes closely since
1950 when, without pr , vocation or warning you were invaded from
your Vorth. I was a member of the Australian Caoinet then, it
decided nromptly to send Australian forces to assist you in
repelling that ag ression. I oelieve we were the first country
after the United States puolicly to declare our intention of
giving military assistance to Korea. Later we were ' lad to join
in helping you to reconstruct your ravaged country.
have taken pSlaicnec. e tYheosu e nodwa rhka vdea ysa tghrreiavti ncgh anegcoenso mfyo r wtihthe ab ehttigehr
rate of growth. You have a Constitutional Democracy. You are
highly respected throughout the free countries of the ' orld.
cdYaeopmuaroos nlysist r aletoednd e anwodfh awtth ietc ha ns uecfbfec iecsdisoe nnes tt obyrai deamsn ineoinfs etorragutrei toitncim,, esoe. nd cuec Yattoheud e hapveeoole
distruoing influences of communist subversion and aggression
have been brought under control.
The ood example you provide has given you increasing
influence amongst free na ions of Asia and the Pacific. Australia
applauded your initiative in calling the successful conference of
ASPAC last year. Your own experience undoubtedly affected you in your
decision to give substantial military help to Vietnam in its
efforts to resist communist aggression. are proud to have
Australians fighting alongside your own troops in Vietnam, as
they did in Korea in those earlier years.
I was glad to collaborate with your distinuished
President and other national leaders at the Su. imit Conference
in FManila last year.
I am greatly looking forward to our meetin together
again, and to the useful discussions we shall oe aole to have.
Mr. Prime M inister, thank you for this most friendly
reception. Thank you also for affording to me and my party this
welcome opportunity to develop better knowledge and understanding
of the Korea of today. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 TAIWAN
JOINT COMMVUNIQUE ISSUED BY THE REPUBLIC OF CHINA
AND) THE COMMVOMWEALTE OF AUSTRALIA 6TH APRIL, 1967
At the invitation of the Government of the Republic
of China, the Right Honourable Harold E. Halt, Prime Minister
of the Commonwealth of Australia and Mrs. Halt, accompanied
by high-ranking officials of his government, visited the
Republic of China from April 4th to April 6th, 1967.
President Chiang Kai-Shek, in expressing his deep
appreciation for Prime Minister Holt's visit, considered it
to be a significant milestone in the history of the friendly
relations between the Republic of L China and Australia.
Prime Minister Halt, on hi~ s part, thanked President Chiang,
Vice President and concurrently Prime Minister Yen Chia-Kan
and the Government and people of the Republic of China for
the warm hospitality accorded to him, to Mirs. Holt and to the
members of his party during the visit.
During his stay in the Republic of China, the Prime
Minister had the opportunity of holding a series of frank and
free discussions with President Chiang, Vice President and
concurrently Prime Minister Yen and other Chinese Government
leaders on the world situation, particularly the situation in
Asia and the Pacific and other matters of common interest to
the two countries. Presideit Chiang and Prime Minister Holt reaffirmed the
long-standing friendship between the Republic of China and
Australia and pledged to further strengthen their co-operation
in the common effort to maintain peace and security in the basis
of freedom and ju--tice and to promote the oconomic prosperity of
this area. President Chiang expressed thle admiration of the
Government and people of the Republic of China for tho stand which
Australia has taken in Vietnam an'. the significant contribution
Australia has made and is still making to the fighting in Vietnam
agaii-ot communist aggression. The two leaders are agreed that
peace, like freedom, is indivisible and that inasmuch as Hanoi
has repeatedly refused to ne gotiate for peace, no end to tho war
in Vietnam is at present in sight and, theroefore, such joint
effort as has been made to resist communist aggreosion, in Vietnam
should be continued,
Prime Minister Halt also had the opportunity of visiting
the industrial centres and harbour facilities of the Republic of
China. He was greatly impressed by the vitality of the people,
the tremendous progress that has been made in the field of
economic development and the political stability that the country
enjoys under the inspiring leadership of President Chiang.
President Chiang and Prime Minister Holt believe that
since Asia has now become the crucial area of resistance to
communist aggression, it is essential that the two countries
should do their utmost to promote unity among free nations
everywvhere and among member nations of the Asian and Pacific
Council in particular, so that the threat to world peace posed by
militant communism on the Chinese Mainland and elsewhere in Aoia
can be eliminated and conditions for the promotion of the economic
prosperity and social well-being for all the peoples of this
area established. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 ' i~ 16
TA IWAN
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT AT GRAND) HOTEL TAIPEI 6THAPIL, 1967
PRIL-E MINISTER: Good Morning, Ladies and Gentlemen of the Press:
I just propose to comment quite briefly first and then
give you the opportunity of asking questions of me, but first may
I thank you for your pleasant introduction, and all of you for
the very friendly way in which you have greeted me this morning.
I am now nearing the end of this fascinating first visit
to Taiwan and the seat of the Government 0ñ the Republic of China,
and as you will no doubt be aware, wie leave at noon for the final
stage of this journey I have buen making, the visit to South Korea.
This is not the first journey I have made since becoming
Prime Minister to countries of South East Asi"-and the Pacific,
but this particular group of' countries selected on this occasion
includes those which have not previously been visited by me, except
for one quite inadvertent stopover for an hour or two while we had
an aircraft diverted in the course of a journey I was making a few
years ago to Tokyo. That is the only other time I have ever set
foot in Taiwan and so this has been a true journey of discovery for
me.&amp; I feel that not only have I learned a great deal in the
other countries visited, as I expect to do in South Korea . aleo, but
my visit to Taiwan, base onabled me to come closer to your leaders,
to get to kniow several of them personally for the first time, to
renew old friendships with others, to see something of your quite
remarkable economic development, to see at first hand the treasures
that you have preserved from your thousand years of civilisation
and culture, all these things have been quite fascinating and
stimulating for me and I am sure that I shall be in a better
position to come to judgement with my colleagues c~ f the Cabinet
on matters relating to your country and its problems as a result
of tiis visit here.
I would have liked to express publicly my appreciation
to the Government, to the President and the Vice President, the
colleagues in the administration for the generous hospitality
we have received and for the very enjoyable and instructive time
we have had while we have been with you.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, as I understand it, you might have
a pre-departural meeting with the generalissimo? Can you tell
us any major points to be discussed during this?
P. M. Well, I haven't myself restricted the range of the
discussion, it will be. for the President to indicate matters
to me he might wish to raise. For my part, having already had
the benefit of some useful discussions with him at our first
meeting, there is no special matter which I wish to raise with
him this morning, but I am sure that what passes between us will
be mutually informative and in that sense helpful.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, to what extent, Sir, do the people
of Australia consider themselves Asians
P. M. Well, vwe are not racially Asians, of course, nor are
we by historical development of -the Asian tradition or culture,
but geographically vie are in the area of the world where the
peoples of the South East Asian area and the Pacific generally,
and indeed Asia as a whole, geographically are our neighbours
and in substance, as a result of the relationships wie have
developed over recent years, are very much not only our. neighbours
but our good friends. 2 
2-
I think the very fa-ct thiat I have been able in the
course of my own short Prime 11inistership to visit, on the basis
of warm welcome, so many different countries of the area of
differing political outlooks and social structures is confirmation
that Australia does enjoy very good relations with the countries
of the area. This has been, I think, exemplified fully in this
visit where I am journeying to four countries very different in
political and social complexiono. but in each country I have been
most gratified by the warmth of w-. elcome which I and my party have
received. A warmth which I kn-ow reaches not only to me but to my
countrymen whom I represent.
It is only in comparatively recent years that Australia
has become conscious of its increasing involvement in the problems
of the area. This involvement reaches not only into matters of trade
butof political co-operation, and over at least five separate sets
of issues in the last twenty-five years Australia has foutnd itself'
militarily involved in the area, so w; e believe ourselves to be
very much part of the Asian scene.
Q. Sir, I have witnessed your troops in active service in
South Vietnam. If the war cannot be concluded in limited detail
are you going to send more troops down there?
P. M. Well, that is a policy matter which would have to be
discu ,* sed with my own Cabineti colleagues, and on the advice
finally of our own military advisors, and, of course, following
a request to that effect from the Government of South Vietnam.
We don't send troops there without the approval, and indeed at
the invitation, of the Government of South Vietnam.
It will be realised that Australia has other commitments
in other parts of Asia, for example, wie have troops stationed in
Malaysia, Singapore, in Ubon in Thailand, and there is a large
programme of training of our military forc'-s inside Australia,
which draws on our regular forces to a. cozoiderable extent.
So there are some practical limits as to how far wie can go in
a period when wie are also trying to press on with the development
of an under-populated continent, but when I mention that over the
last four years we will have more than doubled our expenditure
on defence, it will be seen that wie are making a grow%-ing
contribution to the security of the area generally and the
percentage of our gross national product devoted to defence is
moving up between 4.5 and
Q. Do you think thl ' t the countries having sent troops
to South Vietnam should have a voice about the future courses of
their forces in Guam and any other places?
P. M. I am sorry, I didn't get the reference in what.
Q. Countries that have sent troops to South Vietnam should
have a voice about the future course of action there, for instance,
in Guam or any other places.
P. M. Well, of course, there was a gathering after the Manila
Conference of those who had forces involved, and I am quite
certain that if there were concrete peace proposals coming forward
we should be consulted at all significant stages of such a
discussion. Wie have no reason to complain in Australia of any
lack of communication, indeed, we are in very frequent contact
with the Government of South Vietnam, I would say through our
Ambassador, virtually on a daily basis, and this is true to an
Aevmeenr iclaa rgaendr eoxthteenr t cwouitnht riceosm mwuhonsice atfioonrc ewsi tha ret hep aUrtniictiepda tSintagt esw iothf
ours in supporting the South Vietnamese people. 
-3
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, how do you visualise the possibility
of strengthening. the ties of Sino-Australian relations in terms
of economy and culture?
P. M. Well, I think visits such as the one I have been making
and reciprocal visits from your leaders, will be helpful in that
direction. Wde get to know each other more closely and our problems
in more depth and dotail. As to trade, the briefing vie had from
your Cabinet Ministers indicated very good possibilities of
increasing imports into this country from Australia, as your own
economy develops and we would recognise that if this is to be,
then Australia must be looking to ways and means of improving our
purchases from Taiwan. These 4re connections, I think, where we
can be of help to each other.
I suggested last night, and I was glad to find that the
suggestion did not appear as difficult as I thought it might, that
we could have on display perhape at some time in Australia some of
the cultural treasures . hich you have here in Taiwan. One could
think of a variety of ways wh-, ich the knmovledge oif the two
countries can improve one for the other, and it will be my endeavour
to promote this process.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, vie understand that Australia has
recognised Outer Mongolia rec.-ntly. Wie would like to know if
Australia has no tendency to establish an Emibassy to be used as
a listening post w~ hat benefit can it get froma this representation?
P. M. Wiell, I would like to communt on that in a little detail.
It is a fact that the Government recently took a decision to
recLgnise Outer Mungolia. This was not a matter which had been
reached hastily or suddenly by us. It ha-, s been under consideration
for some time and I want to make it clear that the decision was the
exercise of an entirely independent judgement by Australia and was
not the product of any pressure or influence from any other source.
But ie have taken the view that recognition should be given to
countries which observe the international standards appropriate to
membership of the United Nations and we have put that view forward
in respect of Mainland China on earlier occasions. But in the
case of Outer Mongolia, they have been members of the United Nations,
I think, for six years or thereabouts now.
They have, so far as vie have been able to judge, observed
the standards appropriate to membership of the United Nations.
They are members of Ecafe and Australia next year will be host to
Ecafe, an.-of all the Ecafe members attending that conference
Mongolia is the only country which had not, up to this point of
time, received recognition, and this did have a varyinS bearing
on the time of our decision. Another factor that had a bearing
on it was my own visit here.
Now it may seemi strange to some people that one announces
a decision which is not likely to be popular in the host country
just before you visit that country, but I think you must understand
something of the Australian character to rtecognise the significance
and appropriateness of this. I would not like to have come to this
country and have said nothing about this matter, and then
subsequently, afte: r having enjoyed your hospitality, gone away
and announced this decision. It would have been thought outside
either that it had the tactical approval of your Government, in
those circumstances, or else that objections had been raised which
we had not been prepared to accept. So we felt it was fairer and
honest more honest dealing to take our decision on what we
believe to be the merits of the case and announce it before Ly
visit here. 1o4* 
-4
The other factor which I would like you to bear in
mind is that Australia has, it will be agreed, been a
consistent supporter of the Republic of China, in the United
Nations. We have joined consistently in backing your own
moves to maintain your independent position and status, and
we were, I think, very helpful to you particularly on this
last occasion, when thanks to -the effLorta of your Foreign
Minister and his colleagues of the Government, a very good vote
was secured on the issue of recognition.
Now Australia is likely to be more persuasive and
have more impact on other countries, if they feel vie do have
an independent judgement. We do exerciae that judgemient honestly
and fairly than if they get the impression that we just go along
automatically with any particular decision, and I think this is
well recognised by your Government as being typical of the
Australian attitude. We like to feel that we act with firmness
and forthrightness but with friendliness and in the case of your
own country we can fairly claim to be staunch friends throughout.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, may I know what is your evaluation
of the cha'_ nces of the Chinese people on the Mainland to regain
their freedom, particularly in view ol" the political troubles
on the Mainland, after your discussions with our President Chiang
and our Vice President?
P. M. I think you would be able to get a much more satisfactory
answer on that matter from your own Govenment here than you could
hope to get from somebody as remote from the Mainland as we are.
I have been trying as I have gone around, and I have asked the same
question in the three governments w-, hich I have visited, what is
their evaluation of what is going on on the Mainland of China?
I am sure that your own government is the best informed of all the
governments I have visited and I would hope in the course of this
morning before I leave, to have some more information on that
matter, as I have a briefing with some of your authorities and
also shall be talkinG with the President, but in Australia vie have
very inadequate facilities for reporting in any . authorative way
in what is going on in either the cities or the countryside of the
Mainland. Any more questions
Q. Some on the latest immigration policy, I Llean your
policy as to be understood or misunderstood by Asia?
P. M. Well, I thinkc the-,: e is a good deal of misunderstanding of
it, not only on the part of the Governmaents of the countries of
Asia. We find a quite understanding attitude amongst them, after
all, there is not a country that I Icnow which doesn't maintain
a policy of immigration control. But in the sense that there has
been some ff-eling in the past of racial discrimination in Australia
I think that experience of Asians who have come to Australia in
recent years has helped to dissipate that very largely, and there
have been liberalisations of policy which have contributed to this.
I pointed out, when a similar question was asked in Hong Kong the
other day, that since the var some thirty thousand people of Asia,
and others who would have not been admitted under the rules which
applied before the war, have come into Australia.
There have been many thousands-who have taken out
naturalisation at the moment there is some twelve thousand students
from Asian countries in our schools and in our universities,
sometimes occupying places in univora ' itioa L. in university categories
on which quotas have to be imposed for Australian students, and
these become very good ambassadors for Australia when they come
back. Those of you who visit our country, I am sure, will find
friendliness, complete absence of discrimination and a warm welcome
to you. But wie have a problem of social integration in a relatively
small population of people and wie think that the trend is in the right
direction and this is intelligently perceived, I believe, by the
governments of the countries of Asia. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 KOREA
SPEECH GIVEN SY THE PRIME MINISTER, MA. HAROLD HOLT,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE CONFERMENT OF HONORARY DOCTORATE OF LAWS,
SEOUL UNIVERSITY
vr i * i 7TH APRIL, 1967.
Mr. President Choe, Mr. Dean, Mr. Prime Minister, distinguished
members of the Faculty of Seoul National University, students
of the National University and ladies and gentlemen.
This is a very proud moment in my life. The privilege
which you have accorded me is a great honour. I regard it as a
great honour because I know that in this National University of
Seoul Honorary Doctorates are not accorded lightly. It is a
tribute which I accept not merely for myself but for my country
and in the spirit of frierdship which inspires it. It is more
than 36 years ago that I gained my own degree, quite a modest
degree of Bachelor of Laws, in the University of Melbourne. I
have had to wait those 36 years to receive this very much higher
distinction which I like to feel, although it may not have been
gained in the academic sphere, has been accorded for service in
the University of Life. ' e live toether regardless of the
country from which we come in one of the most interesting and
exciting phases in human history, and nowhere is the process of
turbulence and change a challenge more evident than in the region
of Asia which yve inhauit together.
It is an exciting era because although it is a period
of restlessness and change, although it is full of challenge, it is
also an era full of opportunity and hope to the better world for
which we all aspire.
Mankind has learned through the processes of science
through education, through his relations one with the other, that
the age-old enemies of man, illiteracy, disease, poverty, insecurity,
economic instability, these enemies can b-conquered.
There are some fortunate countries in the world in which
they have been largely conquered and in other countries there is the
expectation that these things can be accomplished.
When the leaders of the nations meeting at Manila last
year were holding their discussions together, their thoughts were
not merely on military matters even though they were, to a very
significant degree, involved in military operations in relation
to issues of far reaching consequences. Issues which went as
deep as the challenge to the security and freedom of your own
people and your own country back in those dark days of the 1950' s.
But while we turned our thoughts to the problems of
how security could be brought to this area we also had a version
of the better world to which we could ill contribute.
This is a world in which these enemies are defeated
and in which people could live in freedom, in social security with
justice liberty and freedom for individuals and for democratic
institutions. Now in this era, we strive for these things.
This is an era in which man with his enterprise and
irrepressible spirit is prooin the mysteries of the universe, of
the shores of outer space and Zhe depths of the sea, and is seeing
new developments in industry, agriculture, science and in education. / 2 
-2-
The young people, those who ar'e coming throuh their process
of education, have a tremendous contribution to make. There is
evidence throughout the world, a phenomenon not restricted to any
one country, that there is a sense of urgency on the part of young
people to learn more about the world in which they live, to make
a greater contribution to the betterment of their fellow men.
We who have the responsioility for Jovernment must
recognise these things, they create great responsibilities for
jovernment and great problems. They create immediate and difficult
complex problems for Ministers of Education and, indeed speaking
as a Minister of Finance for seven years, reat difficulties for
Ministers of Finance. But they are problems which we are meeting
and which -ve must continue to meet to give a better world to the
rising generation and those who aspire to freedom and a better
world, in whatever country they are to oe found.
The opportunities for making the most of these talents
and resources; perhaps older men like myself can dream of a world
in which these things have been at some point of time achieved.
Perhaps it will oe the good fortune of those young peoole I see
in this audience today, to find them realised within their own
lifetime.
you are exprTeshsaitn gw iflrlo mje a mgy refoant d inhospteit uatrido, n byo f thleisa rncienregm, onay trtoibduayt, e
to those who have the responsibility of making the laws which can
fashion a oetter order for the world of the future.
I do prize the distinction which you have conferred upon
me and, in so far as it lies within my power, I shall do , wthat I can
gfrooaml s mwy e exhapveer iesnecte , o umrsy elevneesr, g ieasn d mtoy awborikl ittioe st het o efvuorltuhtieorn thoofs ea gwroeraltd
at peace that is progressing, tlit is prosperous and is secure the
liberty and the sense of security of all people who are of gooA will
throughout the world.
I thank you Mr. President and your colleagues. I thank
you, Mr. Prime Minister, for the generous things you have found
yourself able to say to me. It is to me a pleasing thing that the
researchers of the University have delved into some of my earlier
performances. I hope that my performances of the future will be
worthy of the honour they have bestowed upon me. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 18APRI-L
KOILE v
SPEECH 3Y THE PRIME VINI3STER, MRi. iiROLD HOLT
AT DIIFER PARTY IN SEOUL 8TH APRIL, 19 7
Prime Minister Chung, Mrs. Chung, Your Excellencies, Ladies and
Jentlemen: I am delighted to have this opportunity on oehalf of the
Australian Jovernment Iand the Australian Embassy, my colleagues
from Australia of the official party and of the press who are here
with me toni ht to be able to repay in the least fractional
measure the kindness and hospitality, Mr. Prime Minister, that we
have received from your Jovernment and your people. I am afraid
this is only fractional in more senses than one. I am not able to
offer you for example the delightful after-dinner entertainment
with which you regaled us last ni; ht. Even if you were to come to
Australia I question whether we could entertain you as delightfully
as w: e were last evening. It will be a memory we will carry with
us and treasure for many years to come.
He are now near the end not only of our visit to your own
country but of the journey on which we set out some twelve days
ago to visit four o the countries of this area, neighbouring
countries, friendly countries and it has beun for all of us,
I am sure a most enthralling experience. I spoke Last niiht
on what already had occurred to inform and interest us in the
course of our visit to you, and this has been built on today by
our visit to the South of your country.
The weather in a sense was not timed, but I come from a
very arid continent, and I have learned to welcome rain whenever
it comes because rain means good fortune for somebody. At least
I think you are assured of good crops as a result of the rain
which we have encountered here today. I am only sad, and I pass
my s mpathy and that of my colleagues to you that perhaps it
was he result of the difficult conditions which we ourselves
experienced in our own flying that you have suffered this tragic
disaster from the air, which has caused the loss of. so many lives.
Please accept, Prime Minister, our sympathy in this tragic event.
Our first visit to the United Nations Cemetery at Pusan
was a poignant reminder to us of our friendship. I h-id said
yesterday that I understood there was a cemetery here, where one
in every ten of the graves was an Australian grave, and I went
there today. The Officer in charge of the Cemetery for the United
Nations said it was one in six of the graves which .; ts Australian,
and that is a reminder to us of our comradeship in more difficult
times but a comradeship which laid the firm foundations of a
friendship on which we have been aole to ouild ever since that time.
Then, coming from a country which itself has enjoyed great
industrial development over recent years, it was a stimulating
thing to go to Ulsan and see there the tremendous industriil growth
which, thanks to the imaginative vision and drive of your great
President and of your own leadership and -overnment you have
created in a matter of a few years. You now have tre oeginnings of an
industrial complex which will fortify the economic strength of your
country. Already you have, as I understand it perhaps the largest
urea fertiliser plant in the world, a great refinery, and other
/ 2 
-2-
industries with more to follow. As we drove there, despite the rain,
we found friendly people wherever we went. We found the beautiful
countryside which is a part of your great heritage in this
wonderful country.
So all this adds together to ouild a memorable experience
for us. As we come to the end of this journey in Korea my
over-riding impression is first of the friendliness of your people,
the warmth of which his greeted us wherever we have moved. My
other impression is of the strength of your people their
determination to preserve their Korean identity, tAeir determination
to preserve the way of life they treasure. They have shown that
they can and will resist those who would submerge that way of life
in an oppressive communist dictatorship, and they have a determination
not merely to maintain this country as a secure country and a free
country, out to develop it and make it a better country for its
citizens to live as a growing and strong member of the unity of
free nations. May I just add by way of a concluding comment it may be
of some interest to you because I think it is a happy augury for
our future in this region of the world that my journeys have
taken me to four different countries as well as officia encounters
in Hong Kong and Singapore, and at no point have we found a hostile
banner, a hostile voice, a hostile look.
I, as a representative of a country which has European
tradition and origin but -shich is happy to find itself part of the
geographical unity which is Asia have seen warmth and friendliness
wherever I have gone. Nowhere, Prime Minister, have we been
received with more warmtn and more friendline. s than in this country
of Korea, hitherto unexplored by an Australian Prime Minister. I
thank you and your people Mr. Prime Minister for the hospitality which
you have extended to us. I express the confident hope that these
sound foundations of friendship will be built upon in the years
ahead, and make for our two countries a continuing bond which will
be built with strength for the area as a whole.
In that spirit I invite you all to join with me in honouring
a toast to the President of your friendly country of Korea and
Mrs. Chung, their colleagues in the Jovernment, and the people of
Korea whom we honour and with whom , we live in peace. I give you that
toast. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 KOREA
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD. HOLT AT SEOUL 9TH APRIL, 1967
I am nearing the end now of this journey I have been making to
four countries in the Asian region first to Cambodia, then Laos, Taiwan
and finally Korea, with stopover visits to Singapore and Hong Kong where I
have been able to have some talks with officials and members of governments
in those places also.
It has been for me a most informative, interesting and indeed
enthralling journey. I shall return to my own country very much better
informed about the countries and peoples I have visited and I hope that since
this involves me as Head of my Governm ent, the effect will be valuable in
the Cabinet discussions and parliamentary discussions in which I shall be
participating from now on.
But there is one over-riding impression that I should like to
pass on to you and it is the feeling of warmth, of friendship wherever we
have gone. These countries differ in size, in history and tradition, in
circumstance, in t heir foreign policies some of them but wherever we
went as representatives of the Australian Government and people, we were
greeted with the warmest of friendship. I did not see a hostile banner, hear
a hostile voice, nor see a hostile look in any one of the countries we visited
at any of the time we were amongst their poeple, and nowhere has this warmth
of friendliness been more evident than in your own country of Korea.
It was immediately apparent when we arrived and were greeted
by those wonderful crowds which turned out to give a welcome to an
Australian Prime Minister and his party and it has been evident wherever
we have moved since. Quite obviously the comradeship which built up
between our two countries in the period of conflict earlier, has laid a basis
for an enduring friendship. Our co-operation in Viet Nam, in such gatherings
as the Manila Conference, ASPAC and other institutions and meetings where
we are able to develop together our common interests in this area of the
world, have promoted that friendship.
I am sure that with my own visit, the contact that I have had with
your distinguished President, Prime Minister, Members of your Government,
senior members of your community, your university and students, people
that I have met as I have moved around all this will have given fresh warmth
to that friendship and will have deepened it I hope for all time to come.
So I feel tremendously gratified at the experience I have had
throughout the journey, particularly here in Korea. I shall return to my
country feeling that this has been a most rewarding, irformative, valuable
journey and with friendships strengthened that will, I hope, endure for the
benefit of the countries visited and certainly for my own.
Now I would like to make some time available to you to put
whatever questions you would wish to me. This will be our only opportunity
together of speaking quite frankly to each other so please do not hesitate to
put the questions you would like to ask. / 2 
2-
Q. Press reports have been optimistic lately concerning the war
in Viet Nam. T" ey re desperate and are looking for
a face-saving toj~ ri~ ai~ Do you think Hanoi is
desperate? d tn k A action on the part of the
for oGi" t~ inik: of North Viet Nam, will
accomplish t said all fighting must stop on both sides
before we can accomplish anything.
PM: Well, I am in no position to say whether the Viet Cong or the
North Vietn,-mi--: s-e are desp,--ate or not. I do believe, 7.11 the evidence
which n-ei' d have su~ r~~ e; heavy. : x%-erses. Thie
hi! hjm in tk~ f-e-i had a special sif 7:-cance and T believe that
their iossare curnni'Itive. They are talkilg a great deal of punishment,
but so far the, r e has benno overt indira: ifn of a disposition on the part
of Plano: to sezk Can early end to th~ v L It tes. There is one school of
thoug! i, v. hIich e: eves they are dtom: eito hang on, encouraged perhaps
by scn.-, i;., 7-ent whiCh has como Gut Uinited~ SJ ates. In uarticular,
belireviny t et. he 1968 Fresidentia; l rfi--: z a ) b 7zter
atrno . phiere for .1tI~ th--z t',. ey are n: t: h. i'ir belief.
I am s-ure that the American Hycvp~ cii yant to to he conflict
thri3, rh to a just en~ during -eqce but I can't say or adc. i ! c the
informr, ! L'on wich I think is alrea-Ciy well known to most of you that these
nq~~ aio:: shave hee-a sought iouha inutaber of charir:: Is. There has
beer, an ir: fiX~ fSt a. iven in coc.,-cr-,' d form fromr ih Minila
Conferef-ce and bce~ re that t. here were, of curse, indivi&amp; c. l., 1 rpproaches.
The c: esonof bz; through the
truce period all have been direct,: d to the enezoc; i-ag-, rne -X o; -c-ace
nel-otiarir: ns. But I have no conihdence myseh' that an irii: 1eflnite suspension
of bombing would produce an atno,-) phere for negotiations. When it
has been tried prevlously, all that it has done3 is enabled the North
Vietnamese to build up their suapplies and military strength. They
have taken advantage of it to improve their military position and in the
absence of any cl, ar reciprocity, namely, an indication of the willingness
to enter into nozltatic~ ns in good faith, I don't see any advantage from
a suspension of the bombing at this time.
Q. What does Your Excellency think is the best co-operation
between Korea and Australia?
PM: Well, already that co-operation has been evident first in the
assistance we were able to bring to your pe:--pi-e and your forces in their
t ime of need in the crisis of tle 1950' s, and now there 1has been the
co-operation we have had together assisting the South Vietnamese to
resist the communist aggez-; sion with whiclh they are contending. We
are co-operat~ rg for pec. E&amp; rps and for constructive purposes in
such institutions that I have n-: ntionl--1d sitch as ASPAC, the Asian Development
Bark, and other avenues. I am em~ our aged to belil ve that from my
visit today to Uisan and the talks I was able to have with your Deputy
Prime Minister that there will be a growing trade between our two
countries. He spoke in particular of your intention to establish an iron
and steel industry in this couxrtry which woul-i -he likely to require iron ore
from Australia and of your gr~ owing req..-rcrnent for plywood -which would
be devoted to the making of furniture ar. orwher purposes. In these and
other directions, we can look, I think optirnstically, to a growing trade
relations hip between the two coun Li es a -Ad I would hope that arising out
of my own visit and return visits which leaders from your own country
will, I hope, be making to Au-.,.'( ralia, there will be a clos-er relationship
leading to useful coliaboration in areas of security, of diplomatic
collaboration and of growing trade. y. #/ 3 
-3
Q. Reports from Saigon today indicate that the Allied side had
proposed to North Viet Nam for a cease-fire on the occasion of the
Buddhist birthday anniversary next month. Do you think, Mr. Prime
Minister, that this could lead up to a basis for cease-fire negotiations
for enduring peace?
PM: 1 have not heard of such a proposal. . but this is not a
prospect about which I feel optimistic.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister does your Government consider a
possibility of sending more troops to Viet Nam in an effort to bring North
Viet Nam to the negotiating table?
PM: Our troops are in Viet Nam at the invitation of the Government
of South Viet Nam and as requests are received, of course, they are
considered. But it is well known by the Government of South Viet Nam
that Australia has commitments in ct her directions as well and that
Australia is also at this time trying to build up the strength of its own
Regular Army, which involves the use of many regular troops for
instruction purposes. W~ e do also have, for example, forces stationed in
Malaya as part of our commitment in that area of the world with the
Commonwealth Strategic Reserve and, in addition we have, of course, to
assume a responsibility in respect of Papua and New Guinea and our own home
defence so there is not at present time any proposal before the Government
for Increasing the size of its forces. The latest increases have more than
doubled the strength which existed not so very long ago. I may say we have
doubled the provision for defence over the last four years and this now
represents somewhere between 4 to 5 per cent. of the gross national
product. Q. Mr. Prime Minister, what do you think, in your opinion, the
allied troops in Viet Nam should do to win the war or to bring the war to
an early close? Do you favour the escalation, including bombing of the
north, or do you favour descalatlon?
PM: I think these are matters which rest largely on the military
judgment of the people who lead the forces there and I think one can take
up from the results which are now being achieved that the military forces
are operating very effectively. I believe very effectively indeed. I would
not assume myself the responsibility for urging any particular type of
military activity. I think that In my judgment, this is largely a matter on
which one must rest on the advice of our military experts.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, we heard of your rejection of the peace
proposal suggested by U Thant. Do you have any ideas for a settlement
of the war in Viet Nam? If not, what do you think is the best way for early
peace in Viet Nam?
PM: I thought we had made that clear in our Joint Declaration at
Manila. We indicated there the circumstances which we felt just and
reasonable. The criticism I had to offer in it was not directed to Secretary
U Thant or his very well meaning efforts to bring this unhappy business to
a conclusion but I felt that to suspend the bombing without any reciprocity
on the other side was, having regard to our earlier experience, not a
realistic way for us to secure the negotiations we were seeking.
Q. Yesterday, you had discussions with Prime Minister Chung
about trade relations between Korea and Australia. Have you arrived at
any concrete agreement? Please tell us. 
4-
PM-. There was not much opportunity yesterday to talk on economic
matters for my talks with the Prime Minister were occupied mainly
in discussions on the Viet Nam issue, as they were later with President
Park. I was interested to have an assessment of the developments in
China and our time was largely taken up with these matters, but in the
course of today's travel, during which I spent a good deal of the time
with the Deputy Prime Minister, we have discussed a variety of
economic matters.
I have already indicated the possibilities of increasing trade
which there seems to be in the future, but we were not conducting
negotiation on a trade agreement or anything of that sort. He did tell
me that an economic mission would be going to Australia with a view
to examining various possibilities there and no doubt holding discussions
with the appropriate people in our trade departments.
Q. Do you have any plan to make ASPAC go rather swinging?
PM: Well, I certainly hope that ASPAC will develop in usefulness
but I am not in a position to indicate any special direction at this time.
My Foreign Minister would have been giving his personal attention to
this and he will be meeting representatives of your own Government
at the meeting of representatives of friendly forces in Washington, as
indeed no doubt they will have met at ECAFE also. He left Australia
shortly before I did and I do not know what account he has to give of
these discussions, but we have welcomed the formation of ASPAC and so
far as we are concerned we shall be doing what we can to make it a
worthwhile corporation.
Q. In Hong Kong and Taipei you were asked questions about
A-ustralia's immigration control and in your reply you pointed out that
there had been considerable liberalisation during the past twenty years
and the Australian Government policy was understood by the Asian
Governments. in the light of this would you comment on charges by one
of your Government colleagues the other day that Australia's controls
were highly discriminatory. He put forward the proposal that Ascia should
go out and join ( rest of question indistinct)
PM: Well, I have not seen any text of any such proposal anct indeed,
if there are people of Asian extraction who become naturalised Australians,
they are eligible to join the forces for National Service legislation now
applies to aliens as well, as you would know. But it may be of interest
seeing that I did make a statement when this question was first put to
me, that it occupies a greater prominence in the minds of the pressmen
than of the Governments who are, I think, well understanding of the
reasons for policy and who, in their own countries, administer policy
relating to immigration from other countries, that not one government
representative has raised this matter with me in any of the four countries
that I have visited.
Can I just add, for the information of our Korean friends here,
some of the details which I gave to a question relating to immigration
policy when it was asked earlier at the two places Mr. Ramsey has
mentioned. Since the war, some 3C, C0O people have been admitted to
Australia who would not have been eligible for admission under the rules
which previously applied. He spoke of some liberalisation of our / 3 
1 b ( MR. HOLT Contd. immigration policy. More than 6, 000 have qualified
for full naturalisation and early in my own term as Prime Minister, I
brought the period of qualification of naturalisation for Asian citizens
into line with that which applies to those residents of Australia from
other countries as well. There are also currently in Australia some
12, 000 students from various countries of Asia in our colleges and
universities and I am certain that if any of you have the opportunity to
come to Australia or to visit Australia you will be agreeably surprised
not only at the degree of friendship shown to you but the absence of any
discrimination practised against people of any other race from our own.
Q. At the conference yesterday with Prime Minister Chung, were
there any discussions on assistance to reconstruction in Viet Nam? If
there were any please point out something concrete and also was there
any discussion about additional troop despatch from Korea to Viet Nam?
PM: I think you will appreciate that it is not appropriate for me to
give details of confidential discussions which were held between us, but
as to the first part of your question, I can just put the answer quite
broadly. Our forces there are engaged in work of civic action and there
is, on Australia's part, as I have no doubt there is on the part of Korea
also, aid given in addition to the work of civic action by the armed forces.
I have no doubt that if we could secure a peace settlement that there would
be a good deal of reconstruction to be carried out in South Viet Nam
and Australia would hold itself willing, as no doubt Korea would also, to
give assistance in the work of peace just as we have felt glad to give
assistance to meet the crisis of war.
As to the reference to troops from Korea, that matter was not
raised by me and any announcement which your own Government has to
make on this matter would come appropriately from them. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 bIsro
8 APR 1967
KOREA_
JOINT COMMUNIQUE BY PRIME MINISTER IL KWON CHUNG
OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA AND PRIME MINISTER HAROLD
HOLT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 9TH APRIL, 1967
At the invitation of His Excellency 11 Kwon Chung. Prime
Minister of the Republic of Korea, the Right Honourable Harold Holt,
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia paid an official visit
to the Republic of Korea from 6th to 9th April, 1967.
Prime Minister Holt was accompanied by Mrs. Holt, Sir
Laurence Mclnture, Deputy Secretary of the Department of Ext ernal
Affairs, Mr. D. J, Munro, First Assistant Secretary of the Prime Minister's
Department and other officials of the Australian Government.
During the visit, Prime Minister Holt had a highly profitable
exchange of views with His Excellency President Park Chung Hee of the
RepuliIc of Korea, and he and the Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea
had a series of frank discussions on matters of common concern In a most
cordial atmosphere. The two Prime Ministers noted with satisfaction that the
friendly relations existing between their countries have recently been
further strengthoned through Increased co-operation In their common
Interest and through joint endeavours for the security and prosperity of
the Asian and Pacific region.
Prime Minister Chung, recalling with gratitude the part
played by the Australian Armed Forces in the Korean war, stated that the
visit of Prime Minister Holt to Korea at such a time had a special
significance and marked a milestone in the history of Korean-Australian
relations. The two Prime Ministers gave particular attention to recent
developments in the Asian and Pacific region. They noted that the united
strength of the free nations in the region has been effectively containing
the further expansion of the aggressive forces of communism.
In the course of their deliberations, the two Prime Ministers
reviewed in detail the latest developments In Viet Nam in the military
as well as the political, economic and social fields and discussed ways
and means of promoting co-operation between their two countries In
achieving their common goals of restoring peace and safeguarding freedom
In Viet Nam. They were firmly resolved to do all in their power to
prevent the conflict In Viet Nam from spreading to the rest of the region
and from affecting other regions of the world as well.
They expressed their satisfaction over the more favourable
military situation recently achieved in Viet Nam through the determination
and sacrifices of the Vietnamese people and the joint efforts of their
allies as well as the successful implementation of various programmes of
pacification and social development. e* 
-2
They reaffirmed the resolve of both countries as proclaimed
at the Manila Summit Conference in October, 1966, to continue their
military and other efforts until the communists realise that their aggressive
schemes and actions would not be rewarded and consequently stop their
aggression. The two Prime Ministers agreed that continuing efforts should be
made in search of peace in Viet Nam. They agreed that such a peace must
guarantee the cessation of acts of aggression by the communists and uphold
and respect the independence of the Republic of Viet Nam and the right of
the Vietnamese people to choose their own way of life.
The two Prime Ministers further agreed that a settlement in Viet
Nam, to be enduring, must respect the wishes and aspirations of the
Vietnamese Government and people, that the Vietnamese Government should
be a full participant in any negotiations designed to bring about a settlement
of the conflict and that the nations which have contributed to the defence
of the Republic of Viet Nam should participate in any future settlenti of the
conflict. The two Prime Ministers, recognising the valuable achievements
of the Manila Summwit Conference and the Asian and Pacific Council, stressed
the historic significance of the growth of regional solidarity among the free
nations in the region, including their two countries, as convincing signs of
a brighter and more prosperous future for the region as a whole. They
shared the view that the foundation of a new community in the Pacific has
thus been laid by the countries in the region, and that such a community
should continue to be developed through mutual co-operation of the regiona.
countries working together as equal partners.
They reiterated that their common purpose is to defend the
region from external aggression, maintain peace and order and develop
the region in accordance with the aims envisaged in the goals of freedom
adopted in Manila on October 25, 1966. To this end they agreed to further
the development of adequate machinery for consultation and co-operation.
Prime Minister 11 Kwon Chung, on behalf of the Government and
people of the Republic of Kcrea, expressed deep appreciation for the
valuable support which Australia, a member of the United Nations Commission
for Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea, has rendered to the
position of the Republic of Korea at the United Nations.
Prime Minister Holt, in response, stated that his Government
would continue to uphold the principles which have been repeatedly
reaffirmed at the United Nations with regard iD the unification of Korea.
The two Prime Ministers reviewed trade relations existing
between the two countries and discussed ways and means to promote
mutual trade. Prime Minister Holt welcomed Korea's admission to the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and hoped that trade between
the two countries would be further stimulated through the framework of
the agreement. The two Prime Miniiste~ rs agreed that further discussions should
be held between represebativez u the two Governments with the object of
promoting trade between the two countries. / 3 
-3-
Prime Minister Chung expressed appreciation for the co-operation
rendered thus far by Australia in the economic field, mainly through the
Colombo Plan.
The Australian Prime Minister undertook to examine ways in
which this co-operation might be extended, including the possibility of
providing additional training facilities in Australia for Korean technicians.
Prime Minister Holt expressed his profound thanks to the
Government and people of the Republic of Korea for the great friendliness
and the warm hospitality extended to him and his party from the moment
of their arrival in Seoul. 



ASI. UN TOUIR 1967 KORE1
SPEECH BY THE PRIME IJNI3TER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
ON DEPr. RTURE FRO. 1 SEOUL 9TH PRIL, 1967
As I make my departure from Korea, I would like to sum
up in these few Iinal words, some of the impressions that Mrs.
Holt and I and the other memoers of my party will take away with
us at the end of this most memorable visit.
First of all, Mr. Prime Minister I heartily endorse
your description of this visit as an important milestone in the
history o the relationship betv een our two countries. It has
prov. ied us with a clear indiclation of the pro'' ress we have made
in cemniting that comradeship that we establis ed in the days of
your greatest peril seventeen years ago.
One indelible impression that we shall take away is that
of the tremendous warmth of your welcome to us and of the great
kindness that you and all your people have extended to us since
our arrival here. We have always understood thtt the Koreans were
a .! arm-hearted people !, ho did not hesitAate to display openly their
liking and respect for friends, : nd it has been a stirriny experience
to us to have his understanding so strikingly confirmed.
We have also been deeply impressed b all the evidence we
haanvde msoedeenr noifs attihoen spolf endoiudr pcyro~ oug nrres s ypoaur tihcauv e mrla e ini ntt ihtnehe e ppirssettc ottnows ot ryyueecatarirsso. n
This w s raphically aeronstrate to me yestraay at Ulsan, where
I ' vas Invited to inspect some of your flourishing new. industries.
I am quite suIre amtqhueiree is ean sT entuhian e tahn d a justified ride in these
-~ hav3cretesridein these
achievements and I can sense that they hava creqtd a new feeling
of self-confidence and self-reliance throughout your country.
I have also had an opportunity to admire the disciplined
efficiency and toughness of your :-armed forces. It is not difficult to
see how they have earned their considerable reputation as fighting
; miehno: areI nkonwow setrhvaitn gt hweyi the njtohye m thine rtheesp erecst isotaf nocuer Aouf stcormalmiuanni stforces,
terrorism and agression in Vietnam.
Finally, Mr. Prime Minister let me say I have drawn reat
encourayement from the several frank Aiscussions th4t I have ha in
these three days with your President and with you and your Ministers.
I shall go awa reassured by the close similarity of our views on
the issues that oear upon the future peace and prosperity of the
KAosriaena aanndd APaucsitfriacl iare, giaorne, waonrdk inbgy tthowea . tcrodsn vtihcet iosna met haetn dsb. oth of us,
I could ask you to convey to His Excellency, President Park,
the good wishes of all ustralians and my compliments for all that
has been achieved in Korea under his inspired leadership.
once again Ttoh ey oug, r atMerf. u lP ritmhea nkMs inoifs tMerr, s . anHdo ltt o anMdr s. m yCsheulnf g, an dI meyx ppreasrsty for
all your many kindnesses to us. This has been a wonderful experience.
Toodbye to you all, and may our friendship continue to prosper. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967
STATEMENT TO THE PRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. H AROLD HOLT, AT MASCOT AIRPORT, SYDNEY APRIL, 1967
Tony Eggleton has explained that I feel my first respcosibility,
so far as any detailed report is concerned, is to make my report to the
Parliament. I have given an assurance that If Parliament is in session, it
should be the first to hear matters of substantial political importance, but I
am able, I feel, to m~ ake some broad comments to you, and-hope this will be
of some assistance in the task you have.
First, I would say that this has been one of the most
rewarding and valuable official journeys I can ever recall having made. It
exceeded my best expectations in meeting the purposes for which I set out.
I don't really think it could have gone better from my point of view or, for
that matter, from Australia's point of view.
Tisl was, in the case of each of the four countries visited,
the first time an Australian Prime Minister had been there. This fact was
very much appreciated. You will have gathered from the press accounts that
wherever we went we were greeted with not only friendliness but a warmth of
friendliness which was very gratifying and encouraging. Those who had feared
that our foreign policies might have antagonised the countries of Asia, I think,
would have taken some comfort from what we encountered.
I didn't, in any country visited, experience a hostile banner,
a hostile voice, a sour look, whether at the official level or amongst the
people we met or those we saw as we moved about the cities and the countryside.
So I think it can be quite confidently accepted that there is a wealth of
friendliness for Australia in that area of the world.
It became clear to me that Australia had become accepted
as a member of the Asian and Pacific community, that we were not on the
outside looking in. We were regarded as one of the countries of the area
involved in its problems and, at the same time, able to make our own useful
contribution to it. The Press tell me that they were very well received wherever
they went. It was a mark of the warmth of friendliness which Cambodia, and
Prince Sihanouk In particular, feels towards Australia in that the press were
allowed to enter there in that substantial body which accompanied me. There
is an official policy denying entry to Cambodia for journalists from countries
which are held to pursue differing polcies in respect of Viet Nam, but our
pressmen were made welcome. They attended official functions hosted by
the Head of Government, the Head of State and they tell me that wherever they
went they were particularly well received.
As far as every area of governmental Interest economic,
political and security is concerned I am sure this visit has contributed
very valuably to Australian purposes in all these directions. One of the
discoveries for me and there were many discoveries on this journey was
the strength of South Korea, the extraordinary industrial growth there, the
bright trade prospects they see with Australia. 
-2
This was true also of Taiwan. Both these countries have
very high economic growth rates; both see a rapidly-growing trade with
Australia. Both, for example, intend to set up an iron and steel lu1dustry,
and will be looking to Australia for the iron ore required by these industries.
However, I won't go into too much detail on those matters because I shall
be elaborating on them in Parliament.
I tri ad to project an Australian attitude of fairness and
friendliness, but the views we put we hold to firmly. I expressed them
forthrightly and with frankness but in a spirit of friendliness and they were
well received in that spirit wherever we went.
I am sure that my own knowledge of the countries visited,
and that of the official party which accompanied me has been greatly
improved. We have a deeper understanding, a more realistic understanding
of the problems of the countries concerned. It was an educational tour
in a sense. That education has led to a better knowledge; the better
knowledge has produced a deeper understanding, and out of that understanding
there has developed a warmer and more enduring friendship for us.
So altogether I feel that the journey has been very well
worthwhile and that Australian interests have been promoted as a
consequence of it. Thank you. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO ASIA
Ministerial Statement
.[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 12 April 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister)-by leave-Mr Speaker, this Australia
of ours is a vast island continent
inhabited largely by people of British or
other European stock and with a heritage
of national freedom, personal liberty and
the institutions of a British parliamentary
democracy. But geographically we are part
of Asia, and increasingly we have become
aware of our involvement in the affairs of
Asia. Our greatest dangers and our highest
hopes are centred in Asia's tomorrows.
Already one Asian country has become
established as the largest purchaser, in terms
of money value, of Australian exports. The
only military operations in which we are
-now engaged or in which we have been
engaged since the Second World War are
located in Asia.
It is a basic tenet of our national policy
to live in friendship and understanding with
our Asian neighbours, but the very word
' Asia', while a convenient general description,
is itself misleading. There are greater
diversities of race, religion, tradition,
appearance and national economic development
to be found in Asia than in any other
region on earth. These differences establish
the importance of better knowledge of those
amongst whom we live and the value of
our friendship with them.
5037/ 67 It was with these thoughts in mind that
I set out recently to see at first hand more
of the friendly nations I had not visited
before, to meet their leaders and their
people, to . remind them where Australia
stood in her friendships and to learn
something of their own attitudes. I visited,
in that order, Cambodia, Laos, Taiwan and
South Korea in the course of a thirteen
days tour. The circumstances of -travel
enabled me to have useful talks also in
Singhpore, Hong Kong and Manila, and at
a fuelling stop-over in Okinawa, an island
of strategic importance in the Second World
War, I was able to see the considerable
defence base which is still maintained there.
I returned heartened by the reception which
1 and my official party received. I was
greatly encouraged by the warmi and kindly
spirit in which Australia has been accepted
as a good neighbour and a good frienid.
Our place in Asia is no new discovery,
but its significance has become ' heightened
for us over recent years. The nations which
I visited are ancient lands with rich and
colourful histories. Some of them trace their
histories back 4,000 to 5,000 years. For
some time I have felt that great benefits
were to ' be won by a ' more personal
demonstration of our nearness and our
interest. In recent months my colleague, the 
Minister for External Affairs ( Mr Hasluck),
has visited -the same countries. In -the last
two years joint parliamentary delegations
also have travelled to them. The sum of our
knowledge as a people is growing and is
assisted by the reporting in the Australian
Press and on radio and television around
visits such as that which I have just accomplished.
So is our knowledge as members
of this Parliament. My own visit was part
of the pattern we are developing and as
head of the Australian Government I sought
to underline the warm and genuine interest
we have in the security, progress and prosperity
of the countries of the Asian and
Pacific area.
It was, incidentally, the first visit of an
Australian Prime Minister to each of these
four countries and my third journey as
Prime Minister to the area. I hope that
there can be two-way traffic in personal
exchanges, and my Government will welcome
visits to Australia, as opportunity
offers, of leading public personalities from
these and other countries of the region. Our
interest in Asia is deep. It must be developed
and it must be permanent, for my Governmrent
and I believe that Asia is now the
crucial area of the struggle to preserve the
values of independence, liberty and social
justice for which we have previously fought
in two global wars. I believe also that it
offers bright prospects, if peace can be
secured and maintained, for spectacular
economic progress.
. I believe that for all the shift and change
in the world, none is more important to
us in Australia than the shift of international
tensions from Europe to Asia. We
have to be active on several fronts-on
the armed frontiers where we stand in support
of a small country and with a great
ally and other friendly forces against
aggression; on the frontiers of progress to
a better life for the emerging nations of
Asia; and on the frontiers of our culture
and theirs-for it is by these things, too,
that we know each other better and learn,
as different people with diverse interests,
to live peacefully together.
There is, of course, a continuing preoccupation
with the course of the war in
Vietnam. This was a central point in most
of the talks I had with the statesmen of
these Asian nations. My first person-toperson
talks were in neutral Cambodia with Prince Sihanouk, leader of 61 million
people, whose country is bordered by
Thailand, Vietnam and Laos. The long
history of the nations of Indo-China has
been beset with difficulties. This helps us,
I think, to understand Cambodia's determined
neutrality. There has been the long
struggle to preserve the Khmer race with
its own traditions and cultures. The North
Vietnamese and the Vietcong at times
transgress Cambodian borders for military
purposes-to move men and supplies to
their forces and, at other times, when they
are driven back by the fighting in South
Vietnam. But Prince Sihanouk asserts that
he resents the intrusion of any foreigners
and he insists that he would resist and use
force to remove any alien force which continued
to occupy Cambodian soil.
Australia and Cambodia, to quote Prince
Sihanouk, exercise different options in their
foreign policies. His friendly attitude to ' us
is clearly not based on an identity of views
on political and other questions. Because . he
opposes any foreign intervention in the
affairs of Cambodia., he opposes any foreign
intervention in the affairs of Vietnam or,
for that matter, anywhere else. He feels
that the people of Vietnam as a whole
should resolve their differences, however
tragic and bloody the process might be.
We differ on these points. We joined with
others in resisting aggression in two world
wars. We have long been committed to an
intervention in response to an appeal for
help against Communist aggression, and we
believe also that the Vietnamese should
choose in a democratic way how they should
live and who their leader should be. We
nominate nobody in advance of the event.
But these differences, I am happy to say,
and as I found, are differences, although
important differences, among friends. In
simple terms the Prince says that he has had
friendship from Australia and he gives
friendship in return. This is why he accepted
Australia as the channel between Cambodia
and the United States of America when
diplomatic relations between -those two
countries were severed, and why we act in
the same way for him in South Vietnam.
Prince Sihanouk is a popular leader and
takes an enlightened view of Cambodia's
domestic needs. He has a vigorous programme
of economic development, and his 
administration has happily married the practical
and the aesthetic with modern buildings
having imaginative aspects. At
Sihanoukville a modern port and town,
largely created as a product of his own
inspiration, have been hewn out of the seaboard
jungle in a few years and ha e given
Cambodia a strategic water supply route
formerly confined to the Mekong, which
passes through territory he would regard as
hostile with its unsettled surroundings.
I mention these things in passing as a
reminder that though this neutral country
lives uneasily in the shadow of war, it is
concerned, as we are, with programmes to
improve the lot of its people. We found
there a lively enthusiasm to make a better
life. There lie opportunities for Australia to
continue to express her friendship in practical
ways. It was perhaps significant that,
, although Cambodia retains a ban on the
journalists of many countries, this was
waived in the case of the large party of
Australian journalists which accompanied
me. They, too, found the reception cordial,
and said so, through the president of the
Press Gallery, Mr John Bennetts, in a
special message of thanks to Prince
Sihanouk. Each gesture like this adds something
to the mainstream of our effort. I
carried no brief for other nations in Cambodia,
or the other countries I visited, and
I hope the sum of all I said in many frank
and friendly talks helped to underwrite the
independence of our thinking and our
policy-making.
In Laos, also neutral and also well
disposed, I had significant discussions with
the Prime Minister, Prince Souvanna
Phouma, and King Sri Savang Vatthana, and
other Ministers. I learned that, as on my
last visit to Thailand, I was the first Prime
Minister or Minister from any country to
be invited to attend a meeting of the
Cabinet. This small, land-locked country is
struggling to preserve its neutrality. This is
threatened only by North Vietnam which
maintains more than 20,000 regular combat
troops on Laotian soil to guard the supply
route to the battle areas in South Vietnam.
As Prince Souvanna Phouma himself said
at the General Assembly of the United
Nations in October 1966: ' It is no longer a secret to anyone that entire North Vietnamese
battalions are operating in our
country'. He also said: ' The Ho Chi Minh
trail over which foreign troops and weapons
pass is in our territory'. The Prince claims
that the Pathet Lao has no base of popular
support, is not prominent in military operations,
and has no substantial political significance.
I quote a passage from his talk with
me. He said: ' If we kill an enemy soldier,
we find he is a North Vietnamese; if we
wound one, he is a North Vietnamese; if we
take one prisoner, he is a North Vietnamese.
But if the North Vietnamese make some
military gains, then the Pathet Lao move in
like a lot of crows.'
Laos, due not to lack of enlightenment
but largely to the aggression it has ' had to
withstand, is poor and underdeveloped. With
peace, I am sure Laos could make substantial
progress. I assured its leaders that Australia
will continue to make its contribution
to the economic development of Laos and
the stability of its currency through our contribution
to the Foreign Exchange Operations
Fund. I was assured, not only by the
Laotians but by our Ambassador there, that
this is the most valuable way in which we
can give practical help at present-by helping
to stabilise and strengthen the currency.
I also assured the Laotian Government that
it had our sympathy and support in its
resistance to attacks on its sovereignty, its
territorial integrity and its neutrality.
This completed the first'half of my tour
which embraced the non-aligned countries.
I went then to Taiwan and South Korea,
both aligned with the United States in relation
to events in Vietnam
In the Republic of China I had frank discussions
with President Chiang Kai-shek, as
well as with the Vice-President, Prime
Minister Yen and other Chinese Government
leaders. The island under its present
Government is stable and prosperous. There
is an air of vitality in what is being done
and obvious evidence of economic progress.
It is a going concern and is no longer receiving
American aid. I was also glad to find
the Republic of China strengthening its
position internationally by its active participation
in the Economic Commission for
Asia and the Far East, -the Asian Development
Bank and the Asian and Pacific Council.
Members of the Government see good
prospects of a substantial growth in trade 
between our two countries. President Chiang
expressed his admiration and that of his
Government and people for the stand we
had taken over Vietnam and for the significant
military aid we were giving.
I was impressed by the lead the Republic
of China is giving in the field of overseas
aid, especially in a number of African
countries. Technical advisers as well as
persons to work in the fields with the
Africans have been successful in a number
of African countries in demonstrating how
agricultural productivity, particularly in rice
growing, can be increased. I was told that
in some instances production had actually
increased tenfold as a result of this technical
assistance.
I also had opportunities for frank and
informative discussion on internal developments
on the mainland of China. Living so
close to mainland China, receiving refugees
and defectors from the mainland, the
Government on Taiwan has access to useful
information and intelligence on the
present complex situation on the mainland.
The establishment of an Australian mission
in Taipei last September, which was warmly
welcomed by the Republic of China, should
help the Government in its quest to acquire
more information about developments in
mainland China.
Despite some predictions to the contrary,
neither our trade with mainland China nor
our recent decision to accord diplomatic
recognition to Outer Mongolia were raised
in official discussions. I did, however, have
occasion to refer to the latter question when
asked at a Press conference in Taipei. I
explained at that Press conference that this
was an Australian decision and that it was
of value to the Republic of China to have
a country like Australia, making its own
decisions on the merits it saw in particular
circumstances, generally supporting the
position of the Republic of China in other
areas. In Korea there was much I found
impressive. The Republic has strength, is
democratic, stable and going ahead. It has
made a good recovery from the ravages of
war in the early 1950s when it was a
victim of Communist aggression. Australian
assistance in resisting that aggression is
gratefully remembered and has laid an
enduring foundation for the warm friendship which undoubtedly exists between our two
countries. On the evening I arrived in
Seoul I drove through what was estimated
as half a million welcoming and obviously
friendly people lining the streets. The size
and warmth of the welcome were exemplified
by one Australian flag I saw which hung
the full length of seven storeys on one
building. This amazing welcome was a
measure of the regard in which Australia
is held in Korea. When I visited the industrial
centres of Pusan and Ulsan in the south
it was moving to see thousands of people
in total standing in heavy rain in small
groups in the villages en route to wave a
friendly welcome as our party passed.
At the United Nations cemetery at Pusan
where one grave in six is that of an Australian
the thought was deeply with me
that those who had given their lives in this
country had done so for a good cause. The
present free and progressive society in South
Korea is the outcome of that sacrifice.
Members from this Parliament who have
been to this country, no matter on what
side of this House they sit, will confirm
the friendliness of the people and the progress
that they are making. A
helicopter flight from Seoul took me to
an observation post on the border of the
Han River where the demilitarised zone
begins. -Across the river literally a few minutes
jet flying time from Seoul, the capital of
the country, Communist strongpoints were
established and could be seen. The people
of the Republic of Korea have this everpresent
reminder of the continuing Communist
threat to their national independence
and their separation from a significant part
of their former territory and their kinsmen.
It is not surprising in the circumstances that
their armed forces totalling more than
600,000 should rank amongst the bravest,
the toughest and the best trained in the
world. On this border a marine group gave
a demonstration of their methods of
unarmed combat. Tae kwon do they call
it. It is * the forerunner of karate adopted
in Japan. I saw men with their bare hands
smash building bricks and thick wooden
pieces. I tested the objects myself and there
was no doubt that they were genuine. They
were able to achieve these feats with their
bare hands. One fellow did it with his forehead;
others did it with their elbows. 
Mr Whitlam-The Prime Minister should
have tried his forehead.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I think that the
thickest heads in the Parliament are on
the Opposition side, but even they would
have had some difficulty in accomplishing
this feat of toughness and endurance.
While in Korea I had profitable exchanges
with President Park and Prime Minister
Chung. As comrades in arms in Vietnam
we reaffirmed our resolve, proclaimed at
the Manila Summit Conference in October
1966, to continue our efforts until aggression
ceased and an enduring settlement had
been reached which respected the wishes
and aspirations of the Vietnamese people.
We agreed that the Vietnamese Government
should be a full participant in any
negotiations to end the conflict and that
the nations which have contributed to the
defence of Vietnam should also participate.
We cannot, of course, lay down in advance
what form this might take.
I believe the remarkable progress evident
in Korea is of relevance to Vietnam and
gives us hope, by its example, that beyond
the clouds of war there is a horizon of
peace, political stability, social justice and
economic advancement.
I comment now briefly on the attitudes
to our position -in Vietnam as they were
given to me at various points in my tour.
In both Taiwan and Korea there was strong
support of the stand we have taken in
Vietnam. In Laos, there was understanding
of our action and in Cambodia, which has
publicly expressed its opposition to United
States policy in Vietnam, I was able to
confirm that our own policy towards
Vietnam and our actions in that country
have not damaged the good relations which
exist between Australia and Cambodia. As
I said earlier, Cambodia bases its attitude
to us on a principle of reciprocity: if we
are friendly to it and behave as a good
friend to it Cambodia is friendly and
behaves as a good friend to us.
Generally, I am reinforced in my judgment
that Australia is not-as is sometimes
alleged by critics of my Governmentdamaging
its image in Asia because of
our action in respect of Vietnam. Many
countries in the region publicly support our
position. Others have expressed, in private, understanding of our reasons for our participation
in Vietnam. To speak of Asian
opinion in this context as though there was
a general view prevailing throughout Asia
is totally misleading. As I have said earlier,
Asia, except as a geographical description,
is a practically meaningless term. Each
country in Asia has its own identity, its
own policies, and its own views on Australia's
actions in Vietnam or, for that
matter, anywhere else.
One of the things which impressed me
on this visit is the degree to which national
identities and national cultures are flowering
and being rediscovered, following the end
of the colonial era. I have now visited
Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos. Each of the
countries visited has its own quite different
language, its own national culture, and its
own identity. It is not very long ago that
Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos were all
grouped together by their colonial administrators
as Indo-China. We must, while the
war drags on, be vigorous in our planning
for peace. We put roots down a long, long
time ago with the Colombo Plan, and as I
moved from country to country I saw
something of what we were doing.
In Cambodia, Government leaders spoke
highly of the value and effectiveness of
Australian aid. Prince Sihanouk personally
gave to the hydrographic survey vessel we
presented, which is doing such valuable
work in the harbour of Sihanoukville, the
name Khmer-Australie Amitie'-or, in our
language, ' Cambodian-Australian Friendship'.
In Laos, Prince Souvanna Phouma
expressed his profound gratitude for what
he referred to as ' the positive and
constructive' aid given by Australia.
In South Korea, I saw the contribution
which we were making to Korean technical
progress through the supply of machine
tools and other equipment to Yong San
Technical School.
Generally, I formed the impression that
our aid programmes in these countries,
though modest, have proved valuable and
effective. One of the reasons for this is that
our aid is all in the form of grants. It is
given without strings-with no conditions.
It usually takes a highly practical form of
identifiable items or of the technical
assistance given by Australian personnel. 
Aid-receiving countries accept that we see
the raising of Asian living standards as a
desirable end in itself, and not simply a
means of making gains in the cold war.
Communist countries which attack the giving
of aid by Western nations as a form ot
neo-colonialism are themselves seeking to
deny these countries the assistance which
the countries need to progress and develop.
By their attacks they would perpetuate an
economic and social backwardness from
which those in need of aid hunger to free
themselves. We should not be deceived by Communist
jargon. So when they talk of neocolonialism
they tend to mask their own
efforts to bring newly independent countries
under their own direct sphere of influence.
When they talk of wars of national liberation,
they abuse -the English language in
that the wars they have in mind are in
essence both anti-national and opposed to
genuine liberation. Again, they seek the
establishment of docile Communist regimes
under this slogan.
We are not opposed to the social revolution
which has been taking place and is
continuing in South East Asia. This social
revolution reflects long suppressed yearnings
for national identity, social betterment and
economic progress. We seek these things
for ourselves. What we are opposed to is
the perversion of the forces of social revolution
in Asia to establish through indirect
pressures, through subversion, through
insurgency, through terrorism and aggression,
Communist regimes which are neither
sought nor wanted by the majority of the
people in the countries concerned.
What results can fairly be claimed from
this journey? I believe my visit has contributed
to the consolidation of our relationships
with each of the four countries
concerned. I believe it has strengthened our
stature and influence with the four Governments
with whose leaders I conferred.
Moreover, it has given added backing
to our diplomatic effort in Phnom
Penh, Vientiane, Taipei and Seoul.
I believe the visit was of value -to me
personally in an educational sense. I feel
I now have a greater understanding in
depth of the problems which affect us in each of the four countries, just as I feel
that they now have a greater understanding
of us. Knowledge strengthens understanding
and understanding strengthens friendship. I
believe that -thanks to an excellent coverage
by Press, radio and television, these countries
and their problems and potentialities
have become better known to the Australian
people. I believe that, through my visit,
further progress has been made along our
chosen path of securing the acceptance of
Australia by the countries of the Asian and
Pacific region as a co-operative and useful
member of the region.
I visited two countries which are closely
allied, like ourselves, with the Uniled States
of America, and two countries which seek
to preserve a status of neutrality. Our
relationships with other countries are not
determined solely on the basis of whether
they are allied with us. We accept diversity.
In our search for a stable, secure Asian
region, growing in economic prosperity, we
promote the closest relations with Asian
allies in collective defence organisations.
But we also seek to promote the best
possible relations with countries which have
chosen the path of neutrality. We support
and seek to uphold the national integrity
of all countries in the region. And beyond
this, we look to a future settlement with
mainland China, without which there can be
no lasting peace in Asia.
The success of my visit to these four
countries, the warmth of my reception in
each one of them, and the genuinely
friendly attitude towards Australia which I
discovered, are due in some measure to
the years of patient effort put into developing
personal contacts with these countries
through the efforts of the Department of
External Affairs and our diplomatic representatives
in the area. I cannot speak too
highly of those who, sometimes under
arduous conditions and et times conditions
of danger, represent Australia in such a
dedicated manner in these countries. It is
a matter of some pride to me, and a measure
of the focus of our interest in the Asian
region, that with the establishment of our
embassy in Taiwan last year, we are now
represented in every independent country
in the Asian and Pacific region which we
recognise, except Mongolia, which we have
only recently recognised. 
There has been silly comment in some
quarters to the effect that. in undertaking
journeys of this kind I am, in some way,
usurping the role or functions of the Minister
for External Affairs. This is nonsense.
' the Prime Minister as head of his Cabinet
has an important responsibility for the
foreign policies of his Government and its
relations with other countries and the view
held of his own country by them. A government's
foreign policy is no more divisible
from the central problems of government
policy-making than its domestic policies.
In some countries, the Prime Minister
holds the portfolio of foreign affairs; in
others, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
tends to be not much more than an echo
of the views of his head of state or Prime
Minister. In Australia, the position is much
more closely identifiable with that of the
United Kingdom where it is customary to
find a strong personality holding the foreign
affairs portfolio, capable of interpreting
articulately the foreign policies of his
Government, negotiating for it, and holding
meetings at the highest level. This situation
has never excluded journeys or attendances
by the Prime Minister on occasion, sometimes
accompanied . by his Foreign Minister,
sometimes not. My own overseas journeys
during my term of office have principally
been of an educational kind, with the added
objective of establishing personal relations
with heads of government in other countries.
On the only two occasions when I have
attended conferences, both conducted at a
level of heads of government-the Prime
Ministers Conference in London and the
Manila Summit Conference-I arranged for
the Minister for External Affa-irs to accompany
me.
In the modern world where international
contacts tend to proliferate, a Foreign
Minister is busily occupied throughout the
year. Our own Minister for External Affairs
has personally represented us at meetings of
the United Nations, of SEATO, of A'NZUS,
of ECAFE and of ASPAC, and at the conference
establishing the Asian Development
Bank, as well as accompanying me to the
conferences I have mentioned and conducting
many discussions on visits to many countries
in Asia, Europe and North America
at Foreign Minister and, indeed, -higher
levels. I believe that our activities have
usefuly supplemented those of each other
in our respective. spheres. There has been another purpose in my
own journeyings, and that is to focus public
attention in the countries visited on Australia's
viewpoints, and also to build a better
informed Australian knowledge and opinion
about countries-some of them little known
of special importance and interest to us.
As the size of the Press parties accompanying
me on my own tours would confirm,
there is, by virtue of the office of Prime
Minister, a more concentrated and wider
public notice taken of a visit by a head
of government than by -any of its other
members. We know from our own
experience that delighted as we are to
receive a visit from a Foreign Minister, or a
Finance Minister or a Trade Minister, there
is an even greater interest in the visit of a
head of government or head of state. This
is one of the well recognised facts of political
life. Undoubtedly, my own visits have
brought Australia more prominently under
notice in each of the countries I have visited
and have helped to make those countries
better known here at home.
We Australians can count ourselves fortunate
to have a Foreign Minister of the
experience, intellectual quality and sagacity
of our present Minister. He not only enjoys
the full confidence and respect of his colleagues
of the Government and of the
Government Parties, but I can vouch from
personal knowledge that he is held in the
highest regard by his opposite numbers
wherever he moves. His job is made no
easier nor are Australia's interests abroad
advanced by stupid comment of the kind
to which I have referred.
No account of this journey would be
complete without my thanks to the very
able team of officials who accompanied me,
to our medical adviser, who so promptly
attended to the minor disorders which
affected most of us in what was a very
strenuous tour through a variety of climatic
conditions, to the aircrews whose skill
invariably brought us to a happy landing,
and to the large Press party which assisted
our general purposes by a coverage that
was, generally speaking, fair, factual and
comprehensive. I publicly say my thanks,
also, to my wife, who made her own
distinctive contribution to the succes:; of the
tour. There must be thanks, also, to all
our hosts, whose hospitality we shall always 
remember with appreciation, and which we milestone in the history of the relationship
shall find it difficult to emulate, between our two countries. I believe that
There is no shadow of doubt in my mind can be said of all the four countries
that this was a valuable journey for Aus-visited, and I hope . this will be the judgtralia.
The Prime Minister of South Korea ment, also, of this Parliament and the Aussummed
up the visit as an important tralian people.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



FOR PRESS: -4R P. M. No. 44 -/ 1967
STATEMENT FOLLOWING THE MEETING BETWEEN
AUSTRALIAN MINISTERSQ AND THE MALAYSIAN
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
The Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia, Tun Abdul Razak,
who 4s visiting Australia as a guest of the Australian Government, today
attended a meeting of the Foreign Aff airs and Defence ' Committee of Cabinet.
The meeting followed a Ministerial luncheon hosted by the Australian Prime
Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
The discussions reflected the wide range of common interests
and the close association which have developed between Australia and Malaysia
over a number of years. The two countries enjoy mutual co-operation a
sense of warm friendship and understanding. and a deep respect for each
other ' s achievements and progress.
Tun Razak said he was glad on this visit to express in person
the appreciation of the Malaysian Government and people for the contribution
which Australia had made with the other Commonwealth partners, Britain
and New Zealand, to Malaysia's security. He said that the continuing
presence of Australian. British and New Zealand forces. under arrangements
which had the full consent and co-operation of his Government. remained a
valuable factor in the stability of the region. At the same time, it was
Malaysia's intention to continue to strengthen its own national capacity for
defence. The substantial programme of Australia's defence aid had been of
great value in the expansion of Malaysia's defence forces.
Australian Ministers informed Tun Razak that they believed
that the provision of defence aid in the form of giving equipment for
Malaysia's newly-formed military units. the temporary secondment of
Australian personnel, and the training of Malaysian personnel in Australia
was a particularly valuable form of co-operation 4n the security field.
They welcomed the considerable progress which Malaysia had already
achieved in building its own defence capacity.
An agreement was reached in the discussion that an Australian
technical mission should visit Malaysia in the near future to examine
Malaysia's future requirements. Australian Ministers gave an assurance to
Tun Razak that they were aware of Malaysia' s need for continuing assistance
in this field and, within the limits imposed by competing demands on resources,
would extend the defence aid programme until the end of 19701, the termination
date for Malaysia's present expansion programme.
Tun Razak referred to the great difficulties created for
Malaysia by the low prices for rubber and also to their large requirements
for external finance to implement the first Malaysia Plan for social and
economic development. He expressed appreciation of the developmental
aid already given by Australia and hoped that this could be continued and if
possible expanded in the future. 
r 7 The discussion noted that the increasing and widening
contacts between the two countries extended into many fields, including
growing trade and business connections and tourism. Ministers noted that
there were at the present moment in Australia some '~ CColomboP lan
students from Malaysia studying in Australia as well as several thousands
of private students. These, with the many thousands of Malaysian students
who had received training and education in Australia over the years, added
an important chapter of their own to the story of the relations between the
two countries. The discussions included a general review of pdlitical and
strategical developments in South East Asia. Tun Razak x~ viewed the
progress that had been made in restoring Malays ian/ Indones ian relations
and the possibilities of a wider framework for co-operation. Malaysia and
Australia are both members of two new organizations in the region. the
Asian and Pacfic Council ( ASPAC) and the Asian Development Bank and there
was a useful exchange of views on developments in these organizations.
With respect to Viet Nam. it was agreed that South Viet Nam
had the right to maintain its independence and to self -detex. mination and to
invite its allies to assist in its defence. Tun PRazak pointed out that because
of her own inteznal security problems, Malaysia could not help with troops.
Hcwever, Malaysia had extended support to South Viet Nam in other ways and
in particular provided training of officers in development and administration.
Tun Razak drew attention to the white papers issued by the Malaysian
Government which described the close relationship between communist
activity Jin Sarawak and West Malaysia and similar activity in South Viet
Nam and North East Thailand. It was agreed that there was a need for
constant vigilance if the stability of the region was to be preserved and if
the countries of the region were to be able to press on with the great tasks
of national construction with better and widening opportunities for their
peoples. CANBERRA, 13th April, 1967. 



OPENING OF A. SSCCIATED CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE
BUILDING, BARTON, CANBERR. A
Speech by the Frime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt APRIL, 19 67
Mr. President May, Mr. President of the Senate, Your Exfcellencies,
D-stinguished Guests, Ladi. es and Gentlemen
Thank you, Mr. May, for the kind things you have said about
the basis of co-operation which has at all times exlisted between the
Commonwealth Government and this Chamber or Associated Chambers of
-Commerce of Australia. 1 would just like to make it clear that close though that
associaton, and warm though that co-operation has been, no ulterior
significance is to be drawn from the fact that you have established your
building in close prox'. mity to the headquarters of the Liberal Party.
You mentioned that there have been occasions I am glad to
hear you say they were rate occasions when you found It necessary to
disagree publicly with us, but of course there have been occasions when you
found 4. t necessary to disagree publicly with I won't say'thet rival party"
but that other very important Chamber the Assoz: iated % Chamberso f
Manufactures. And yet these days such is the :: e--rvas've and diversified
influence to be found in the Australian economy, many members, I know,
of this Chamber are also members of the other Chamber, ald similarly : n
a sense, while from time to time you look upon us if not as tiatural enemies
at least as a pi-evailing force to be contended with, so no dodbt you entertain
the same views to the other organisation.
But happily for Australia and ' t is a feature of the
Australian democracy there is through all levels of the social and economic
structure a degree of friendly co-operation which I think it would be difficult
to match in any other country of the world. Undoubtedly our national strength,
our national progress and our prosperity owe a great deal to that co-operation
which we have been able to establish at all these levels. W~ e, like you, have
found value in the talks we hold from time to time and for my part, I can
assure you that these will be a continuing feature of our Administration.
Certainly the talks have important influence upon the final economic judgments
that we come to. I congratulate you on the establishment here in Canberra of
this fine building. It is, of itself of course, a tangible sign of the progress of
Canberra, the recognition of Canberra as a firmly established national
capital, and a sign also of your own confidence -n the strength of your
Associated Chambers and of the part you will play in the future of the nation.
The Chamber serves the nation well in a variety of ways. I
pay public tribute to it, and as wie see our own burgeoning economy and our
own advancing nation progress, so we will anticipate the need in the future
to perhaps an even greater eXtent than in the past of a body equipped as yours
is, to service its members with information, to make public and private
representations for them in official quarters from time to time, and to give
articulate expression to the particular purposes for which the Chamber stands. 
Wte can see in the years perhaps not so distantly ahead
new problems) new opportunities arisiing for Australia. Traditionally
over the past years, much of our trade has been with the United Kingdom.
Through no desire of ours, but through the progress of economic events,
that has been at least in percentage a declining factor in our trade and
perhaps if Great Britain enters the European Common Market, there will
be less emphasis in the future upon the trade here than i'n the past. I
hope not, because it is our wish to maintain a continuing expansion of our
trade with the United Kingdom and, indeed, with the other countries of
Europe generally. Vlhatever may be the result in that direction at least we
can feel reasonably confident that if we turn our eyes northwards, there
will be growing opportunities for Australia in the countries of Asia, and
there will be new problems for men of commerce to face in their dealings
with the economies and gove:: nments of these countries. W~ e have only to
consider the amazing development that has occurred in Australia's two-way
trade with Japan over recent years to see an illustration of this. From a
position shortly after the war when there was virtually no trade between us,
Japan has now become, as you know, the largest purchaser in value of
Australian exports. We are currently the third largest purchaser in value
of Japanese goods. What is occurring and has already occurred in Japan
may not be repeated on the same scale in the other countries of Asia, but
certainly from my own recent journeys to that area over the last twelve
months, I am convinced that we do face growing opportunities there.
On this most recent visit, for example, both in Taiwan, a
country of thirteen million people, and Korea, a country of just on thirty
million people, where they both possess annual growth rates ranking
amongst the highest in the world, there are, I am sure, potentialities for
development of Australian trade which have yet scarcely been scratched.
In Korea I saw the largest fertil ser factory, as they claimed it, in Asia,
and a petrol refining establishment. They told me they have already a
consortium established for the creation of an iron and steel industry and
would be looking for Australian i~ ron ore in order to service the steel
industry of that country. They were looking to us, they said, for plywood,
since sources of plywood previously available to them were drying up.
And these are only illustrations.
In Taiwan, there was a similar indication to us of a very
substantial growth of their purchases of Australian raw materials and goods
over the years ahead. Now these are growing economies, but the problems
there may not necessarily be the same as those with which you have to
contend in Europe. There are the undeveloped countries of the world which,
while their progress at the moment may seem slow, yet as more
enlightened policies apply and more generous aid can be provided from the
growing economies of more favoured countries, again there should be an
expansion of demand which commerce will be able to put to its own
advantage. And so I think we can take a bright prospect of the future
and, if only peace can be restored in this area of the world, that process
w~ ll be greatly accelerated. / 3 
There are other developments which will occur to you.
Australia, as one of the great trading nations of the world, relies very
heavily upon transport by sea and to a growing extent by air, for the
carriage of goods. We have been watching and do'ng what we have been
able to encourage the new developments in the f. eld of containerization of
goods and the modernization of ports and greater efficiency in the handling
of goods at the waterfront, and in these and other ways trying to assist you
in the task of marketing your products abroad, or else importing the goods
for sale here in Australia. So from these few illustrations we can see not only-good
prospects ahead, but a continuing need for the kind of co-operation which
we have already established. And I say in appreciation of what you
have already been able to do w4th us that we look for that continued goodwill
and teamwork in the years ahead, and in that spirit and with best wishes
the continuing growth and success of the Associated Chambers of Commerce
/ A. ustralia, I now officially declare this building open and shall have pleasure
in unveiling a plaque. Well, gentlemnen, with best wishes from my Government
to you all and may this bu'lding long continue to serve efficiently the
purposes for which you have combined together. 



/ 095
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 45/ 1967
TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR. , DENAUER BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
Dr. Adenauer contributed to the growth of post-war
co-operat'on among the countries of Europe a co-operation which found
practical expression in the European Economic Community.
He will be remembered for the part he played
personally * n restoring the basis of friendship between Germany and
France. He was regarded by many as the outstanding German
leader of th4s century. His liberal and humanitar-an outlook d; d much
to create the favourable acceptance of post-war Germany.
West Germany today is a tribute to his wise leadership.
CANBERRA, 2&amp; th April, 1967. 



I\
FOR PRESS AUlTRALIA AT EXPO 67
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Hirold Holt
Canada's Centennial Exposition, better known as
Expo 67 will open in Montreal on Friday. This great display,
of icially styled the Montreal Universal and Internati'onal
Exhibition, is a central feature of Canada's celebration of her
first hundred years of Confederation. The Exposition will remain
open for six months.
Australia will be one of more than sixty nations
represented. 7te have set up an impressive Australian Pavilion
on the Exposition's man-made islana site in the St. Lawrence
River, opposite downtown Montreal. Our exhibits are installed,
the Pavilion staff has been assemoled and trained and arrangements
have been completed for us to take part in the various cultural
activities associated with Expo 67. These include the International
Film Festival and the Vorld Festival of Ballet and Music.
The whole Exposition is larger than the recent New
York World Fair but is different in concept, presentation and
management. The Exposition portrays, " Man and His Jorld" his
endeavours in science, fine arts, exploration, agriculture and
iniustry. Australia's Special Day will be June 6 and I will be
there for the occasion. As my colleague, the Postmaster-general,
has already announced, arrangements have been made for a direct
pioneering telecast to Australia by way of the satellite ' Telstar'
of the special events of that day.
This is the first time Australia has taken part in
such an international Exposition. The decision to do so was taken
at a comparatively late stage and this imposed a demanding
programme for planning and construction and called for special
measures to ensure that we would be ready on time.
The theme of the Australian Pavilion follows carefully
the theme of the Exposition. Design studies were undertaken by
the Commonwealth De-artment of ; orks and in December, 1965,
Cabinet selected a aesign by an architect of that Deoartment, Mr.
James Maccormick. Early in 1966, Cabinet approved proposals by
the Exhibits Architect, Mr. Rooin Boyd, and the general approach
proposed by the Commissioner-Jeneral, on other forms of participation.
The total cost is estimated to be q3.14 million.
It is a matter of satisfaction that, despite the time
factor, oroblems of distance and climate and our lack of previous
experience of such an exhibition, plans have been carried through
and the Pavilion is ready to open on time with an effective
presentation. This has been possible only through the enthusiastic
and purposeful work of the Commissioner-Jeneral, Sir Valston
Hancock, and his team, and the wholehearted suprort which the
Organisation has received from Commonwealth Departments and
authorities from the States, and from many private sources in
industry and business throughout Australia.
The mounting of our exhibition is in fact a remarkable
story of co-operation and enthusiasm. The Canadian authorities
estimate that some two million visitors will pass through the
Australian pavilion during the Exposition. Far larger numbers
will of course, be reached through specially arranged T. V. Radio
and Press coverage of occasions including Australian presentations
such as our Special Day. All this will promote greater A 
-2-
international awareness of Australia, its achievements and its
potential. Throughout the Australian Pavilion the exhibits are,
as far as possible, Australian made. Many of them have been
manufactured in Australia for the first time from original
designs. The Pavilion is virtually a floatin, box, 1361 square
with two glassed-in sides, suspended above a typical Australian
bushland setting. The mood created within it is one of space
and tranquility. The Spirit of Adventure has been expressed
through curving tree forms that support four independent roof
sections. The theme of Australia as the world's major wool producer
is emphasised and an immense off-white carpet of natural wool covers
the entire floor area and sweeps up two end walls to ceiling height.
Twenty-two hostesses will wear costumes of golden wool designed in
Australia. The uniforms of male attendants are also of wool.
There is a model of our great radio telescope at Parkes
an animated scale model of the Snowy Mountains Scheme, a scale model
of Canberra. There is a collection of contemporary Australian art and
displays of acoriginal bark paintings : and precious opals. In a
series of photogr phic and physical exhibits all our great developmental
projects, from mining to medical research and architecture
are presented. There is an unusual feature at the heart of the Pavilion,
consisting of electronically operated sound chairs. There are 240
chairs, grouped about various exhibits. They have a built-in
stereophonic sound system developed and produced in Australia
enablivn visitors to hear, as in personal discussion, the voices
of notable Australians describing the exhibits.
The Pavilion is in a natural Australian setting, of gum
trees some up to 30' high and other native trees and shrubs.
There is a spectacular scientific display of over 1,000 pieces of
coloured coral from the Jreat arrier Reef. There is a billabong,
a water hole, 20 kangaroos and 10 wallabies to make the atmosphere
complete. The Australian Ballet will give six performances in
Montreal oefore leaving to tour South America and the Meluourne
Symphony Orchestra will give two performances. There will be a
pop concert including well-known performers like the Seekers, and
the Central 3and of the Royal Australian Air Force will give
several open-air concerts. A comprehensive prozramme of
entertainments, including sheep dog trials, woochopoing,
boomerang throwing, and an unofficial Davis Cup has been devised
by Mr. Robert Helpmann for presentation at the Place des Yations
on our Special Day.
I have every confidence that our staff in iontreal will
acquit itself well. I am satisfied that the 3xhibition will stand
proudly among the best of all the nationa" exhijitions, and I would
hope that all Australians travelling abroad will take the opportunity
of seeing it.
APRIL, 1967. J 



7 f FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 46/ 1967
NATIONAL LIBRARY COUNCIL APPOINTMENT
OF CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERSStatement
by the Prime M'nister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, said today
that the Governor-General had re-appointed the Chairman of the National
Library Council and five other Council members, and had appointed a
new member to the Council for the term of three years from 23rd March,
1967. He explained that the Parliament, as provided by the
National Library Act of 196G, had already elected two Parliamentary
members to the Council Sir Alister McMullin, President of the Senate,
and Mr. G. M. Bryant from the House of Rperesentatives.
The re-appointments announced today are
Grenfell Price, C. M. G. ( Chairman)
Mr. Justice M. P. Crisp
Mrs. Kathleen Fitzpatrick
Sir Leonard Huxley, K. B. E.
Mr. Kenneth Myer, D. S. C.,
Mr. H. S. ' A'Wyndham, C. B. E.
The new member of the Council is Mr. WV. R. Cumming,
C. V. O Assistant Secretary, Prime Min'ster's Department. He replaces
Mr. A. L. Moore who is now Official Secretary at Australia House, London.
The Frime Minister said that these re-appointments
reflected the Government's appreciation of the tireless and devoted
energies of members of the Council. The magnificent building now being
erected in Canberra for the National Library was evidence of much
excellent work being done by the Council.
CANBERRA, 2Qth April, 1967. 



EMBARGOED
UNTIL TT. M.
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 48/ 1967
R. MICEWEN TO VISIT RUMANIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
Following his discussion in London and Geneva
on the progress of the Kennedy Round tariff negotiations,
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Industry, Mir. McEwen, will pay a brief visit to Rumania
early in May.
Mr. McEwven has been invited to visit Rumania by
the Rumanian 1inister for Foreign Trade, Mr. Gheorghe Cioara,
to discu3s the development of closer trade and cconomie
relations between Australia and Rumania. These
discussions could lead to the conclusion of a trade
agreement. CANBERRA 26th April, 1967 



R'S
S-2 MAY 1967
LIBRAW
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 49/ 1967.
PRIME MIEISTER'S MESSAE3S TO CINADA
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, has sent messages
to the Prime Minister of C nada Mr. Lester Pearson and the
Australian Commissioner-eneral for Expo ' 67 Air Marshal Sir
Valston Hancock, to mark the opening today of Canada's Centennial
Exposition in Montreal.
The texts of the messages are as follows
To the Prime Minister of Canada
" On this historic day for Canada, I send to you, on
; ehalf of my Government and the people of Australia, warmest
greetings and every good wish for the success of Expo 67.
are proud to be associated with your inspiring
Centennial Exhibition we cherish the friendship that rhs made this
possible and we confiae tly anticipate our two countries will face
together challenges that the years may bring to our common interests
and those of the Commonwealth of Kations to which we both belong.
" Your first hundred years as in independent nation have
been enriched by great achievements, by valour in wars fought in
defence of free'om and your dedication to purposes of peace. The
exhibition will bear faithful witness to your story and we are glad
to oe contributing an Australian chapter.
" Montreal today invites the attention of the world;
Canada today enjoys the respect of all nations. Sincere
congratulitions from us all. I look forward with enthusiasm to my
own visit in June. Personal regards."
To Sir Valston Hancock
" Th'en Expo 67 opens on Friday I am sure we will have
a fine exhibition. " I am sure, too that you all will represent Australia
with great distinction and with credit to yourselves. Thank you
most warmly for everything you have done.
" This is the lrgest exhibition we have staged overseas
and the first of its kind with a broad Austr lian character. You
have done wonderfully well in little time.
" I look for.': ird with very great pleasure to seeing the
exhibition on Austrilia's day md thanking you in person.
" Good luck and best wishes."
C28 BER, 1967.
28 APRIL, 1967. 



FOR PRESS, RADIO AND TELEVISION 1
( NOT TO BE PUBLISHED, BROADCAST OR CABLED R'A 0
BEFORE 5.30 P. M. ON SUNDAY, 30TH APRIL, 1967) R
PAY-ROLL TAX EX1PORT INCENTIVE REBATES
The Commonwealth Treasurer, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon,
announced to-day that in the three months ended March last, pay-roll
tax rebates totalling 3,016,000 had been allowed to 328 firms which,
by increasing their export sales in 1965/ 66, had qualified for
rebates. This brought the number of firms to which rebates had
been allowed to date for 1965/ 66 exports to 738 and the value of
rebates to -, 8,016,000. A further 361 claims for the 1965/ 66
financial year, totalling %? 4,590,000, were currently being handled
by the Taxation Office.
Mr. Mc~ iahon said that, in adcition to rebates for 1965/ 66
exports, the Taxation Office in the March quarter had allowed rebates
totalling $ 1,641,000 for exports of prior years. To the end of
March, 1,526 firms had been allowed rebates totalling $ 12,972,000
for 1964/ 65 exports, 1,680 firms had been allowed rebates totalling
$ 12,540,000 for 1963/ 64 exports and 1,588 firms had been allowed
rebates totalling 8,999,000 for 1962/ 63 exports. Rebates
totalling Z13,145,000 had been allowed for 1960/ 61 and 1961/ 62
exports up to the end of March. Claims totalling ' 1,856,000 for
1964/ 65 and earlier years were currently being handled by the
Taxation Office. Pay-roll tax rebates are part of the taxation incentives
for export introduced by the Government in 1961. Rebates are
available to firms increasing their exports above the level of their
average exports in the two years 1958/ 59 and 1959/ 60. If the value
of a firm's exports increases by one per cent of its gross business
income, the firm is entitled to a rebate of 12.5 per cent of its
pay-roll tax liability. This ratio applies proportionately so that
when the increase in exportE is equal to 8 per cent of the gross
receipts of the firm's business, the firm is entitled to a full
rebate of pay-roll tax.
April, 1967. 



Cr 2MAY 1967
. FOR-PRE 3S CORAL SEA AINNIVERSARY 1.4-NO. 5e/ 1967.
Iessage frop., the EriiiJ i~ er Mr. Harold Halt
The followiinZ messaze, to mark the st-irt of the
Anniversary Celebrations of the Battle of the Coral Sea, wav's
broadcast by the Prime M4inister today over the A. 3. C.' s national
network TIS WEEK WE ARE CZLEB1RATIWr THE TYI: riTY-FIFTH ALIII'JERSABY
OF THE jATTL] OF THE CORA* L SEA.
THOSE OF US WHO LIVED THROUG 1IHE SO0 EDYSO A
1942t REI'ZM] 1VBER TH : EEK. THOSE OF YOU HOARE YOUNGER M-AY N6T.
BUT YU. IAt " O TO LL Y._ 1M'IT TO RE1MZMBER, FOR THIS IS
PART OF YOUR HI1STORY".
THE 1ATTLE WJAS UQIJEI A MO, 1DERN , AR BECAUSE IT 73~ AN
EN1COUNTER uiET7W7X] TH1 i' 3. IRCRAFT C, 3RIE 1R FO LCES OF THE UNIT7ED STATES
AND JAPAN. NO SHIPS EXCHANG, E D iIOTS NOR DID THEY EVEN, SIX HT EACH
OTHE R. IT i. SFOUGHT BELOW-: THEIR O. iON-CARRIER AAITARCF,
AIRCRAFT AJJ[, IMT CARRI ER.
FOR EVZJL DA-Y S THE OUTC" OME" OBSCURE THEN THEMAIN
3ECAIL! J .1' LEIR. k THREATZN.: ED IYViSIONT OF PORT LMOZ7E 3Y IiLD BIEN1 TUpRNED
BC KTH RISK O11A% I i-THREA IIDS ON ; 3U. S'TH1L. I. iYT MAIrLAND HAD 132EN
REVU TID. A'ND 1 õ OA,. E THAN:* 1T ? HJ. Al PORKIDB3L1? TH1RUST TO TH HEART OF THE?
-" HOLE : I1LIL] D CAU SE I I' TH-S~ T-. ETPACIFIC F: D BEEP I3ROKM. THIS
1j, THE FITRS" T I. 1iJOR VICTO.' Y, JN q 11RNI3 POI T 1F THE WR
SO ' YE L. TIO' 3 TRIAUTE ONCE II} TO THE' I-WL AIRME
OF THE JIJITED ST T3 HO ChIS2D, THE WIL BURDElN OF THE i5ATTLE AND
H'LXEDHOITE THE VIMTO'. RY. ATD TO OUR O GJ AIOR . IL JEMEN WHO1
' TaV THE" IR SUPPORT.
TODA" Y OU!) L FI3HTIIG'r " lIN ilJN STAND -' LLONIXSIDE THE UNITE", D
STJZS21 IL. VIETIJI{ ITE 614-J-FORGED IIN LHZj COL LAND OLjH
SCATTMERED 3A iKTLE LI1ES OF THE P'~ CIFIC A rUaRTER OF t CEI'TURY L.' O
HA ' E ET17DU~ iED. ASK IS : 0 THI 1ORLD' S WOU1ST TROUBLZ] SPOT BUT ITS PEOPLE
A; RE UNDERGOING AllU EXIllC I T IN RWOL) TI ON OFP HOPE : 01D 1ARE LOOKING TO A
BETTER FUTURE. FOLLO. JNJ RECENT VISIT TO lSil, I AM, CONVINCED
TH T IF 3 IN THE REGiON CAN" L.. 70ORK TOIJETTI R HZLrED BY FRIENDLY
COUi~ tRICS OUTSIDE IT, IC. Y: Q ' UICKLY f6 * iR) S . LER1 OF EV3R
REATER PqOGR,-ESS.
' Ti" TR.. DE LiES OF THE CORA" L SE HN IEUOENAD FREE
NO' FOR OVER TW" ElTYYERS JAPAN AFD WE ARE FRIENDS PDTOGETHER *' JE
i! RE DEVELOPING' TR: DE ND COZREFOR THE BENIEFIT NTY ONY OF OUR TWO
NATIONS BUT FOR THE REGIO 11S A JOLE I HOETHS ROj~ LI1NKS CAN 3E
AN EX "" PLE FOR R1E'. rj. TIONS'IIIPS THROUGHOUT THE IJZEIA. t iVEFIHI
OURSELVES. 7] B3ELIEVE TH.. T W. ITH FIRiIJIESSS OF PURPOSE 2ND FRIEN11DLY
CM. OP" RATIOIT ST ,3ILITY CA17 3E1ALTIIEDl THE ; 0EA. AND ITS PROGRESS
SS3) UR E THIS IS THE CI! ALLE j1TF O: TODAY A'-N. D TOMORR&amp; ICH CORAL SE,. L
WEiEK B7! INGS TO US ' tJJS7'. Ai._ S, D Vi1S3R OF THE DLYIVELOPIIG
A S IAT.. REJION.
CA _ llr3 _ j ~ PRIL, 1967. 



9
FOR PRESS NO. 51/ 1967.
VICTORIAN ELECTION RESULT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr, Harold Holt.
Sir Henry Bolte is to be congratulated on a notable
political victory and a personal triumph.
It is a real achievement to be confirmed with so large
a majority after 12 years in office.
The result is a tribute to his firm, forthright, positive
and constructive leadership. The people of Victoria clearly want
a party which stands for all sections of the community and is
strong enough to resist sectional pressures.
The result reflects the strength of Liberalism in
Victoria and is consistent with the result there in the Federal
elections. It is to be hooed that the Legislative Council will
respect the sweeping mandate given to the Premier and his Government
in the Legislative Assembly. He h:-s the entitlement of democratic
endorsement to go steadily ahead with the programme he placed
before the electorate. It is good to know I can Inok forward to a continuance
of the constructive cooper. tion which has marked my own
relationship as Leader of the Federal Government with Sir Henry
in his capacity as Leader of the Government of Victoria.
CA 1ERRA. 30TH APRIL, 1967. 



a~ b~ r
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MAY 1967
RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT, IN THE HOUSE * 8A~,
OF REPRESENTATIVES ON THURSDAY, LBA~
4TH MAY, 1967
BRITISH APPLICATION TO JOIN THE EUROPEAN
COMMON MARKET
I promised the House yesterday that I would comment on the
announcement made by the Prime Minister of Britain ( Mr. Wilson in the
House of Commons on Tuesday to the effect that Britain proposed to make
an application to join the European Economic Community.
We know the British Government has given much thought to
the course it should follow. Honourable Members will recall the earlier
attempt to join the European Economic Community which failed in 1963.
That was during the Prime Ministership of Mr. Macmillan. Mr. Wilson has
now said " All of us realise that this is an historic decision which could well
determine the future of Britain, Europe and indeed of the world for decades
to come". Each nation is entitled to make decisions in what it conceives to
be in its own national interest. But equally, it is to be expected that when
major decisions are taken which will affect countries of such historic
relationship as Britain and Australia, then the interests of the countries
affected will be considered, and the decisions influenced. Now that the
British Government has decided that an application to join the Common Market
should go forward, we will be looking to the Government and people of
Britain to ensure that the terms of entry take full consideration of the interests
of Commonwealth countries, which include Australia. In the longer term,
it is in all our interests that Britain should remain strong, and indeed grow
stronger. Only a strong Britain can remain a power of significance in the
world, and we all wish this to be so.
During recent months, we have been aware that Britain has been
contemplating further approaches to the European Economic Community.
Throughout this period the British Government has kept us advised about the
essential nature of the discussions at Ministerial level with the individual
member governments of the European Economic Community.
More recently, the British Government has kept us informed of
the development of its own thinking and as recently as last week, my
colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Industry,
discussed the matter with British Ministers in London.
We have no doubt that as matters proceed, the British Government
will continue to keep us informed of essential developments. We would hope,
however, that we would also have the opportunity for meaningful consultations.
Both publicly and privately the British Government has continually
emphasised that entry into the European Economic Community would be
subject to adequate safeguards to protect " the essential interests of the
Commonwealth". I note that in making his announcement, Mr. Wilson
referred specifically to the special problems of New Zealand. We certainly
have a full appreciation of those problems. Mr. Wilson referred also to
Commonwealth sugar producers, and we welcome this reference. / 2 
-2
But our important interests, of course, go very much wider, and
we would expect that Jin seeking measures to safeguard the essential interests
of the Commonwealth, Britain would take full account of her contractual
obligations to Australia and of -the heavy dependence of a number of our
export industries on the British Market.
Because there appears to be some conflict between the
essential interests of the Commonwealth and the present European Economic
Community regime, and because at this stage we do not know what safeguards
Britain will be able to negotiate, it is not pract;. cable for us to make any
firm judgment on the extent to which Australia's exports are likely to be
affected by Britain ' s eventual entry into the European Economic Community.
The impact of British membership of the European Economic
Community upon Australian trading interests would depend upon the extent
to which our preferential entry to the British market i~ s affected. We sell to
Britain under preferential conditions products to the value of approximately
four hundred million dollars. This four hundred million dollars of trade is
concentrated in a relatively few products, and in some cases represents a
substantial share of the total export market for the industries concerned.
There are also whole communities whose basic idustries have
geared themselves to the British market. We must recognise that their
future could be affected, perhaps seriously, . fthe British market is lost or
substantially reduced. The Government will, of course, be watching this
aspect of the problem with particular care.
In recent years there appears to have developed, both in Britain
and in Europe, a belief that there may be no great need to take special
measures to protect Australia's export position because we have been
diversifying our export trade and have been building up markets in other
areas. Over the past five years, the share of our total exports going to
Britain has declined from about twenty-four per cent. to about seventeen and
a half per cent. But the total value of exports preferential and other to
Britain has increased slightly,-Handlast year amounted to about four hundred
and seventy-five million dollars in total.
In certain agricultural products recent -increases in production
and availability have enabled us to expand our ex,, ports to the world and to
develop some new markets. As a consequence, the proportion of total
exports going to Britain has declined somewhat. Nevertheless, the absolute
volume of shipments to Britain has increased.
I refer particularly to beef, butter, fresh fruit, canned fruit and
sugar. In the case of these key products, our dependence on the British
market has, in fact, increased. There are some other products such as
wheat, flour, dried fruits and canned meat, where the British market 4s of
prime importance. During earlier British negotiations to join the European Economic
Community, it was suggested, both in Britain and in Europe, that the
problems of countries such as Australia could be met through the establishment
of effective world commodity agreements which would lead to improved access
and remunerative prices for agricultural products. From the early stages
of the Kennedy Round -1 was agreed by the more important participants that
effective commodity agreements were essert ial to the success of these
negotiations. / 3 
-3
The concluding stages of the Kennedy Round are now being reached
in Geneva. The final result will not be known until the negotiations have
formally been completed, but the prospects of a successful outcome are
far from bright. It appears possible that there may be a Ministerial meeting
in Geneva next week. The success of this meeting, if held, in opening up
new prospects for world trade in agricultural products, will affect to a
significant degree the extent to which our export trade could still find
opportunities, following a successful British application to join the European
Economic Community. Turning now to the financial and economic implications of British
membership of the European Economic Commwity. Australia has had a long
history of close financial co-operation with Britain, and no doubt there will
be changes in some of these relationships if Britain joins the Common Market.
There is little point in speculation at this time as to all the possible financial
ramifications but we cannot ignore the possibility that there may be difficulties
for us. Much will depend on terms and conditions of British . membership.
However, I feel I should mention one issue which will be of considerable
interest to us namely, the future level of capital flows from Britain to
Australia. At the present time, Britain is imposing some restraints on the
outf low of investment to developed countries of the sterling area such as
Australia. Nevertheless our position is still better than that of developed
countries outside the sterling area.
If Britain were to join the European Economic Community in the
near future, it seems likely that it would have to alter its current policies on
the control of outward private capital flows. In that event, whatever
preferences we may have now in respect of British investments abroad could
be quickly abridged.
I do not need to emphasise here the extent to which the growth of
the Australian economy has been assisted recent years by the strong
inflow of capital from abroad. Most of this ' s private capital and almost
half has come from Britain. In 1965-66, private overseas investment in
Australian companies from Britain amounted to some two hundred and fifty
million dollars. V. e are thus talking about one of the more important elements
in our balance of payments and one of the more important factors contributing
to a higher rate of growth in the Australian economy.
Rather similar considerations apply in the case of official capital
transact i ons abroad. Australia, as a member of the sterling area, has had
greater access to the London capital market than non-sterling area countries.
If Britain joins the E-_ uropean Economic Community, we may be faced with a
reduction of borrowing opportunities in London. As we have about $ 25C million
of official debt maturing in London over the next five years and some $ SC. C
million maturing over the next ten years, the question of access to the London
capital market is of considerable importance to us.
It is, of course, difficult to make an informed judgment on these
matters now. Indeed, pending clarification of the terms and conditions of
membership, it is virtually impossible to make a precise assessment of the
financial and economic implications for Australia. Vie shall certainly be doing
our best to ensure that Australia's interests are taken into account.
In conclusion, it seems fitting to observe that the British approach
to the European Economic Community is still at a very early stage indeed the
application, although foreshadowed, has not yet been made. Substantial
discussions are ahead, and it will only be out of these that we can gauge the
likely consequences, and thus what action can be taken to safeguard the interests
which are important to us. As I have said, we look to a process of continuing
consultation and discussion. We shall, as we can, keep Honourable Members
informed of developments. 



THIRD INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON HUMAN Z 3 U 16
RELATIONS
Southern Gross Hotel, Melbourne
Opening Address by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt-
8TH MAY, 1967
The association of human relations and technology is vitally
important. It is a supreme challenge for us, because all the wonders of
science and technology cannot enable us to live by computers alone. A
mechanical heart may keep some of us going in future years, but the
creative ideas, the emotions and the impulses of man cannot be duplicated.
Man remains the master, and it is with his task to see that the application
of technology to the business of living is so ordered that the change Jt
brings makes for peace, for prosperity, for happiness and for security.
The title of my address is Technology in the SerV4 ce of the
Nation, and I want to say something of what we are doing as a government,
and what Australia is doing as a nation. I will select some samples, rather
than attempt to open up the whole emporium of our national effort. The
range of technology In the service of the nation Is wide Indeed, and we have
achieved much by ourselves alone, through universities, and by partnerships
with industry. We live here in Australia in a free society, and my government
believes firmly, as a philosophy, in free enterprise. It is opposed to the
confining and inhibiting limitations of a socialist bureaucracy. The forces
of change operate in many directions and at various levels. Vie are not so
bound by doctrine that we cannot see virtue in government 4nstitutions, in
government activities, but basically ours is a free enterprise philosophy.
And these forces of change must be able to play freely.
VU ith these principles 4n mind, we have been conscious as a
government that, nevertheless, there are heavy responsibilities on us to
ensure that the impact of technological change is made in the right places
with benefit to all, and as far as that is humanly practicable, with hurt to
none. We cannot discipline the fact of these changes in an absolute way,
but we can give some direction to the course they take, and wie can help to
co-crd mnate some of the national responses which have to follow.
The government has done much; it cannot and should not be
expected to do everything. There is a matching responsibility on industry
to make this technological revolution peaceful and productive. The govern ment
can take limited initiatives in education, in research, in the promotion of
essential partnerships with others, in the exchange of knowledge, and in the
marshalling of capital. Beyond that it is essential for industry to play a
full part, and this is one that must enlarge rapidly in the year ahead.
Australia has a small population as great countries go, and we
do not claim yet to be a great country, although in some directions we not
only aspire to greatness, but we feel that we have achieved greatness. We
have a vast continent with this small population, a continent approximately
the size of the United States, if the Alaskans will excuse me once again for
leaving them out of the picture. And Australia should, if we are to take the
long-sighted view, broad and statesmanlike view, we should welcome / 2 
2-
automation with open a rns, because it is through technological ipoeet
through automation, that we can enable this small population to achieve things
which otherwise would only be possible in a country with many times the numbers
that we possess. And we have not waited for others to do this job for us.
We are not a spendthrift nation, we devote nearly 30 per cent
of our gross national product to capital investment. In a guest of honour
broadcast during his visit to Australia, Admiral McDonald, the United States
Chief of Naval Operations, A ustralia, pointed out that our capital investment,
as a proportion of our gross national product, is more than one and a half
times the rate of investment in the United States of A merica, or of Great
Britain. Vle ra. L, I believe, second only to Japan.
We have something of a dilemma here, because wie are at the
same time proceeding with a programme of large scale immigration, and
if immigration is to be successful, then you must have job opportunities quickly
and plentifully available for those whom you attract to the country, But I
think it says something for the skill with which these matters have been
handled and I am not speaking now merely of governments, but of the
community as a whole that thinughout this quite lengthy period, running now
to just on twenty years of large-scale immigration Australia has been able
to maintain a level of sustained high employment which is not surpassed, I
believe, by any other country In the viorld.
. e have achieved this to a degree as a result of the contact and
co-operation which Australian governments have been able to maintain with
industry. We do conduct regular consultations on a basis of consultation
early in the year, and then just before the Budget session, with representative
spokesmen of industry. But these are quite apart from the multitude of ad hoc
consultations that go on through the year. We have regular discussions, in
particular through the Department of Labour and National Service, with the
organised trade union movement.
And I think that assisting all of this is the Australian temperament
and character. ' Vie, as visitors to Australia will find, a friendly people. Vhle
like to get on well with others, we like to get on well with each other. And in
particular, we like to do what we can for those who are finding the going tough,
or who have their problems, in our community This has contributed
enormously to the success of the immigration programme.
Wle have each year a Citizenship Convention to which we invite
representatives from all sections of the community life; not merely trade and
industry, and the trade union movement, but social orginisations, religious
bodies, the whole gamut virtually, of the Australian community existence.
And through the year, quite apart from these regular gatherings, which occur
annually, there is the work of the Good Neighbour movement in each community,
helping us to assimilate the new settlers who come to live with us.
PAIRTNERSHIPS
So far as government is concerned, we try to maintain a threeway
partnership, with management and with those whom they employ. The
relationships I believe are good, and are steadily improving. For particular
problems which arise, we do have certain ad hoc groups, wihich are able to
take charge of the si tuation in respect of some innovation, some technological
innovation, which could otherwise be disruptive, both of good relations and the
employment situation. / 3 
-3
have been able to go through these processes of change
with remarkably little dislocation. In my own time as Minister for Labour,
the considerable mechanisation that went on in t. he coal-mining industry
pnxluced a displacement of labour, but the problems were minimised by
consultation with owners and miners, and the industry has had a better
industrial record since those days, than it had before.
V~ e have other examples which perhaps I could mention; the
extensive use of computers, in particular in the insurance industry,, The
displacement of clerical labour which this has produced in some areas has
gone by with again remarkably little dislocation. Automatic control
mechanisms in important industries, such as the steel Industries, the
petroleum industry; the growing degree of mechanisation and automation in
the automotive industries; the significant part these modern processes are
playing in the development of our oil resources and will be, with our natural
gas; the problem with which we are grappling at the present time of
container is ation on the waterfront; the introduction of mechanical cane cutting,
and in particular of bulk sugar loading in Queensland, which I recall vividly
from my own days as Minister, and which confronted us with problems of the
re-absorption of labour displaced on the waterfront.
All these are examples of technological change, and the way in
which we, with our small population, are trying to make the most in terms
of production of the resources we have.
VWe have shown our concern for human relations in industry in
a considerable variety of ways. W e played a proni not part, for example, in
the establishment of the Duke of Edinburgh Study Conference on industrial
relations, and the next conference s to be held in Australia in 1.968. VWhen
it came to the establishment of Churchill Scholarships, Australia proved to
be the highest contributor per capita of any country invited to join in that
particular scheme. There has always been much emphasis given to industrial
relations In Australia. It has had a political content, of course, because
both sides of politics have given a great deal of their attention to industrial
relations issues, but quite apart from that there has been this feeling that
the worker in his job is entitled from the egalitarian approach that Australians
bring to their community life, a fair deal, a fair go, and he enjoys one of the
highest standards of living in the world as a result.
Our arbitration system involved us in a good deal of pioneering
in this field. It had its critics those who preferred collective bargaining;
those who felt that management could be best left to work out its problems with
its own employees, and while we do not ignore the important place which
management must still play in direct personal industrial relations with those
whom it engages, the Australian arbitration system has brought confidence to
the wage-earner that his conditions would be reasonable, and that there would
be a fair remuneration for the contribution he makes to the industry in which
he is involved. ' Lie have been gratified to find that, increasi ngly over recent
years, there have been studies made from the United Kingdom and the United
States of the way in which we handle these matters. I could speak also of the
concern we have exhibited to ensure that those who have special problems,
the disabled, the returned servicemen, the children of servicemen who are
given such generous and thoughtful treatment by Legacy and the Returned / 4 
1%
Soliers' League all these are illustrations of the emphasis which we place
in Australia upon good human relations, and then in turn relate those to the
problems of our technology.
It has been said that we are missing the bus in the technological
sense, that we are depending too much on imported knowledge. This simply
is not true. My government has cast a very wide net indeed here and in all1
the significant centres of technological activity abroad, to ensure that we are
up to date in our knowledge. It is right to say, of course, that we have
imported know-how from other countries. But i s this wrong? Does it not make
good sense, while going on as best we can within the limits of our own
resources with research and development activity, that we should turn to the
very much more extensive research of which countries with very much larger
populations, the United States, with 193 millions, the United Kingdom, with
more than 510 millions, Japan getting up to the 90 million mark, or thereabouts,
that they are able to make in their own industries?
Australia has benefited from this activity, which others have
carried out. It makes sense for us to learn all we can from others, and to
use the superior skills that are thus produced, where they can be made available
for us. Wle are acquiring new skills all the time, and building up a formidable
sum of experience. The benefit of this experience can be rated in terms of the
per capita production measured by our gross national product. For example,
India, with ' 2times our population, can point to only twice the size of our
gross national product; Indonesia, with nine times our population, has only
a third of Australia's gross national product, and this, of course, is one of
the principal factors why Australia counts as a trad ing nation, and a factor in
the world, despite the comparative smallness of our population.
We have tariffs to protect Australian industry, but we do not
propose to impose tariffs on ideas. L. nation which is wrapped up in itself
makes a very small parcel indeed. That is why, as I said earlier, we welcome
the results, fruits of research and better techniques which come to us from
other countries. Vie are, in relation to our population and resources, doing
well, and man for man, project for project, we believe we are measuring
up in skills and knowledge to the efforts of other countries of greater size and
greater wealth. This does not mean that we cannot do more, and I do not wish to
introduce any note of complacency. -% We must do more; the pace quickens, and
the demands on us as one of the affluent societies must inc~~ ase as we live
more intimately with our Asian and our Pacific environment.
THE NATIONAL RECORD
Lot us look briefly at what we are doing. Take education.
The roots of our technological activity are, of course, in our educational
system. The States are primarily responsible for education, but the Commonwealth
Government is taking an incteasing interest and giving greater financial
help in areas which are complementary to their systems.
VWe have recognised the significance of education in the
technological age, by appointing a Minister for Education and Science. He is
a member of the Cabinet, and he directs a newly-created department but,
of course, our efforts began long before that. 
We have, over a period of years, encouraged and aided the
States to build new universities, some like Monash in this city with a bias
towards technology. If I could give you just a few examples. Eleven colleges
of advanced education received interim capital grants up to December 31st,
1966. In the 196T-6 triennium, 3.0 colleges of advanced education are to.
receive capital and recurrent grants, and in addition, 12 are to receive
recurrent grants only. Altogether 163 technical colleges have received grants
under the Federal Government scheme.
Practically every State secondary school in Australia in which
science is taught has received some science teaching apparatus under the
Federal Government scheme. At 28.5 State schools throughout Australia science
laboratories are either completed or under construction. So far, 400 independent
schools have benefited from the scheme, the degree of benefit varying from the
building of multi laboratory science blocks, to the provision of apparatus for one
laboratory. We have made possible the introduction of a new area of
tertiary education, complementary to our universities, and are helping the
States to develop this system so that there is a general extension of standards
and greater opportunities for young people to have higher education. W~ e have
given Federal aid to science blocks in denominational schools, and inct'eased
the number of scholarships for secondary students, with special provision for
technological students. Vil'e have increased taxation concessions in the education
field. These have a significant bearing on the end product of technological
development, and are vital to the further research which has to be undertaken.
In the field of research, through the Ministry of Supply, the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation and other
agencies are active in many fields, and getting sound results. 1 do not think
the average Australian realises how much we have done. In recent months, we
have taken a fresh look at the needs of industry, to see where we could help, and
the government recently announced an incentive scheme for financial help in
research by companies in the manufacturing and mining industries. This, we
felt, is the best way to give top management the encouragement to test new
ideas, and to give full rein to the enquiring minds of our young technologists
in industry. Recently I opened a new tracking station at Honeysuckle
Creek, not far from Canberra. This station is one of the latest examples of
the application of our technological skills, in the assembly of a highly complicated
apparatus needed for tracking satellites Mn outer space. It was specially
established for the United States, and in co-operation with them, as part of
the facilities required to service the planned attempt to land men on the moon
in the 1970' s. It may interest you to know that on the Apollo project, there
are three stations which will be assisting in this tracking; one in the United
States, one in Spain and the third here in Australia. Al1together this is the
sixth tracking station here in Australia, and It is just ten years since we
established the first of them, during the 1957 international geophysical year.
They are all operating now. They are to be found at
Garnarvon, in Western Australia, Cooby Creek in Queensland, Y! oomera in
South Australia, and at Tidbinbilla, Ororral Valley, and Honeysucle Greek
in the Australian Capital Territory. These stations make up the largest
complex outside the United States to be directly involved 4n that country's space
programme. / 6 
6-
And quite apart from the practical function they perform in
space flights, they represent a place for us in modern technology in an
advanced form. Weget a rub-off, as so many of you around this room will
know, in specialist technical fields. They reflect our capacity to hold our
own in skills and knowledge with nations greater in wealth and size.
More and more men and women are being trained Australia
to handle complicated equipment associated with space technology, and their
experience is spreading through the services of the Government, as w'ell
as through industry. W, e have already had, for example, the first telecast between
Britain and Australia by way of satellites in outer space, and by the same
process, will see the events of Australia's special day at Canada's Centenary
Celebrations in Montreal next month. In Australia today, 95 per cent of the
nation's population is within reach of telecasting.
W. ke have our scientists and explorers in the Antarctic and they
have kept us well in the van of research and development in that area. We
have established a place in the front rank of world astronomy, and we are
adding to the facilities we already have at Mount Stromlo and at the Radio
Telescope Centre at Parkes by deciding in partnership with Britain to set up
a new 15C inch optical telescope at Siding Springs in New South '!' ales. This
w Ml be the largest in the southern hemisphere and the second largest in the
world. WThen I run through lists of these achievements and these are
just a few examples one can talk of what we are doing at 1' oomera with the
development of the special weapons there, like Ikara and Malkara and others
of that sort I do not find myself counting any years that the locust has eaten.
But there is more to be done.
If we leave space for a moment, and the other examples I have
given, and go to the other extine, that is to the wealth of our natural
resources in the hard earth of this ancient continent, we find that here too the
technologists have blazed new trails in the past decade. This -is where we
have had some of our most spectacular successas in national development,
and inevitably the demand for skilled manpower has increased heavily.
You all know of the discoveries that have been made in the iron
ore country in the west and north west of the continent, and of the millions
of tons which lie there to be exploited to enrich the nation, and of the bauxite
and manganese that is now being taken from the gulf country. In these
remote areas, all the skills of the scientists and technologists are required,
because the areas are thirsty lands, uninhabited for the most part, and
lacking ports and sources of fuel and power.
Yet the challenge has been taken up, settlements are developing,
and now ports are being established on barren coasts. The petroleum search
in this country vmhich began in earnest twenty years ago, i5s havi~ ng its
first successes. VWe now have commercial oilfields in Queensland and
Western Australia, and while they provide only a fraction of our needs, they
may well be seen as signposts to further discoveries.
In recent years too, there have been some important inland
gas strikes in C%; ueensland, South Australia, Wlestern Australia and Northern
Territory. Last year we had the drambitic discovery of substantial gas / 7 
-7
flows from the three offshore wells on the Gippsland shelf in Victoria.
This has opened up a new phase in petroleum exploration, and has provided
a new challenge to the technologists to handle the complicated task of
extracting gas from below the seas and bringing it to your home and mine,
and to the industries of this country.
The more I look at these events, and over the wi'de sweep of
national development, the more I realise that the needs for the future are
not only in skilled manpower and in sane co-operative huiman industrial
relations, but capital requirements, in new techniques and at all levels
of management, if we are to secure maximum results.
The extent to which overseas capital is being applied to our
affairs is a subject of regular and continuing controversy. It is only fair
to say, though, that the initial impetus to the development of some of our
new -found mineral resources would not have come, had A ustralian industry
not had access to substantial quantities of overseas capital. just on
per cent, certainly 85 to 90 per cent of our investment in Australia, comes
from our own sources, and that extra 1C to 15 per cent has had a great
value for us. Ike have got off to a good start, but it is important to spell out
once again some principles which the government regards Is of first
importance. I could summarise them best this way.
W7-e will continue to need overseas capital, and we will need to
have it in a regular and substant-al way. just on 90 per cent of it has come
to us from the United Kingdom and the United States, and both tbose countries
at the present time have found it necessary to impose some restraints on
their capital inflow. We have seen this reflected in a good trading year in
the drop in our overseas reserves, because the capital inflow has fallen
sharply below that of the year before.
We have an obligation as a government, and you have an
obligation as leaders in industry, to ensure that where practicable an
Australian equity is established. And I am glad to say that this attitude of
ours is becoming increasingly appreciated by those who bring their capital,
their skills, and accept ti-e hazards of investment here in Australia.
In the last few weeks the government has announced a plan,
drawn up in association with the private banks, to help industry finance
major capital works. Most of the capital will be generated within Australia.
Overseas capital will also have its own useful place. Thi s is one of the
measures which the government has been considering for a long time, to
ensure that we have sufficient funds to develop our resources and to have an
Australian participation in their ownership.
The government certainly does not want to discourage overseas
capital, but it is deeply conscious of the anxieties that hate been expressed
in the past, and my Government will do what needs to be done to ensure that
there is no wastage of an Australian entitlement to our vast natural resources.
THREE POINTS TO NOTE
There are some points I would like to make by wvay of
conclusion, which I feel are important, as you discuss the application of
technological changes to our society. 
-8
The first is the need to know. By this I mean that a government's
readiness to help in the technological fedand to assist in the translation of
new methods into our society, can be effective only if governments and
industry are clear about what they want to do and where they are going.
It is, for instance, no good giving lip service to our drive for
new markets, unless exporters are ready to try their products in these
markets, instead of waiting . unil the other fellow has opened the door. The
same applies in the technological field.
The second point is readiness to venture It is not in anybody's
interest to hold back until a government umbreba7 is spread over a new
enterprise to protect it from all risk. By the same token, I think that the
Australian entrepreneur can take some stimulus and encouragement from the
way in which others with capital to invest from oversea-s have taken on
difficult projects, even with hazardous or dubious prospects, and shown that
there are opportunities here and Jif we show the enterprise to take advantage
of them. I do not say that the Government never opens an umbrella over
industry. It has very special respons Jbili11ties. For example, in the
preservation of an effective tariff system. It also has responsibilities for
subsidies in specific areas, and for wide-ranging incentives, not only by
direct grants, but by taxation concessions and other methods. But there
remains always a large area of self help, and this is not only an industry
responsibility, but an individual responsibility.
The third point is the level and competence of top management
and this goes for governments, mine included, as well as frindustry. There
are unexploited opportunities here and I am glad that this is implied in your
selection of subjects for discussion. There is a growing sophistication in
our industry; this is amply demonstrated in so many ways and Jit is important
that top management should have the appropriate qualifications to deal with
it. I feel our universities and our industrialists can, together, do a
great deal to secure this objective. It would be fatal to all we seek to do if
there were a " brain drain" from this country at a time when we need the skills
of the technologists and the competence of management most. Fortunately,
at the present time Australia is attracting more scientists than she is losing.
There is one final word. I have recently been int.,. sia for the
third time as Frime Minister. This is our region of special interest and for
more than a quarter of a century we have been giving technical aid both in
manpower and materials to the underdeveloped countries. Under the Golombo
Plan we have given, in technical assistance ( as distinct from economic
assistance), something like $ 0million to African and Asian countries.
Through SEATO we have given over $ 14 million, mainly in the technical
field, and through a number of other agencies, bilateral and multilateral, we
have contributed sevec-al more millions.
This may not be large when matched against the total need but
this direct help is continuing and J ncteasing and stands as a constant reminder
that our technological assets are suff iciently high for us to be able to export
them to needy countries. Is there any better bridge between humanity and
technology, than this? Is there any better service to the nation? 



OPENING OF E. R. SQUIBB SONS' PLAT ' 1
NOBLE PARK, VICTORIA l l
Speech by the Frime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt 8TH MAY, 1967
Mr. Gardiner.... and may I take this opportunity of welcoming
home to Australia the Ambassador for the United States, Mr. Edward Clark.
He has two homes, one in Texas and one here in Australia and we permit him
temporarily to serve as Ambassador from the United States to this country.
I feel we ought to be paying him the money. If every overseas ambassador
gave us as good service both inside Australia and when he goes abroad on his
various occasions, then our foreign influence would be very much greater than
it is. But we welcome him back. He is sporting his daily-renewed Texas rose.
I think he must have had an injection of some Squibb hormone or something to
keep it going or else they have shown him how to preserve these things
indefinitely. However, Ed, good friend, welcome back to Australia.
And welcome, also, Mr. Chairman of the Board, Mr. John McCloy.
There are various reasons, most of which will emerge as I
speak to you, why I find it a personal pleasure to be here this afternoon, but
I would be putting right at the top of the list the renewal of my acquaintance
and my friendship with the very distinguished man not just a distinguished
American but a distinguished world citizen in the person of the Chairman of
your Board. If any of you have found the opportunity and those of you who
haven't I hope will take it of studying the curriculum vitae of this remarkable
man, you will wonder how much could have been crammed with such distinction
Into the period of one lifetime. He tells us he Is getting on but even In the
time he spent getting on, it amazes me that so many notable posts could have
been discharged with such ability and with such general acclaim as have been
occupied by the Chairman of the Board.
And when he talks about getting on, again he is a very good
advertisement for Squibb products if that Is the way he puts It regarding
himself. He looks a very fit and vigorous specimen after having journeyed
across the Pacific and come to join us here today. Mr. McCloy, on this your
first visit to Australia, I am delighted as its Prime Minister to welcome you
here. I hope it will be the first of several occasions, and we applaud all that
you have been doing for the satisfaction not just of one President of the United
States from one side of politics but for all the Presidents who have occupied
that post during your maturity and from all sides of politics. What you have
had to say, while I am warmed by your generous references to myself doesn't
prompt the things which I feel in me to say regarding your own contribution to a
better world. You mentioned that you had been talking to my former leader,
Sir Robert Menzies, and that he couldn't find very much that was quotable to
say about me. I served with him, of course, in the Parliament for, I think,
it was thirty years, or just on thi rtyone years, and for thirty of those years
he kept referring to me at " young Harold". Eventually he got accustomed to
the idea that it was bout time that I took over and that I wasn't quite as young
as he might be presenting me in that particular form. / 2 
-2
I accept what you say about the reference I made to the United
States. I can't claim to have coined the phrase, but in the circumstances of
the Viet Nam involvement, I was very glad to adopt this for Australia. I am
entirely unrepentant about it and so far as the Viet Nam Issue is concerned,
we are there together to see this thing through. Now, when you suggest that
through Bob Menzies, I might say " all the way with Squibb", well I haven't made
a bad beginning but I am very conscious of the fact that not very far from here
are some very close friends of mine, the Nicholas family, and one has to be
diplomatic about these things.
Another very good reason for my being with you is the subject of
health. I suppose there is no topic a tout which human beings converse more
frequently or in which they are more interested individually, and this is to be
noted in the ordinary salutations with which we greet each other or the way
in which we indulge together on convivial occasions. You raise a glass and
you say " Good Health.!" Or perhaps that Is not quite so fashionable as it was
because thanks to companies like your own, most of us enjoy far better health
than earlier generations and people tend to say rather than " Good Health!
these days, " Good Luck! or If you happen to live in a country regarded as,
heidlthy and lucky, you are just as likely to get " Bottoms Up!" Then,
occasionally, we fluctuate in these matters and someone says to you, " Well,
how are you" or " How do you do". There have been mornings when I have
replied, " Well, don't ask me or I will tell you".
But what a remarkable change has come over the business, the
pleasure of living as a result of the work of men such as the founder of this
great organisation whose material evidence of success is to be found as an
example In this fine building here today.
Edward Squibbs' own story Is a romance In itself. He established
his first production laboratory as so many people living in a free enterprise
society find it necessary to do, on borrowed money, shortly after he had
left the Navy. He did this In 1858, and shortly afterwards, the laboratory
was completely destroyed by fire and he was, I understand, permanently
disfigured as a consequence of it. But such was his courage, such was his
enterprise, such was his determination that he was quickly back in operation
and by the end of 1859, he was there In business again.
And it is a very long history for a pharmaceutical organisation to
spread over more than a century of active and successful development. But
It was not just that he was successful in producing things that were of value
to people, to help them and make them feel better. He had a keen sense of
public service, of devotion to the health of the people, and somehow he felt
responsible for the ethics of the industry.
The high standard of ethics which the pharmaceutical industry
feels it desirable to employ dates back really, I think it could be fairly
claimed, to this man. Certainly he was one of the great moulders of a fine
tradition. He was dedicated to the health of mankind. He launched a new era
in pharmacy, and I don't think it is stretching it too much to say, when you
speak in terms of human well-being and happiness, he launched a new era in
human fulfilment and enjoyment. He gave his personal attention to his products.
In the early stages, he used to personally sign the bottles or containers that
carried his products, and his signature was synonymous with the quality of
his products. And without wishing to give an advertising spiel to those now
produced by the Squibb organisation, again it can be fairly said that these
high standards have been maintained. / 3 
-3
In doing a little research about him, I came across the official
opinion expressed of him by the Committee of Revision of the United States
Pharmacopoeia and I think this was some time after his death, but that is
immaterial. I quote this passage ' Dr. Squibb had the unique distinction
of possessing a sound knowledge of medicine, an innate fondness for chemical
research, an extraordinary grasp of pharmacy and of the scientists' ideal
love of truth. He could always be found opposing any course which tended to
weaken the cause of righteousness or ethics. And that is a fine tradition for
this company to have inherited. It Is a fine thing that it should be maintained.
It is difficult for a modern user of drugs to understand the
significance of Dr. Squibbs' crusade because national laws protect the life
and health of the people against adulterated drugs, there are now legal standards
for pharmaceutical production, false and extravagant claims are outlawed,
reputable drug manufacturers police their own production facilities and impoe
their own high standards. And what a contrast this is from the dark ages of
patent medicines, old wives' remedies, adulterated compounds and mysterious
potions. The presence of my colleague, the Minister for Immigration reminds
me, Mr. McCloy, that he was the Minister, then Attorney-General, who
introduced the restrictive practices legislation which also, no doubt, serves
as some sort of protectiort In this field.
Now, when I say it is difficult for us to realise what these things
mean to us because we tend to take them for granted as available for whatever
ailment or malady, temporary or otherwise, afflicts us, my mind goes back to
just a few personal experiences. I lost my own mother when I was a boy from
a bout of pneumonia. A few years later some M B tablets would probably have
saved her life and perhaps prolonged it to this time. Later, Winston Churchill,
you will recall, was stricken more than once with pneumonia, and we remember
how he used to talk about the way the M B tablets saved his life. And I
remember a distinguished Australian statesman, the late Sir Earle Page, who
also from time to time had bouts of pneumonia, and thanks to these modern
specifics, was able to remain in health and survive until a very ripe old age.
Well, these days I am told even M B I hope no disservice to
the firm has been superseded or at least there are others which are turned
to rather more readily, penicillin being regarded as a very effective remedy
for this purpose. And you have only to think about again I turn to
another personal experience. As a boarder at a preparatory school here,
Wesley, when thanks to some tainted milk, we got, several of us, a bout of
typhoid. In those days, the cure for typhoid, as far as I can recall it, was a
course of starvation. You could only take very soft foods or fluids. I was
in bed, I remember, for six weeks and I had a very mild dose well, mild
compared with others. A friend of mine, also a boarder with me at the
preparatory school, now Senator Turnbull I say " a friend of mine"
although he votes against me far more often than he votes for me he had
a bout which lasted three months. Now today you get one of what they call
the broad spectrum antibiotics, and in a matter of a comparatively short time,
you are able to control the symptoms and able to have a very much shorter
period of convalescence. And if you turn to a scourge such as tuberculosis, you see what
a dramatic change has come over the scene in that respect. All of us who
travel at one time or another know the needle treatment which is mildly
uncomfortable at the time but which protects us against what used to be the
scourges of earlier generations of mankind. And these are just a few
illustrations which one might mention of the way in which we have all been
assisted and benefited by these great developments. / 4 
-4
Now, I gather that included in these fields are such items as
tranquillisers and the relief of hypertension. These have a special appeal,
of course, for the politician who frequently needs a course of one or the
other. But these are only a few of the ways in which our life has been made
the pleas anter and the happier as the result of the work of men like Edward
Squibb and those who have followed on him.
This has become a major area of Government activity as well,
and you may be interested to have a f ew facts so far as the Commonwealth
is concerned. We are concerned with the efficacy and quality, of course, of
pharmaceutical products but our principal interest in the industry stems from
our provision of pharmaceutical benefits. Wle are concerned with the safety,
quality and the cost of drugs, and as the number of prescriptions increases,
so do the dangers in herent in the toxic nature of many drugs. I am glad
to report that in this coxy there is, so I am advised by our Department of
Health, excellent co -operation with Squibb and other pharmaceutical
manufacturers and much valuable work is being done through the Australian
Drug Evaluation Committee, with which the Department of Health collaborates.
The Commonwealth's activity in the field of drug safety through
its Therapeutic Substances Branch, through the National Biological Standards
Laboratory, represents practical recognition of its concern for the safety
of drugs being administered to the community. So many new drugs have been
introduced that governments throughout the world have found it appropriate
to establish in the form of legal standards, minimum requirements for drugs
and tiopgical products. We co-operate fully with other governments in
maintaining desirable standards of safety and quality, our main agency for
this being the National Biological Standards Laboratory. All new products
are tested at the laboratory for purity and potency, and unless they conform,
they are not listed in the drugs available under the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme. The Laboratory also carries out continuous sampling of drugs.
Now this is costing us at the present time about $ A92 million
for payments made during 1965/ 66 to chemists for dispensing pharmaceutical
benefits, thus making the pharmaceutical benefits the third largest
expenditure of the Commonwealth Government on social services. Of the
$ 92 million paid by the Commonwealth Government to chemists, approximately
$ 57 million represented the cost of the drugs to the chemist, that is, their
value at wholesale prices.
Now, another consideration which has attracted me here today
is the way in which this enterprise represents, I believe, a shining example
of the benefit of overseas investment and of enlightened approaches on the
part of the management to the problem of overseas investment. The staff,
I am informed, including the management of the firm, is an all-Australian
staff. That does not mean that in this country there is any veto on the
presence or the management or inclusion in substantial numbers in the staff
of the nationals f rom whence the investment comes, but it is a reflection,
I believe, of the faith that the management of Squibbs have in the Australian
people, of their capacity that in this enterprise, expanding as it is, they
h ave included an all-Australian staff.
The plant and again this is a bull point so far as I am concerned
will produce not only for the Australian market but for export. The firm is
engaging in basic research and no doubt is able to draw on the research of
the parent company which in turn is a part of an enormous American
organisation, Olin Mathieson. I notice, looking through the annual report
of Olin Mathieson that they also manufacture WVinchester rifles and perhaps,
Mr. McCloy, it was a wise decision to have a separate chemical company 
altogether, otherwise you might have had thrust on you the slogan " Kill
them or cure them
We applaud this research because it is through this that
productivity and efficiency develop and I have spoken earlier of the confidence
which this Investment demonstrates in the future of Australia by a well
known and reputable firm from overseas, conscious not only of the
opportunities in this country but seeing, I think, with a far-sightedness
tshoamt et hpea prtrso douf ctths iso fr eAguiosntr aliina winh itchhe wfuet ufirned moauyrs pelrvoevse trheaand itehro soef fernotmry ointh, er
countries, including the United States Itself.
Some of you have heard me talk abott the fact that we occu py a
very special place and I am prompted to say this because Mr, McCloy's
remarks took a broad range over the world scene we occupy a special
place In relationi to Cambodia, which I have visited quite recently. You are
aware, Mr, McCloy, as, the Ambassador is, that the United States not having
diplomatic relations with this country, Cambodia, Australia represents
Americati interests in Cambodia, as indeed we represent Cambodian
interests in South Viet Nam. I think I can claim that there are very few
Heads of Government and this is not something T claim for myself; it
is reflective of the country who could have visited the four countries I
visited so recently. Some could get to two, some would have been acceptable
in three; very few people would have been acceptable in the four. And I
make that point because I think that it is wise for any vast organisation with
an International distribution to include Australia as one of its distributing
points. Ours is a friendly country, we are on friendly terms with our
northern neighbours and from this point, export can be readily arranged.
Now we have tried to set a climate in this country encouraging
to investment, prod ucing for ourselves prosperity and full employment,
rising standards of living and good prospects of expansion. We believe that
responsible overseas investment in Australia is not only desirable but
essential to supplement our own efforts to invest, and thereby maintain our
rate of growth. Australia invests a high proportion of its gross national
product. We are not waiting for other people to come and do the job for us.
The Chaiman of the Board may be interested to know that of the
total capital investment in this country between 85 per cent and 90 per cent.
comes from Australian sources themselves, but we do value the extra
per cent to 15 per cent, that comes to us from overseas, with the know-how
it brings, with the research that frequently accompanies it, with the skilled
executive management that also frequently comes in the wake of the investment.
And Australia invests a higher proportion of its gross national product than
I think any other country in the world with the exception of Japan, more
than one and a half times the proportion invested in the United States or in
the United Kingdom. So you will gather, Mr. McCloy, and I am saying this because
he has got a very good entree to the President of the United States, and the
sting is in the tall because 90 per cent, of investment in Australia has come
from two sources the United Kingdom and the United States of America.
Both of those countries for economic reasons of their own and financial
reasons of their own, have found it necessary to place some restraint on the
movement of capital here. But I am sure, as you look at Australia and see
its relationship, geographically and otherwise to the United States, to those
countries of this region In which the United States has a profound interest, / 6 
4 -6
it will strike you, as a man with your international experience, experience
in international affairs, and in financial and legal affairs, that it should be
a prime United States' interest to help to make this country strong, and we
don't say that in any spirit of seeking some charity from others. VWe have
never sought nor accepted a dollar of aid from the United States of America,
but w'e do believe it to be a continuing United States' interest to see that
Australia grows and that that growth is assisted by a steady flow of
investment capital from the United States of America.
Now, over the last twelve months, largely as the result of
the reasons I have mentioned, there has been some fall away not falling
away of interest as I am sure the Ambassador will confirm. His life is
made hectic rather than busy, contending and coping with those who come
from overseas seeking out opportunities in Australia or wondering what
can be done here. And I hope that this appreciation of what Australia can
mean to this region in which the United States is showing such a commendable
interest the South-East Asian and Pacific region and indeed of Asia
generally, the whole area East of Suez in which are to be found three-fifths
of mankind, that in this picture there will be seen quite clearly a place for
a growing, strengthening Australia as a contributing factor to stability, to
progress, to leadership in this area of the world.
Now that has got a little outside my charter. I was tempted
to introduce it because you, Mr. McCloy, were kind enough to give us
your own picture of Australia in a world setting. And I am looking forward
greatly to seeing the President again in the first week of June, and I know
that he has a deep affection for this country and he has a recognition of
its importance in the directions that I have mentioned. I know that it is
a product of his resolution, as it was of two American Presidents who
preceded him, that America sees the necessity of building a better world
order in the area of the world in which we find ourselves, and that is why
we so wholeheartedly have aligned ourselves with you and why we are so
determined to see these issues through with you. Our countries together,
I think, can make a great contribution to strength, to stability, to progress
and security in this area of the world, and this establishment, which shortly
I will formally declare open, is itself tangible evidence of the way in which
the best that ewines from America can be married to what is good in
Australia. We encourage immigration of people and we find that we
have been able to assimilate them readily, happily for ourselves and
happily for them. L Unbrenlightened leadership by overseas investors
there can be the same happy marriage between capital from overseas,
techniques, know-how and executive skills from overseas with the
opportunities available here in Australia.
May Squibb play a significant and growing part in that
co-operation and I wish you every success for your future. 



r W. 67/ 10 2
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 52/ 1967
A. L. P. TACTICS ON POSTAL CHARGES_
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Increased charges by Governments are never popular, and
it is not surprising that the Labor Party should attempt to turn the
announced increases in postal and telephone rates to its political advantage.
But the decision to use its numbers in the Senate to defeat the Government
on a substantial financial matter reveals the depth of political opportunism to
which the Labor Party, under its new leadership, will allow itself to sink.
It is one of the most firmly established principles of British
Parliamentary democracy that a House of review should not reject the
financial decisions of the popular House. The terms of the Commonwealth
Constitution reflect this principle.
It has long been a cherished principle of Labor policy that the
Senate should not frustrate the financial policies of a Government possessing
majority support in the House of Representatives. This was consistently
adhered to by the former Leader of the ALP, Mr. Calwell; it has been
repeatedly emphasised by Labor's Shadow Treasurer, Mr. Crean, and given
clear expression by Mr. Whitlam himself. He is on public record as having
stated Labor's belief that Senate powers on financial matters diould be only
those of consultation. He made this statement at a time when he was acting
Leader of the Labor Party. Labor's attitude on this matter is carried to the
point of maintaining as a plank of policy in its platform, the abolition of the
Senate. There will be many staunch Labor supporters disgusted by this
cynical abandonment of a long-held princtp1e and this blatant exercise of
political opportunism in the teeth of so many firm and clear public declarations
of the past. If this is the new look in Labor leadership, then it is revealed
as having no basis of consistency or principle nor any respect for historical
democratic tradition and practice.
CANBERRA, May, 1967. 



S4.' 4
1 7 MAY 1967
4 RAs EM3ARGO: 7.30 Monday
May, 1967.
REFERENDUTM: THE " YES" CASE
Talk by the Prime . Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
( This talk opening the " Yes" cases for both referendums will be
telecast and broadcast by -e A. 3. C. in all states this evening).
I want to talk to you about the referendum which will be
held throughout Australia on Saturday, May 27th.
This referendum is necessary oecause your Federal Parliament
proposes and this is subject to your decision to make certain
alterations to the Commonwealth Constitution which the Parliament
considers desirable. have passed the legislation to do this, but,
under the . terms of our Constitution, Parliament's action must oe
approved by you, the people, before that Constitution can oe altered.
For reasons I shall outline, we hope you will say " Yes"
to what we have in mind. ' hen I say we, I include the Leader of the
Country Party, Mr. McEwen, and the Leader of the Labor Party, Mr.
'. hitlam. We have joined in preparing the official " Yes" case,
which should have reached you through your letterbox. ;.' hen I say
we, I can include also . all'e mbers of the House of Representatives
who voted unanimously for the proposals we s . all be putting to you,
and, in the case of the Sen te, ll Senators in sunport of the
proposal rela. ting to aboriginais and an overwhelming majority of
Sen: tors the vote was 45 to 7 who voted in support of the proposal
to break what is called the " rexus" rel'ating to the number of
Senators and Members of the House of Representatives.
You will gather that we are putting two matters before
you. One concerning our . boriginal people and the other described
as the Nexus Referendum. I shall speak first abou,. t the Nexus
Referendum. The word " nexus" may need explaining. It is a short way
of summarisin the words in section 24 of the Commonwealth Constitution
whioh now read this way:-
" The House of Representatives shall be composed of
Members directly chosen by the people of the
Commonwealth, and the number of Members shall be,
as nearly as pricticable, twice the number of the
Senators.
This section, as you will see, ties the House of
Representatives to the Senate in terms of numbers. That is
what the word " nexus" implies. Now to put the matter simply,
all the main political parties in Federal Parliament believe that
this " nexus" should be broken. As matters stand, any increase in
the House of Represen: tatives made necessary by population growth
must be accompanied by an increase of half that total in the number
of Senators. We do not believe this to be necessary. We think it
requires us to create more Members of Parliament than the situation
is likely to call for at any particular time. We have in mind two
things 1) To remove the need to increase the number of
Senators whenever the number of Members in the / 2 
-2-
House of Representatives is increased:
2) To impose a limit on ume extent to which
membership of the House of Representatives can
be increased.
The first would break the " nexus" and the second would
write a safeguard into the Constitution against excessive increases
in the number of parliamentarians.
I am sure thit, as believers in the democratic system
you will be impressed by the fact that the vote in support of these
proposals in the House of Representatives was unanimous and that the
leaders of the three principal political parties have united to ask you..
to give your support to them. e did not embark on this course
lightly. Indeed, legislation for this purpose was introduced by my
predecessor, Sir Robert Menzies, in 1965. ie see the proposals as
commonsense, practical parliamentary reforms. We see your response
to them as a test of political maturity and a rejection of the
prejudice and misleading arguments with which you will find yourselves
assailed. The generally accepted view of all the main political
parties'is that the Senate of 60 members 10 from each of the 6
States needs no increase at this time. The Senate was intended
to be a House of Review and by tradition is regarded as the custodian
of the rights of the smaller States. Its powers are defined and
established in the Constitution and its effectiveness does not
depend upon increased numoers. We have had six States since
Federation and no change in that figure is in sight. Membership
of the House of Representatives, on the other hand, is geared to
the population and we are confronted with a rapid and continuing
population growth.
When the present size of the House of Representatives
was decided in 1949, Australia's population was just on 8 millions.
If the present Parliament runs its normal course, with the next
general election being held in 1969 our population should have
reached 12 millions an increase of 50% in the 20 years which will
have elapsed since 1949. We have no proposal for an increase in the
size of the House of Representatives in any way proportionate to
that increase in population. Indeed we are proposing to you that
the number of Members of the House of Representatives be determined
by dividing the population of each State by not less than 85 000.
In 1949 each Member of the House of Representatives represented on
average 66, COO people. Under our proposal we would continue to
represent not less than 85,000 people, and this despite the enormous
growth in the subject matters dealt with by the Commonwealth
Parliament and their increasing complexity. Australia is a
rapidly growing nation with widening interest and responsibilities.
Matters which in the past occupied little or no time in the
Commonwealth Parliament are now matters of major concern, which in
the judgment of the electorate call for Commonwealth attention and
participation. I have only to mention as examples such matters of
vital concern to you as education, housing, national development,
employment, external affairs, immigration, health and social
services. If you say you cannot break the " nexus" what will
follow. The result will no be that from now to eternity the number
of Senators will remain at 60 and the number of Members of the House
of Representatives at 123. At some point of time, because of
population growth and other factors, the demand for a more
representative Parliament will be irresistible. But the " nexus"
rule would still apply. You will be told by our opponents that ours
is a proposal to increase the numoer of parliamentarians. We do
not need any change in the Constitution to bring that about. 
-3-
Parliament has unlimited powers to increase the House of
Representatives so long as at the same time it increases the size
of the Senate. Twelve more Memoers of the House of Representatives
would mean 6 more Senators. Tuentyfour additional Members in the
lower House would mean 12 more Senators and so on; One of these
days our population will have reached 20 millions. If the increases
in the House of Representatives to service the needs of this
growing population have to be matched as to half the number of
Members of the House of Representatives by additional Senators,
then we certainly might have a surfeit of politicians. Surely
the sensible alternative to this clumsy kind of operation is to
say " Yes" and break the " nexus" at the same time saying " Yes"
to the provision which will limit the extent to which the House
may be increased now or in the future.
The core of the matter is whether you believe, with us,
thit the Senate membership should not necessarily be enlarged
whenever population growth invites an incro se in the popular House.
If you agree with us you will, far from facilitatin the growth
in the numoer of parliamentarlins, be limiting the increase which
can oe made. It cannot be repeated too often thit a " Yes" vote will not
only remove the out-dated link oetween the Senate and the House of
Representatives; it will also limit the rate at which the popular
House can grow.
The advocates of the case put on a show of iodignation
at the prospect of an increase in Parliament and throw in the glib
phrase thit ' e are already over-governed. 3reat Jritain, a small
island has a House of Commons numbering 630. You don't hear the
English people complaining about the size of the House of Commons,
which is the voice of the nation. The British people believe deeply
and profoundly in the institution of Parliament.
The " No" case strikes ne as a crude appeal to prejudice
rather than an appeal to the commonsense of the Australian people.
A small minority of Senators you could number them on your fingers.-
are in open opposition to reforms supported unanimously by the
House of Representatives and by all the main political parties.
The case they put to you is the oaseless suggestion that your National
Parliament has conspired in some wiy to undermine the Senate, and
they add a sneering imputation that the Members of the National
Parliament elected by you are ln y and inefficient. For good
measure, tAis handful of " to" spokesmen hint darkly at unnecessary
increases in the cost of government. This is another red herring.
The cost of parliamentary government in Australi is remarkably low.
The relevant figure for operitin the House of Representatives works
out at about 30 cents per head of the population. Not very costly
when you think of the role the House of Reoresentatives plays in
our national affairs and in relation to your own lives.
I have enough faith in the good sense of Australian electors
to oelieve they will examine the pros and cons of this auestion calmly
and objectively. They will reject the spirit in which the " No"
spokesmen have approached them. I confidently expect a mature
judgment from mature people.
Now let me say something about the second referendum guestion
the one concerning our aboriginal people. There was no opposition
to it in Parliament in either House and I would anticipate overwhelming
support for it by the electors.
The aboriginal people of Australia are mentioned explicitly
in the Constitution twice only. / 4 
-4-
Section 127 of the Constitution says:
" In reckonin the numbers of the people of the Comlonwealth,
or of a State or other part of the Commonwealth,
aboriginal natives shall not be counted."
At the turn of the century, when the Constitution was
framed, the principal reason for including Section 127 was the
practical difficulty of countin, the aboriginal population at
that time. It is, however, no longer a serious di ficulty. The
basis for the existence of the section consequently no longer remains.
It is completely out of harmony with our national attitudes
and modern thinking. It has no place in our Constitution in this
age. The second alteration Federal Parliament wants to make
is the deletion of the words " other than the aboriginal race in
any State" from Section 21 ( xxvi).
This section says:
" The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have
power to miake laws for the peace, order and good government
of the Commonwealth with respect to:
"( xxvi) The people of any race, other than the
aboriginal race in any otate, for whom it is
deemed necessary to make special lirs".
We have been influenced by the widespread impression which
exists that the words " other than the aboriginal race in any State"
are discriminatory. Unanimously, Federal Parliamment wants to remove these two
references to the aborigines, because one of the provisions is
out of date and oecause the other is widely believed to be discrininate
against aborigines. Let me remind you a'ain in conclusion that I can speak for
the three leaders of the principal political parties Liberal,
Labor and Country Party for a unanimous House of Representatives,
and for an overwhelming majority of members of the Senate when I
ask you to vote " Yes" to the two questions which ,; ill be Lefore you
on the ballot paper.
CAM1ERRA. 15 MAY, 1967. 



TSHTAE TRETM. EHNOTN . B YH TAHREO LPDR IHMOEL TM, ININIS TTEHRE, U' ' 7AY ' 117
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES aA
16TH MAY, 1967
THE OUTCOME OF THE KENNEDY ROUND TARIFF
NEGOTIATIONS
I can tell the House that I have just this morning been
informed by Mr. McEwen from Geneva that the Director -General of the
G. ATT has announced that agreement has been reached on the elements of
a successful Kennedy Round. This is the outcome as at present seen of
negotiations over some four years and, even on the limited information as
yet available, can be said to represent a major success in reducing barriers
to world trade. As Honourable Members will know, this important series
of negotiations was initiated by t he late President John F. Kennedy with the
obj ective of achieving a significant liberalisation of world trade covering
all classes of products, both industrial and agricultural. It is in relation
to agricultural products, of course, that Australia has been most concerned
to achieve better trading conditions.
After the difficult negotiations of the past few weeks in
Geneva, it is gratifying that the major traders of the world have been able
to reconcile their conflicting interests and to reach agreement on arrangements
which offer benefits not only as between themselves but also to the
less developed countries of the world. I understand that the net effect of
the Kennedy Round could be a reduction in tariffs in the industrialised
countries of the order of 3L-per cent. covering trade to the value of some
$ pUS-, billion. It is not yet possible to provide Members with full details
of the overall settlement reached in Geneva. In fact, discussions on some
items of importance to Australia are continuing. I can, however, say that
with respect to one of our major export commodities wheat we have
achieved more satisfactory arrangements than at various stages of negotiations
seemed attainable. Agreement has been reached which will ensure that
world wheat marketing will continue on an orderly basis and within the
framework of internationally agreed rules of trading.
A new minimum price has been established some 2C cents
per bushel above the minimum in the present International Wheat Agreement.
This in itself i. s a worthwhile gain. It establishes a new floor for world wheat
prices. At present we are, of course, selling our wheat above this level
in world markets and we hope that we shall continue to do so. But it is
reassuring to know that if a situation of world surpluses were to emerge,
we have the protection of a higher and firmer floor price than we have had
up to the present. Furthermore, the price arrangements are such as to retain
Australia's competitive posit-Lon in world markets. 
-2-
Another important element of the agreement on wheat is
the acceptance by the developed countries including the EEC, the UK and
Japan, that they should share equitably with the wheat-exporting countries
the burden of providing food aid. This is a principle which Australia has
been pressing ever since the commencement of the Kennedy Round
negotiations. The new arrangement will mean that the food-producing
countries of the world will no longer be looked to alone in providing this
food aid. At this stage, I am not in a position to inform Honourable
Members of the details of the negotiations on meat. Detailed discussions
are in fact still proceeding in Geneva but our delegation is confident that
valuable gains will be achieved in our meat trading arrangemehts.
Moreover, in the totality of the Kennedy Round there will be other benefits
which will assist a number of other Australian industries. Details of these
benefits will be made available when the negotiations have been concluded.
It is the nature of international negotiations in which
conflicting interests must be reconciled ard a balance of advantage struck,
that governments cannot achieve all their negotiating objectives.
Nevertheless, what has been achieved in the Ken nedy Round represents
a real move forward in the whole area of international trade, and one
from which Australia can expect to derive important trading benefits. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. V97
HON. HAROLD HOLT, M, P6 IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVESE 16th MAY, 1967
FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF COMONW\ EALTH WVAR
GRAVES COMMISSION
I wish to remind Honorable Members that 1967 marks the
Fiftieth Anniversary of the establishment of the Commonwealth W/ ar Graves
Commission which originally was 1known as the Imperial War Graves
Commission. In a few days' time, Australia will be represented by our High
1Commissioner in London at a special Fiftieth Anniversary meeting of the
Commonwealth War Graves Commission presided over by His Royal Highness
the Duke of Gloucester. In more than 23, 700 burial places throughout the world are the
graves of nearly one and three quarter million, men and women, of
the former Imperial Forces who died in the two World W~ ars. Of these,
more than 100., DCwere P ustralians.
All who have visited any of the war cemeteries must have been
moved by their beauty and by the care with which they are tended. The
efforts of many are involved, and to them I extend our thanks to the
architects, engineers, builders and horticulturalists who have created these
places and to the researchers who so far as is humanly practicable, have
made sure that each man and woman who died in the cause of freedom in
either of the two WAorld W, 7ars has been honoured by name. I am sure it is
a matter of pride to us all that our honoured dead are cared for in this way.
The Commission itself is a " Commonwealth" body formed by
the member countries of the Commonwealth to honour their dead of the
two World W1a. rs. Each war cemetery, each memorial, each individual
grave is a tribute paid jointly by a united C-. ommonwealth of Nations.
VWe rake pride in the fact that Australia is an active partner in this organisation.
In this year of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the establishment of
the Commission, we place on record our very sincere appreciation of the
work that has been carried out, and still continues.
I have no doubt that this statement carries the support of all
Members of the House.
I propose to send the President of the C"' ommonwealth W/ ar Graves
Commission a message in the following terms
" Cn behalf of the Parliament and people of Australia
I would likL-e to express to the Commonwealth War Graves
Commission our sincere appreciation for the manner in which
it is carrying out the task of commemorating and honouring the
dead of the two VWorld Wars and to assure you of our continuing
support and confidence in the future. On this Fiftieth Anniversary,
the Commission can look back with a true sense of pride at its
achievements over the years." 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH 2 6 MAY 197
4BY8RARI
The Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT,,
ON
' VOYAGER' INQUIRY
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 17 May 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister) [ 8.47]-The House has had a very
thorough discussion on this particular
matter. Three of my ministerial colleagues
have jaken part in the debate, as has a
former Minister for the Navy from the
Government side. It is not my purpose at
this stage to go over the ground again
or to try to canvass all the points that have
already been raised. We have reached a
stage where the Parliament must recognise
as I am sure most, if not all, honourable
members from the outset have recognised,
that we have an obligation to do justice.-
justice to the living and justice to the dead.
We also have an obligation to do justice
to the Royal Australian Navy. I believe
that we have a fine Navy with a splendid
record-a Navy that has inherited the
British tradition of naval efficiency and
gallantry. Certainly our own'Navy, though
small in size, ' has maintained a standard
which is not surpassed by that of any other
' Navy in any part of the world. It is a Navy
operating in the best tradition established
by what we believe to be the best of all
navies, the British Navy. Yet, as a result
of' allegations that have been made and
canvassed in the course of this debate,
justice is in danger of being obscured and,
in the case of some people, denied unless
this Parliament can resolve these matters
as they should most properly be resolved.
I devote the first portion of what I have
to say to what I term a ground clearing
operation. Although the allegations that
6980/ 67 have been canvassed here have been
directed in particular against the commander
of the ' Voyager' on the night of
this tragic collision, by implication they
have reached out to other people; indeed,
they have reached out to my predecessor,
Sir Robert Menzies, who was then Prime
Minister. There was created an atmosphere
that the Government, in order to avoid
some political embarrassment for itself,
concealed evidence which should properly
have been placed before the Royal Commission.
Some cloud has been cast over
even the Royal Commissioner himself, and
certainly there have been references to
, counsel assisting the Royal Commission,
the, Chiefs of the Naval Staff, the Naval
Board, and other senior naval officers. All
these things I believe have created a
situation which must be cleared. Let me
. say a few words in relation to my distinguished
predecessor.
Mr Clyde Cameron-Do not blame him
for it.
i Mr HAROLD HOLT-I am not attempting
to blame him, and I hope that no one
else will blame him. What I want to make
clear in relation to Sir Robert Menzies is
that from the outset of this unhappy
business he was determined that there would
be the most searching inquiry into its
causes. This was the reason that motivated
him in deciding to have a Royal Commission
rather than an inquiry by the Naval
Board, which would have been in accordance
with normal naval practice. To
remind the House of what Sir Robert 
Menzies said in his ministerial statement
concerning the loss of ; HMAS ' Voyager',
I-quote his ' words from page 1074 of
Hansard of 15th September 1964 as
follows: I do not'seek to minimise the tragic nature
of the ' Voyager' collision, with its appalling
consequences in lives lost. That is why we
instituted the most searching public inquiry in the
whole of our defence history.
As one who was close to my predecessor
at that time, being the Deputy Leader of
his own Party and a senior member of the
Cabinet, I can well recall the atmosphere
and the spirit in which he addressed himself
to these matters. So far as he was
concerned, he wanted an inquiry that
would produce the truth, not just for the
Government to see but for the information
of the people of this country. That is the
spirit in which I and my colleagues have
dealt with every aspect of this matter that
has since come before us.
There have been suggestions or allegations
that Sir Robert Menzies bore some
prejudice against Captain Robertson, but
I never heard him utter words of prejudice,
or for that matter words of criticism,
against Captain Robertson. At the bottom
of page 1075 of Hansard of 15th September
1964 Sir Robert Menzies is reported
to have said:
Of the general capacity, not only of Captain
Robertson but of Captain Stevens, there cannot
be any real doubt. Each had a splendid record
and very considerable naval experience.
That is not the language of a man who
bears prejudice or is trying in some way to
do a disservice or to belittle one of our
respected Service officers. Something was
made of the fact that Captain Robertson
had difficulty in securing senior counsel. The
facts as I understand them are that at the
beginning of the inquiry Captain Robertson
did not want counsel; he felt that his own
specialist naval knowledge would be of
strength to him in whatever might be
alleged during the inquiry. But as the proceedings
developed and his own position
came under challenge, it was suggested to
him that he should have counsel. He applied
for counsel. At the time it is true that he
was first allotted junior counsel, but what
has to be borne in mind is that he was not
the only officer whose position was under
some analysis and examination by the
Royal Commission; there were several such
officers, and if senior counsel were to be provided for each of them there would
have been something of a practical problem.
This matter was raised by the honourable
member for La Trobe ( Mr Jess). Very
properly he formed a view, no doubt after
consultation or as a result of what came to
him from Captain Robertson. As he will
know, he finally brought this matter to me.
I in turn took it to my leader, Sir Robert
Menzies. I can assure the honourable member
and the House that as soon as I made
my own recommendation on this matter and
explained the reasons for it, Sir Robert
Menzies readily consented. It is a distortion
of the situation to say, as has been said
earlier in this debate, that this was the
result of some pressure because there was
a Party meeting coming up. It was dealt
with on its merits and as it should have
been dealt with. Thereafter Captain
Robertson had the assistance of senior
counsel. I make a brief reference to Mr Justice
Spicer because it has been said that as a
former Attorney-General and a Minister in
a Menzies Government he was not an appropriate
person to have been appointed to this
Royal Commission. I do not think any
member-from whatever party-who was
in this Parliament at the time when Sir
John Spicer was a senator and the Attorney-
General will have any other view than that
he is a man of integrity, whose objectivity
and capacity for complete impartiality fitted
him to deal with a matter of this sort. 1
have never heard that seriously contested
by any contemporary of his from any section
of the Parliament. The fact of the
matter is that over the years Sir John
Spicer has built up something of a name
as an expert in these disaster cases. I took
the trouble only today to get some details
of a number of these matters in which he
has conducted inquiries. I find that he has
conducted at least seven investigationsthe
Trans-Australia Airlines Friendship
disaster at Mackay; the Ansett-ANA Viscount
disaster at Botany Bay; the Ansett-
ANA Viscount crash at Winton; three
marine courts of inquiry, including the
' Atlas' inquiry and two in Western Australia
so he was not unfamiliar with these
naval matters, and the ' Voyager' Royal
Commission. Therefore, I do not think the
House will allow any argument to rest on
the basis that these proceedings suffered
on the grounds of lack of competence or 
impartiality on the part of the Royal
Commissioner. Counsel assisting the Royal Commissioner
has come in for his share of criticism, it
being alleged that he deliberately withheld
evidence which had a material bearing on
the matters before the Commission. The
implication is that he did this to cover up
in some way for the Navy or to withhold
inlormafion which could have been of
embarrassment to the Navy. The irony of
this is that shortly before this he came under
a great deal of criticism because it was
alleged that his cross-examination and his
analysis of Navy actions were much too
severe. I do not think the House will place
very much reliance upon that charge either.
Some of my colleagues-including the
presentMinister for Education and Science
( Senator Gorton) who had been Minister for
the Navy until a couple of months before
this incident and my colleague the honourable
member for Perth ( Mr Chaney) who
was at the time of the incident Minister for
the Navy-have by implication come under
a cloud. If one draws from these allegations
the belief that in some way the Navy was
not in good shape and was not being
properly conducted, the inference is that
the Ministers I have mentioned, Chiefs of
Naval Staff, the Naval Board and senior
officers of the Navy, were not doing their
duty properly by the nation. This charge
all hangs on a single fabric, so far as the
Parliament is concerned, and the fabric is
the uncorroborated Statement of Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban. There has not been
any other evidence or material of consequence
put before the Parliament in the
days of this debate which goes beyond the
statement that has been under debate and
which comes from Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban. I ask the House to weigh this
because if the reputations of so many men
in high places and if the prestige of the
Australian Navy are at stake in this debate
then the grounds for these charges and
these suspicions must be thoroughly
examined. Of course, those who have spoken in
the debate have said: ' This is our purpose.
This is what we want to achieve. We want
to see whether these statements do hang
together and whether they are worthy of
credence.' I have no wish to make any sort of personal attack upon Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban. I believe him to be a
conscientious man with a sense of public
duty which' he has demonstrated with some
courage by the way in which he has brought
these matters forward. But as my colleague
the Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) pointed out
earlier today, if we are to rely on this
statement and build this structure upon
that singlestatement then we cannot ignore
some of the elements in the past record or
in the personal history of the man who
makes the statement.
: Mr Clyde Cameron-So now the Prime
Minister will drop the bucket.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-The honourable
gentleman is accustomed to that technique.
I am putting as dispassionately as I can
facts I believe to be relevant. If he thinks
that they are not, he can say so or form
his judgment upon them, but I. think it is
of relevance when-statements are madeso
far not corroborated, although great publicity
has been given to the matter throughout
Australia, and, I should imagine
throughout the English speaking world. So
far as I am aware no member on the opposite
side of the House has brought forward
any-substantial corroboration of the series
of allegations that has been made. Here is
a man who, having as a member of the
Naval Air Arm, failed to make the grade
and, being removed from that posting,
sought twice to resign from the Navy;
and who in the course of the first application
said that he was disillusioned with
the Navy. I think these are relevant facts.
I do not wish to over-emphasise them but
they are relevant when, I repeat, the basis
of the allegations is the statement coming
from this man.
These statements bear on the career and
reputation of a' man who had given long
and able service in the navy of this country.
He is a man who can no longer speak for
himself, because he went down with his
ship, and we, have a duty to do justice
to him as we have a duty to do justice
to the living. I mentioned a little earlier
Captain Robertson. I think it is relevant
again to remind the House of what Captain
Robertson had to say about Captain Stevens
in the transcript, as recorded, of the Royal
Commission on the loss of the ' Voyager'. 
Captain Robertson was being questioned by
Mr Jenkyn, as follows:
Did -you know Captain Stevens personally?-
Yes. Do you know his record as an officer?-Yes.
Do you know him as a competent commander
of a destroyer?-Yes.
And so this vessel which was manoeuvring with
you you kniew was at least skippered or commanded
by a competent captain?-Yes, but let
me just qualify that. I knew his reputation as
a very successful naval officer. From my own
personal knowledge I had not served in a ship
with him and so I cannot honestly say that I
knew him as a good commander but I knew
his reputation was certainly that, and I have no
reason to doubt it at all.
Ours is a small Navy and Captain
Robertson was, as I understand it, about
the age then of what would be the age
today of Captain Stevens had Captain
Stevens survived. In other words, they were
contemporaries in the same fleet-in a
small navy. I doubt if he would, on oath,
have been expressing himself in these terms
if he had reason to believe that there were
attributes of Captain Stevens which made
him an incompetent officer or which, on
the occasion in question, would have
raised doubts in ' his mind as to the course
the other vessel was taking.
I want to put to the House-and I do it
with some reluctance but with a full
sense of responsibility-confidential reports
which were made over the ten years
leading up to the incident which brought
about the death of Captain Stevens. My
predecessor gave powerful reasons why
these confidential reports should not be
made public. He pointed out that the
officers who provide these reports are
normally not below the rank of captain
which, in naval terms, is the equivalent of
a full colonel in the Army-in other words
a senior officer of the Navy. The reports
are made to the superior officer . of the
officer reporting. If the reports are to be
quoted publicly from time to time, then
some inhibitions would be placed on the
reporting officers and the usefulness of the
reports would be eroded. We have thought
long about, whether these reports should be
made public and until the debate of the
last two days it had been our decision,
although we know of them and their substance,
that they would not be made
known. I believe that in justice to the
memory of this dead naval officer and in view of the allegations that have been
made against him, we have . a duty to his
family, to his memory and . to the public
to make known what his fellow officers
thought of him at that time. [ Extension of
time granted] I thank the House and 1
shall endeavour not to abuse its patience,
but the seriousness of this matter is well
appreciated. I asked for reports going back over the
ten year period leading up to the ' Voyager'
incident. The first report is signed by an
acting captain of the Royal Australian
Navy. It speaks of Lieutenant-Commander
Stevens, as he then was, as a very capable,
forthright and reliable officer, really keen,
alert and zealous who has the interest of
the Service at heart and who does not
spare himself to improve conditions. The
report continues:
He will do well. Physically fit and plays most
games. A good messmate who is maturing with
responsibility.
The next report covers the period 1st
December 1953 to 27th October 1954 and
states: An extremely proficient and resourceful officer
with a flair for organisation. Cheerful and very
loyal ' with the interest of the Service at heart.
A good leader and does not spare himself
in the performance of his duties.
Plays most games reasonably well and keeps
himself fit.
The next two reports cover very short
periods and are marked by the officers
concerned: ' Insufficient knowledge' and
' Insufficient knowledge. Time only'.
Mr Clyde Cameron-What dates do they
cover? Mr HAROLD HOLT-They cover the
periods 29th October 1954 to 15th April
1955 and 9th June 1955 to 22nd September
1955.
Mr Clyde Cameron-What about the one
in between, the one you have missed?
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I have not missed
any, and I ask the honourable member for
Hindmarsh to restrain his normal impulses
and behave himself. This report covers the
period from 23rd September 1955 to 26th
October 1955 and it reads:
A volatile officei, extremely loyal and capable,
who should do very well in the Service. Keeps
himself fit.
The next one covers the period from
October 1955 to 15th April 1956. It is 
signed by a captain of the Navy. It is
customary for the next senior officer to
whom one of these reports is forwarded to
sign the document, or the flimsy, as I think
it is called, and to add a remark if he
thinks that necessary or desirable. This
report reads:
An outstanding officer who lives for the Service.
Full of initiative and drive. Quick to make
decisions and an officer who welcomes responsibility.
Possesses a high professional standard. The
ship's present state is due to a great degree to the
qualities of her captain. This officer has served
under me in another appointment and with my
previous and present experience of him I would
be glad to have him in higher rank at any future
time. To this the rear-admiral added ' Concur' and
his signature. The next one is for the period
from 23rd September. 1955 to 7th July
1956: A proficient seaman with plenty of initiative and
drive. He has the ability to make decisions without
any unnecessary delay. At times wears a doleful
expression which is quite misleading. Extremely
hardworking but nevertheless can relax. Most pronounced
quality is that of loyalty. In view of his
non-specialist training and his considerable small
ship experience I am not sure regarding the
measure of success in staff appointments at this
stage of his career.
The rear-admiral who sighted this merely
signed it without comment. The next report
is for the period from 7th July 1956 to
19th December 1956. He was at that time
a training commander and had been promoted
commander. The report reads:
A keen and enthusiastic officer who has the
ability to bring out the best in the young ratings
under training. He sets a high personal example to
the officers under him and has good power of
command. A good organiser and keen games
player. He deserves very great credit for his work
as Chief Marshal at the Olympic Games. A most
likeable personality.
Then I come to a report covering the period
from 14th January 1957 to 1 lth July 1958:
A very good officer with marked qualities of
leadership. He tackles everything with enthusiasm
and has the faculty of inspiring loyalty and keenness
in his juniors. As well as efficiently fulfiling
his duties as Training Commander he has run the
F. N. D. Cricket Club and Australian Rules Football
Club with success and was in charge of the
arrangements for the Inter Service Sports 1957-58
for which the Navy was host Service. These also
were a great success. He is a good mixer, a
splendid messmate and has considerable personal
charm. The next report is from 28th July 1958 to
December 1958. He was then an executive officer.'. The report . reads:
I feel Stevens is finding it a little difficult
being second in command. H' is a forceful
character with only average brain power, and
because of this he is inclined to rush his fences.
At present he makes ' tioo much noise too frequently
to inspire quiet confidence in a carrier.
I have told him of this failing. He is energetic,
of, sober habits and zealous. When he finds his
feet and has a little more experience, I am confident
he will be a complete success in his present
appointment. That was signed by a captain and countersigned
by a rear-admiral. Then I have a
report from 17th December 1958 to 7th
August 1959, when he was still an executive
officer: A smart and enthusiastic officer who gives of
his best at all times. He is inclined to brood
over problems. A very good games player.
To that the rear-admiral added:
Concur. He has been a successful Commander
of the Flagship.
I have another report for the period from
17th December -1958 to 3rd December
1959: A keen and hardworking officer who has
achieved good results. He is a firm and fair
disciplinarian both with officers and men. He has
been more cheerful and brooded less since his
ulcer was successfully treated. Of good physique
and smart in appearance. A keen and good games
player. That report was followed by these remarks
of the rear-admiral:
Concur. He has been an efficient Commander
of the Flagship.
Then there is' a report for the period 14th
Maich 1960 to 12th August 1960. The
significance of this one is that it covers a
period when he was in England as a student
at the Royal , Naval Staff College at Greenwich.
It is signed by a captain of the Royal
Navy and there is an additional signature
of a British rear-admiral. The report reads:
A cheerful and very likeable officer whom I
would welcome on my staff. Stevens has played
a full part in all activities of the Staff College
and has contributed well. Very co-operative. He
should make a sound and reliable staff Officer.
I believe this officer would be a useful Captain
and therefore recommend him for promotion now.
The rear-admiral added: ' Concur'. Captain
Stevens was at the Naval Staff at the
Admiralty during the period from 27th
October 1960 to 7th March 1961, and this
report was made on him:
A bluff and cheerful officer who goes into his
work with enthusiasm and has very quickly found
out how the Admiralty organisation works. He is 
conscientious, outspoken and willing to seek
advice, and he is pulling his weight well. I am
impressed by his commonsense outlook, particularly
on Commonwealth matters. He is not ready
for promotion yet, but I believe he will be suitable
after a little more experience.
That was signed by a captain of the Royal
Navy and under ' Remarks of Senior Officer'
we find ' Forwarded' and the signature of
a vice-admiral, Fifth Sea Lord. Commander
Stevens was still with the Admiralty between
27th October 1960 and 18th September
1961, and for that period the
following report on him was made:
The more I see of this officer the more I am
impressed by him, and the more I like him.
He is bluff and cheerful, but by no means a
blowhaid. He gets on well with everyone and
earns their respect for his professional knowledge
and vigour. His commonsense is refreshing.
Withal he is always prepared to seek and accept
advice, and has learned rapidly how best to set
about progressing-a project in -the Admiralty
machinery. As an ' integrated' officer he has access
to matters he might not see in a purely national
capacity, but. I have absolute confidence in his
discretion and no fear that he will abuse this
position. I believe he will do well in a higher
rank.
The vice-admiral added ' Concur'. He was
still at the Admiralty between 27th October
1960 and 9th March 1962, and I have
this report:
I have nothing to add to my remarks on
this officer in his last report except to confirm
that I recommend him for promotion.
That was signed by a rear-admiral and
the vice-admiral added ' Concur'. Then
there is a report from the Naval Staff
Admiralty, for the period from 10th March
1962 to 7th December 1962:
A vigorous and forceful officer who deserves
the goodwill which exists between him and all
his contacts. He has dealt very effectively with
the multiplicity of business for which he has
been responsible. Coming directly from the Staff
College, I believe that he has faced a challenging
task with determination and efficiency. I do not
doubt that he has found it useful experience both
in general Staff. work and also in the work of a
Service Ministry:
That again was signed by a captain of
the Royal Navy and to it was added
' Concur' by a rear-admiral. Then there is
a report on Captain D. H. Stevens, Commanding
Officer, HMAS ' Voyager', for the
period Ist February 1963 to 20th July
1963: A popular and pleasant officer, who has a
ready smile and is fine company. He has worked
hard and well while with the Far East Fleet
to good-effect. Very enthusiastic and rarely disheartened. There is sound material here but at
present I cannot rate Stevens' chance of reaching
flag rank higher than good.
That was signed by a vice-admiral, and
another vice-admiral added:
I agree. Stevens has shown himself to be a
good Post Captain.
The last report I shall read in this connection
covers the period from 2nd
January 1963 to 6th January 1964:
A very keen officer of average intelligence who
is devoted to the Service. He has a volatile
nature, considerable dash and much enthusiasm.
He does not strike me as having great abilities
and has probably reached his ceiling, though he
will always give his best to the Service in any
capacity. That was signed by a rear-admiral and the
senior officer, a vice-admiral, added: ' Noted
-I concur'. That is the last of the reports
up to the time of this episode.
Mr Whitlam-Are they the originals or
copies? Mr HAROLD HOLT-They are copies.
If the honourable gentleman believes that
I would supply the House with false copies,
he might say so.
Mr Whitlam-You put in an anonymous
letter once.
Mr ACTING SPEAKER ( Mr Lucock)-I
ask the Leader of the Opposition to refrain
from interjecting.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I leave the matter
to the fairminded judgment of the members
of this House. A man has been the subject
of confidential reports by senior officers
from the rank of captain up to vice-admiral.
More than twenty individual reporters are
in the list that I have given to the House
tonight. If the Leader of the Opposition
wishes to study their names I shall make
the reports available to him, but for obvious
reasons they should not be generally canvassed.
This has been the responsible judgment
not only of officers of our own Navy
but also of officers of the British Navy
in Great Britain and outside that country.
We are now told on the uncorroborated
evidence of one man that we have been
dealing with a chronic drunkard, a man
who was not fit to command a ship at sea.
Is it reasonable for anybody seriously to
believe that the charge could be made that
any one of these men, let alone all twenty
of them, would be so lacking in a sense
of duty and so lacking in a sense of responsibility
to seamen under the command of 
such an officer and going on operational
duty with their lives at hazard, that the
officers concerned would fail to report some
blemish in the character of this man that
made him unfit to control a ship or made
him a hazard to the lives of the men under
his command? That is what we have been
asked over recent days to believe about
this man.
I ask honourable members to take their
minds back twenty-four hours to the allegations
that were being bandied about this
place. Sir, I think I should put before the
House one further piece of information that
comes from a highly responsible source. It
was prompted by the article that appeared
in a Melbourne newspaper on 13th May.
I am authorised to make this statement
public on the authority of the Minister for
the Navy ( Mr Chipp), who in turn was
authorised by the gentleman concerned to
release it. The Medical Director-General of
the Navy, Surgeon Rear-Admiral Coplans,
has stated: in view of certain critical statements
appearing in a Melbourne newspaper on 13th
May 1967 concerning the late Captain Duncan
Stevens, I feel I must place on record my
own perception of the man.
I was acquainted with Captain Stevens for about
twelve years. I use the term ' acquainted' in the
sense that I am acquainted, by virtue of my profession
and standing, with many officers and sailors,
and their families.
I knew Captain Stevens both professionally and
socially. I have stayed with Captain and Mrs
Stevens in their own home, and both were visitors
to my house. I have never, at any time, seen
Captain Stevens under the influence of alcohoL
Indeed, he was so meticulous in observing his
dietary restrictions that it became somewhat of a
joke that when offered a drink he would invariably
ask for a glass of milk.
Even before his admission to hospital for treatment
of his duodenal ulcer, he drove me many
times both in the city and in the country. I refer
to this because I do not normally like being
driven by other drivers, but I never at any time
had any doubts about Captain Stevens' ability to
drive, and he was one of the few drivers in whom
I felt confident at all times.
I do not believe that Captain Stevens, with
his history of dyspepsia and peptic ulceration,
would knowingly suffer the pain, and risk the
possible complications, of aggravation by over
indulgence in alcohol.
Somebody might say: ' That sounds all right,
but what about that triple brandy?' There
was evidence that, not having ordered anything
to drink earlier in the day, on the
night of this accident he ordered a triple brandy. A triple brandy sounds an enormous
drink, but I suppose that if the Captain
had ordered a tot of rum nobody would
have thought it an enormous intake for a
sailor. After all, the daily issue in the
British Navy of a tot of rum has been
going on for more than a century certainly
and perhaps back beyond Nelson's time for
all I know. A tot of rum consists of between
2.6 and 3 ounces and'is the equivalent of
a triple brandy. The medical evidence was
that the autopsy which was conducted in
an area of the body that would produce
the least favourable results for this man,
showed an alcohol concentration of
0.025%. Much was made earlier in the
debate of this result representing a rather
considerable degree of alcohol absorption.
It has been pointed out that 0.05% is
normally regarded as the threshold at which
insobriety commences but my understanding
is that in Great Britain a man is taken
to have reached the threshold of insobriety
at 0.08%. In New Zealand, I think, it is
taken as being reached at 0.07%. I speak
subject to correction on this point.
I do not want to canvass these matters
in any technical spirit or in all their detail.
They have been discussed by other members
who are much more competent to deal
with them. All I am trying to do is bring
this episode back into something of the
perspective that I believe it should rate. I
have mentioned these matters in a desire to
do, justice to this dead man who served his
country for so many years, on the evidence
before us, with great devotion, loyalty and
ability. Nowhere in that record does there
appear anyihing to suggest that his personal
habits had disqualified him in any way for
the conduct of a naval command. Earlier
today the honourable member for Batman
( Mr Benson) quoted some other evidence
in relation to this man's physical condition.
For reasons that we all understand he was
not disposed to mention that his ulcer had
played up again with him, but there is
the evidence about the pain in which he
found himself. There is also information
to the effect that in times of great pain he
would, as I have known other duodenal
ulcer sufferers to do, take some spirits and
water to ease the pain. However, what is
alleged is a far cry from that. Indeed, the
very symptoms that were alleged against 
him are so inconsistent with a degree of
alcoholic indulgence except indulgence such
that no man could possibly carry out his
normal naval duties, that they become consistent
with a physical condition that was
seriously affected by this peptic and
ulcerated condition about which the
Medical Director-General spoke.
I return for a moment to a point raised
by the honourable member for Batman in
relation to Lieutenant-Commander Cabban.
He asked: ' Why, if he felt that this man
was in this chronically unsatisfactory condition,
did he not make a report to a
superior officer?' I ask that again, as did
the honourable member for Batman, because
it would be entirely in accordance
with the duties expected of an officer of
the Navy, even if it were a superior officer
whom he was reporting. It would be
entirely in accordance with the duty expected
of him to report this condition to
another officer of even more superior rank
who could take appropriate action. I can
tell the House that there is an interesting
precedent for this in that one junior officer
who did feel it his duty so to notify his
superiors subsequently became Chief of
the Naval Staff of the Royal Australian
Navy. It did no detriment to his position
in the Navy and is entirely consistent with
what could reasonably have been expected
of him.
1 do not ask the House to judge these
events tonight. I believe that not only is the
dead man Stevens in a sense on trial in this
Parliament in this debate, together with
others to whom I have referred and over
whom a cloud has been cast, but also the
Parliament itseh is on trial as an institution.
We are expected by the people of this
country to behave with a sense of responsibility
and a spirit of fairness in relation to
this issue. The Government has not held
back any material factor relating to this
matter of which I am aware. After my colleague,
the honourable member for La
Trobe, had, for understandable reasons
which we all can respect, pressed this matter
so vigorously, it was discussed with him
and considered by Cabinet. We came to the conclusion that we would
not be justified in having any further public
inquiry into this matter. Now that the House
has had all the relevant information before
it and has had an opportunity to discuss
the matter, it is for the House to judge what
course we should adopt. There are various
possibilities. A select committee has been
suggested, but anybody who has followed
the debate closely during the last two days
would have grounds. for questioning whether
ihis Parliament, in this atmosphere and with
so many personally committed in their views
on this. subject, is the appropriate tribunal
to'resolve, as between competing evidence,
which should prevail. I leave that thought
with honourable members. I do not exclude
from my own mind a select committee as a
possibility. There are other possibilities. I
do. not. exclude any of them. There is the
possibility of further judicial inquiry.
There is the possibility that this matter
having been" canvassed and laid bare as it
has, with the question being asked of it
whether this evidence would in any way
have' affected the findings of the Royal
Commission, we perhaps should consider
whether any useful purpose would be served
in further pursuing the matter and whether
we would be justified in harrowing the
feelings of others indefinitely by carrying
these processes on. These are all matters
which arise for judgment and I suggest io
the House that it should not attempt to
exercise its judgment tonight.
I would like to have an opportunity to
discuss ihese matters further with my colleagues
and the members of our Parties. I
have no doubt that the Leader of the
Opposition ( Mr Whitlam) would wish to
take a similar . opportunity to discuss the
matters with members of his party. I
would expect to be in a position to report
to the: House at some stage tomorrow the
recommendation which the Government
would make to it regarding the future
course to be taken on this matter. I would
hope that' that recommendation would be
based upon a responsible assessment, invoking
that spirit of fair play and decent justice
that I am sure all of us would wish to bring
to our conclusions on this matter.
BY AUTHORITY: A. 3. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY ( Q2 3MAY; 1~ 96
E3IeRAJ
The -Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
REFERENDUM
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 18 May 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister&gt;--by leave-I move:
That this House, having studied the arguments
set out in the official No case, reaffirms its view
that it is in the interest of good parliamentary
government in Australia to remove the need now
existing under the Commonwealth Constitution to
increase the number of senators whenever the
number of members in the House of Representatives
is increased, and to impose the limit proposed
on the extent to which the House of Representatives
can be. increased.
I have taken this opportunity to propose this
motion because, although this House previously
assented unanimously to the legislation
that enables us to introduce referendum
proposals and to present them to the people
and . this was followed by the support of an
overwhelming majority of the Senate, since
then the official Yes case and the official No
case have been published. Tonight it is my
purpose to refer briefly to the elements in
the case that we put before the Parliament
when the proposal to break -the nexus between
the House of Representatives and the
Senate was ' adopted, and* at the same time
to make some examination of the principal
arguments that have been advanced in the
official No case.
Honourable members will recall that the
first of the principal purposes of this refer-
7060/ 67 endum proposal is to remove the need to
increase the number of senators whenever
the number of -members of the House of
Representatives is increased. This is what we
term familiarly as the nexus between the
House of Representatives and the Senate
under the Constitution as at present worded.
The second purpose is to impose a limit,
which is put before the people for the first
time, on the extent to which membership of
the House of Representatives can be increased.
It is too seldom realised that as the
Constitution stands, the Parliament has
unlimited powers to increase the size of the
House of Representatives whenever it so
wishes, provided at the same time it increases
the size of the Senate. I have heard this
referendum described by its critics as a
proposal to increase the size of the Parliament.
We do not need a constitutional
change to do that. We need a constitutional
change for this reason: If at any time the
size of the Parliament is increased, we must
accompany an increase in the House of
Representatives with an increase of as nearly
as practicable half that number in the Senate.
I remind the House that section 24 of the
Commonwealth Constitution provides:
The House of Representatives shall be composed
of members directly chosen by the people
of the Commonwealth, and the number of such 
members shall be, as nearly as practicable, twice
the number of senators.
In the official case for the Yes proposal
the Leader of the Australian Labor Party,
the Leader of the Australian Country Party
and I have joined as spokesmen for -our
respective parties. We have put the case
in favour of an affirmative vote. We have
put the view that the Senate consisting of.
sixty senators-ten from each of the six
States-needs no increase at this time.
Membership of the ' House of Representatives
is based on populatioh growth. We
have been going through a period of rapid
and continuing population growth, and
this situation faces us as far ahead as we
can see. The House last dealt with the size
of the Parliament in 1949. If this Parliament
runs its full course twenty years will
have elapsed by the time we , reach the' next
general election. In 1949 each member of
the House of Representatives represented
on an average 66,000 people. Today the
average is 94,000 people,: and by 1969
the figure will be well over 97,000.
There are some people-this appears
to include those who have presented the
official No case-who take the view that
there should never be any increase in the
size of the Parliament. This is. the logical
conclusion to be drawn from the argument
advanced in the No case. It does not seem
to matter that since membership was ' last
increased the population will have risen -by
1969 from eight million to twelve million.
What does a-mere 50% increase in population
matter? What does ' a mere increase
in the complexity of the business of government
matter? What does a mere
increase in the variety and number of
subjects that this Parliament ' is called upon
to deal with matter? Even in, the eyes
of those who have joined together in
presenting the official No case there must
be some point at which they recognise that
the ' increase in population ' has brought
about some need for an increase in the
size of the House of Representatives.
However,' while the: nexus remains the
change can be accomplished only if at the
same time we increase the number of
members' in the Senate to' half the extent
of the increase in the number of members
in the House of Representatives.
We have proposed that the -number ot
electorates in each State should be determined by dividing the population of the
State by not less than 85,000. This does not
mean that automatically there would be
an increase in membership for each 85,000
people, but it does set a minimum. For
the first time in the history of this country
a limit would be imposed upon the extent
to which the numerical strength of the
. Parliament could be increased. We as
members of the Parliament are willing to
accept that limitation because we want
the public to be assured that we are not
seeking any. inordinate increase in numbers.
All we want to ensure is a Parliament that
effectively represents the interests of the
people whom we represent in this place.
Of course, there is a different way of going
about it. It so happens that we as members
of the National Parliament represent on an
average more electors than does a member
of the House of Commons in the Parliament
at Westminster. Yet I have not heard
the people of Britain complain that they
are over-governed, that they have too many
parliamentarians. They value the services
they receive from their members. Theirs
is a strong democracy.
As I said, we could go about parliamentary
representation in another way, as
is done in the United States of America.
There a member of parliament represents
far more people than each of us does or
would propose. However, to carry out his
duties a member of Congress or a member
of the United States Senate needs a very
large official staff. Thus the people are
served largely by officials. I do not think the
Australian people or the people of the
United Kingdom want that sort of representation.
They have become accustomed to
being able to go to their own parliamentary
representative and have him look after their
interests-not have them looked after by a
first secretary, a second secretary or a third
secretary as part of a large staff as has been
found necessary in the case of a Federal
member in the United States so that he may
provide some representation for his constituents.
I doubt whether there is very much
economic difference between the systems
that operate, in the United States and
Australia. .1 repeat that this is the. first attempt to
write a specific check into the Constitution;
the first attempt to limit the rate of growth
of the House of Representatives. With today's
population a quota of 85,000 would 
give a' membership in the House of Representatives
of 136, an ' increase of thirteen
seats throughout . the whole of Australia.
The Senate would be left unchanged at sixty.
This would m: ean' that each seat in the
House would represent 85,000 people compared
with the figure of 66,000 when the
Parliament was last increased in 1948
coming up to the election of 1949. Unless
this nexus is. removed . any, increase in the
House of Representatives must be accompanied,
by an. increase in the size of the
Senate on a two to one basis. By this proposal
that we put forward to break the nexus
there is no question, as I shall establish,
of eroding the proper role or powers of the
Senate or of preventing its future enlargement
if the Parliament so decides. The prevailing
view is that the Senate of sixty can
discharge : effectively its role as a house of
review and as custodian of the rights of the
smaller States.
have': mentioned the United States of
America.' It" has just on eighteen times our
population. and has' a Senate of just on 100
membies cormpared with our Senate at ' present'of
sixty. Yet'the Senate in-the United
Statis enjoys a ' prestige and ' an ' authority
which'I think would be envied by any upper
chamber in any part. of the world. So the
effectiveness of the Senate does not depend
on . numbeis. Its powers are defined and
establisfhd' in the Coinmonwealth Constitution.
Other -countries with a two house
system operate successfully without the need
for a nexus between the two houses. I have
done some research on this matter and apart
from Australia there is only ' one country
which I have been able to discover-it is
Norway-with anything approaching such a
nexus. The' proposal is designed to allow
th'esmallest increase in the House of Representatives
which we believe to be consistent
with effective representation without the
necessity-at the same time to make adjustments
in the size' of the Senate.
I do not'want to spend a great deal of
time on: the positive side of our argument
because this '. was covered quite . adequately
in the second reading'debate when the proposal
was originally, before us. It is all on
the record. I have made my statements on
the matter on television and over the radio,
as have the Leider of the'Opposition ( Mr
Whitlam) and the Acting Leader of the
Australian Country Party ( Mr Anthony), who have joined in the support'of the case
which is now being presented to the people.
But it does become necessary to make some
analysis of the ' officialcase presented for
the No argument. The case has'been presenited,
as I understand it, by the two members
in the Senate of the Australian Democratic
Labor Party, ' assisted by a Liberal
Party senator, Senator Wright, and certain
others of the small gr. ou who voted against
this proposal in the Senate.
Stokes-They. are. all senators.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-Yes, the only
people who have joined in resisting the Yes
case-in the official case anyhow-are senators
and : they are a very small minority of
the total membership of the Senate. The
votiig ' in the Senate on the proposal was
forty-five in favour of . what we are now
advocating and seven against.
, I. find the No case saddening. It is quite
disheartening in a way. to find in these days
that men who represent the people in the
Senate-they are . a small minority of the
total membership of the Senate-can resort
to. these fusty,! old-fashioned appeals to prejudice,
picking up the sort of cliches that
have. been bandied around by critics outside
the Parliament and with which we have had
to' cope from time to time. I will refer
further to that matter later. To me it is a
sad thing that there is still a body. of men
to be found in the other chamber who cannot
make ' an objective, dispassionate ' and
logical appeal to the people on the strength
of the argument they can present but instead
must resort to prejudice-to actual dishonesty
in at least one instance, as I shall
demonstrate-and -to : misleading . argument
in. order to try to frighten people by the
bogies they create or the picture they conjure
up of.' the dreadful -things which; this
wicked House of Representatives, chosen by
the people, will:: do . to the people of
Australia.. Let me go into that niatter in a little more
detail. The case for No reads:
Vote NO because:
We do'not need more parliamentarians.
Australia is already over-governed.
SA Yes vote would be a vote against the
interests of the States, particularly the small
States, and country districts.
Honourable members will note the appeal
there to people in. the smaller States. The
supporters of the No case direct a sectional 
appeal to country interests. Let us see how
these arguments stand. up to the most superficial
analysis, and I would hope that my
analysis could go a good deal deeper than
that but it does not have to go very deep
in order to explode the arguments for the
No ' case. First I deal with the proposition
that we do not need more parliamentarians,
stated ' quite absolutely without any reference
to this. point of time or any other
point, of time. The same argument. could
be applied with as much logic when the
population of Australia is 20 million, not
building up to 20 million at the 11.5
million stage as we are now. If that is the
strength of -the argument it can apply at
any time. When is the time that you need
more parliamentarians? This Parliament has
not shown itself over eager to increase its
size during the period of our federation.
In fact, since 1901 when the federation
was formed there has been only one substantial
increase in the size of this Parliament.
The House of Representatives numbered
seventy-five when the Parliament was
first constituted. The number had actually
declined to seventy-four when in 1948 the
Government of the day decided that it had
become necessary, for a variety of causes,
to increase the size of the Parliament. There
was a substantial increase in the numbers
in the House of Representatives to 121.
Thswas done because the House had not
been touched for forty-seven years.
If this Parliament runs its normal
course, by the time of the next election
twenty years will have elapsed since the
Parliament. was last increased, and our
population will have increased by almost
We are not proposing a major increase.
We have set a limit on the increase
we can achieve. We say that there must
bme emnobt efre.. wI esr trtehsas n th8a5t,, 0 0b0e cpaeursseo nisf fwoer reeaacdh
the No case we get a picture of this Parliament
increasing step by step every few
years. It is no ' t in the nature of the animal
for that to happen, as we know. It -is very
rare to find all parties in ' the Parliament
supporting a proposal, as -they have on this
occasion. * It is' rare to find a government
and an* opposition saying at the same time:
This is what we should do in relation to
the Parliament'. It is even rare to find a
situation in which a redistribution of electorates,
despite the fact that some may have become disproportionately large in relation
to others, should be carried out. They
should be carried out. There has not been,
on an average, a redistribution every six
years in the life of the federation. Usually,
changes have merely been in the boundaries.
Only on one occasion, as I have mentioned,
has there been a significant change in the
number of members.
I said that I would demonstrate that
there is at least one quite dishonest statement
in this document. It is to be found on
the first page of -the No case. It is this:
In this referendum the Government wants you
to remove this safeguard-
That is, the nexusfrom
the Constitution. If you do that, you will
be destroying the only braking device against
unnecessary increases in the size of the National
Parliament. How can men of honesty say that, when
all honourable members know that part of
our proposal is the provision that we cannot
increase the number of members beyond
the point where -there are fewer than 85,000
persons in each electorate. This just baffles
me. Either those who prepared this case
have not understood the proposal or this
is an entirely dishonest presentation of the
facts. There is a braking device against unnecessary
increases and that braking device
is the size of the Australian population.
The No case goes, on to state:
Moreover, if you vote NO and retain t" i nexus
provision, you will preserve the position and
power of the Senate and will prevent the Senate
from being weakened.
This is a picture conjured up to frighten
people into believing that this upper chamber
is to be weakened and shorn of its
authority. Will anybody who reads this
document pause to ask: If this statement
is correct why is it that forty-five out of
fifty-two of these senators whose powers
are going to be weakened have joined in
supporting the Yes case? I hope that in
a democratic system majorities still count
for something, and when they are overwhelming
majorities I hope that they will
have some persuasive effect. I have no need
to labour the point, Mr Acting Speaker. If
the Senate were in serious danger of having
its power or. authority weakened by this
proposal, would the overwhelming majority
of senators have joined in supporting it? 
I come now to the next argument in the
No case. It states:
Always think . of the Senate as the States
Assembly, which was its name in the draft Constitution.
It is your House, designed to protect
the interests of your State. Thus any attack on
the Senate is an attack on the protection of the
interests of your State in the Federal Parliament.
The first comment I make on thai statement
is that all honourable members in
this. place, with the. exception of my friends
the honourable member for the Australian
Capital Territory ( Mr J. R. Fraser) and the
honourable member for the Northern Territory
( Mr Calder), are representatives from
individual States of the Commonwealth. If
this proposal were an attack upon the
position of the States would we have had
a unanimous vote in this House by people
who are elected from States, who are
representatives of States, and who are
accountable to electorates in those States?
The question has only to be put against
the facts for the answer to -be automatically
supplied. I can go further: The Senate has
always been regarded as an additional safeguard
for the States-as a custodian of
State rights. If the interests of the States
were threatened by our proposal would we
have had forty-five out of fifty-two senators,
elected as representatives of those States and
charged with the role-as they see it-of
safeguarding the interests of the . States,
joining in this proposal with us?
The next point refers to the' interests of
country districts: Here again the bogy has
been conjured up: ' Don't vote Yes because
if you do terrible things will be done to
the country electorates'.. In each of the
three parties constituting this. House we
have representatives of country electorates.
Some are in' the Country,, Party-as' the
name implies. The Labor Party. -certainly
can claim to have representatives from
rural electorates. And of course'. there are
many in the Liberal Party. Do those representatives
of rural electorates consider that
rural interests are being threatened by this
proposal? If they do, it is very odd . that they
should have joined in a unanimous vote on
this matter in this chamber. Again, this
argument ' just does not stand up to
examination. In the time available . to me I cannot go
through all the arguments set out in this
document. I do not avoid any. of the . difficult
arguments. I ' have referred to what the authors of the document have set out as
being the central propositions favouring
a No vote.. However, I would like to refer
honourable members to the passage appearing
on the second page-of the No case.
There the authors have set out what they
consider . the growth in numbers will be
in steps over a period of years. I have
already pointed out that this is not the
way that this system works-as the history
of our federation has demonstrated. It is
rare for the Parliament to increase ' its size.
1 repeat that it has been done but once
in the history of our federation. I cannot
see-and I am a fairly seasoned politician
in this place-the Parliament, or for that
matter governments, coming along very
frequently with endeavours to increase-the
size of the Parliament-not when we consider
all the discomfort involved in the
procedure of redistribution of electorates
and all the other implications of that process.
Let me just mention one of the more
important implications. Inside this chamber
there is a check-an inbuilt safeguard.
Three parties are represented. Each of those
parties, understandably and very properly,
watches . closely the movements, in the
numbers of electors and the size of electorates.
If any of the three parties, came to
the conclusion that what was being proposed
was. unfair or unreasonable, the parliamentary:
action which it could take, either
here or in what is, now almost chronically
an evenly divided Senate, could have the
effect of checking the process in the lower
house. Let me give an illustration; We are
a coalition Government. If we brought'forward
proposals for ' an increase in the. size
of Parliament ' which our colleagues in the
Country Party felt would work ' seriously
to their detriment, they would not join with
us in such a decision. Nor would we be
able to' give. effect to that proposal without
their support. On the other hand, if what we
proposed seemed unreasonable to the'meinm-
6ers of whichever party happened to be
in opposition at the time, they could, with
the numbers that they could reasonably
count upon in the Senate, make the proposal
extremely difficult of achievement,
not merely, by their voting strength but by
the campaign they could wage in the electorates
throughout the country. Quite apart
from anything that the Constitution provides,
there is, as any politician in-this place 
would' know; -an inbuilt check and a safeguard
against arbitrary, unreasonable
increases by either side: of-politics.
Someminor arguments have been introduced
into the No case and I even regret
hlaving to make. reference, ( o them becaiuse
they are in a sense petty, and almost' perile
in what they convey to; the piblic. However,
. these arguments are, put with: some
strength and . emphasis in . the, concluding
passages of the No . case. Honourable
members will find0 there a re'frence--1
deplore that it should have come from a
member of either House of the Parliament
-to increases, in parliamentar salaries and
the cost of government which allegedly will
flow.. ifthe nexus, is broken. On the last page
of, the., No case honourable members will
find it stated. that the last: increase in the
numbers of members of Parliament resulted
in. fewer. sitting days and that members' pay
increased from $ 3,000 to $ 7,000 a year.
Then there appear,' in capitals, the words:
' What next?' Does anybody seriously argue
th'at' the duties : and-responsibilities of-a
memrber of this'House have decreased since
1949, ' that being' the ' last time ' when there
was avote-on: the increase in the size of
the Parliament? : Certainly no member
present would accept that as a statement of
fact. We all know the : increase -in the
number and complexity of'matters with
which we,' as members of the. Parliament,
have: been called upon to deal.
Let us take the salary aspect. Why do
those . who . support the No case not. say
honestly in this ' document that the period
to which' they ' are referring is between
1947, when the pay of a member of Parliament
was fixed'at $ 3,000, and 1967, when
it siands at $ 7,000? ' Why do they not go
onh'to say that' over that period, there have
been' quite' substantial increases in the basic
wage? [ Extension ' of time granted.] I thank
the House for its indulgence. These facts are
certainly relevant ' to the argument and are
of general' interest to honourable members.
The increase in the salary of a'member of
Parliament over the period' from 1947 to
1967 has been 133%.' Over the same period
the -basic wage hais been increased by
201%, that is, from $ 10.90 to $ 32.80. But
what is more' significant-we are " dealing
now with : the : community as a wholeis
the mihovement in the average weekly
wage. Betwe'n 1947 and 1967 the increase in average weekly wages was of the order
of 285%. This Parliament has not been
greedy. I shall not labour the point. Whatever
cheap advantage those who joined in
the No " case seek to ' gain from this point,
I. say that it'is not substantiated by the
facts. . Mr Whitlam-The cost of this House is
30c per head . of population.
SMr HAROLD HOLT-I ' will come to
that. ' Those-who have put-forward the No
case' begin their great peroration by saying:
' Vote no-we do not need more parliamentarians'.
We say that at the present time
we ' do not need more senators. An overwhelming
majority of senators-forty-five
to seven-join with us -in saying that. They
continue: ' Vote no-protect the small
States and country districts'. I-have already
referred to that argument, and I hope that
I have demolished it. They also say: ' Vote
no-prevent unnecessary increases in the
size : of the House of Representatives'. In
principle at leastfwe can agree with them
here. We do hot want unnecessary increases
in the'; size of the House of Representatives.
and we have taken the responsibility of proposing;
for the first time, a limit,. not previously
imposed"' by the Constitution, upon
the size ' to which the House of Representatives
may grow. Their final adjuration is:
' Vote'no-prevent unnecessary increases in
the cost of. government.' This terrible
burden of. the cost of government! Let me
give the. House the relevant figure.
' The total cost of the House of Representatives.
and. the. Senate works out at
approximately .40c per head of population
or, in the old currency with . which some of
us are more familiar, .4s. a year. That is a
shade . more . than the . price of a packet of
cigarettes., That . figure works out at less
than a quarter of Ic for each member of
Parliament:, a year. I know that there are
some cynics: in . the ' community who say
that honourable members are not worth
much. more than that. They can have that
opinion' of us, but they can scarcely argue
that. it is aheavy financial burden upon
them. If. we . were to increase the size of
the Parliament by thirteen . or fourteen
members two years from now-
Mr. Irwin-The cost would go up by one
fag. Mr HAROLD HOLT-I hope that honourable
members-would not go up in smoke. 
The additional cost would only be of the
order of 3c or 4c per head of population.
Perhaps we have dealt somewhat flippantly
with some of these arguments. Frankly, if
they are examined carefully it is difficult to
understand how a serious-minded body of
men could argue them seriously. I say that
it is not their purpose to do so. Their
purpose is to create an atmosphere of
prejudice and fear and to play up bogies
which will frighten people into casting a
No vote, because history has shown that the
Australian electorate tends to say no when
it is in the slightest doubt as to what should
be done about a proposed change in the
Constitution. I come to my final point. I have faith in
the good sense and the' maturity of the
Australian electorate. I am sure that the
Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Country Party and the Acting Leader of
the Country Party, who is with us tonight,
think the same. I believe that we have an
electorate which has increasingly demonstrated
itself to have become much more
mature on political issues. I believe the
people will dismiss as a lot of fustian the
sort of argument, based on prejudice and
fear, with which their intelligences have
been insulted by those who have put forward
the No case. We on the Yes side have not
tried to put forward a glamour case. We
put calmly, temperately, moderately and
logically the case that we see for a commonsense
and practical parliamentary reform.
Because I believe that the Australian electorate
is sufficiently mature to weigh these
considerations, I am confident of the outcome
when the referendum vote is taken
on this nexus proposal.
BY AUTHORrITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT.
HON. HAROLD HOLT IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
18TH MAY, 1967 b
a-2 2MAY 1967
" VOYAGER" ENQUIRY RAf'
I told the House last night at the conclusion of what I had to
say on the " Voyager" matter that the Government would be taking the
opportunity this morning to consult with members of the Government parties
on the course that it could recommend to the Parliament, and I am now in a
position to indicate the course that we believe should be followed.
My colleagues and I have considered the various possibilities
that are open to us. Vie have considered, among other questions, whether an
inquiry should be conduct-ed by a select committee of this Parliament. I think
most honourable gentlemen will have concluded that, having regard to the
involvement of so many members in the debate and the quality and content of
the debate., this would not be the most suitable tribunal to consider a matter
of this sori. There is room for a vi ew that the matter, having been
thoroughly debated here and all aspects that honourable members could see
as being relevant having been canvassed, little useful purpose would be
served by a committee of the Parliament conducting a further inquiry. The
Government has considered that view, but it believes that, though the detail of
these discussions has been well known to us and perhaps to those who have
carefully read all that has appeared in the Press, there will be many members
of the public who will be left with a feeling that more should be done to
. s atisfy th ei r minds regarding the matters in dispute.
So the Government has concluded that there should be a further
inquiry and that it should be a judicial inquiry conducted probably by three
judges. I have not yet the precise terms of reference which later we will be
putting to the House, and I ask that I be not held strictly to what I now say as to
the substance of matters which the Government thinks should be covered by such
an inquiry. Clearly, it should be directed to the allegations made against
Captain Stevens and the questions arising from them that is, whether he was
incompetent to command the " Voyager", whether his command of that ship
left him open to criticism, whether the allegations have sufficient substance
for these matters to have been known or whether they should have been known
to superior naval officers who would then have been in a position to deal
appropriately with him, and whether they should have dealt with him according
to the evidence in their possession. The question arises also as to whether
any evidence was improperly withheld from the Royal Commission, and if so,
whether that would have substantially affected his findings.
I have not attempted to put what I have said in strict legal
parlance. It is the substance of what we believe should be considered by
such an inquiry. Our own view is that there is no need for a second " Voyager"
inquiry in the full sense of the one that was conducted before. I believe that
the public generally is satisfied that there was a competently conducted
inquiry which has covered most of the matters in issue at that time. But
this is a special area which has been the subject of debate in this Parliament,
and the Government thinks that the issues and the allegations can be
satisfactorily resolved only by an inquiry conducted on the lines that I have
proposed. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, a"
THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT IN THE 23
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 9
19TH MAY, 1967 ~ R A R'
" VOYAGER" INQUIRY
I am sure the House would have wished the Government
to move as speedily as it could in resolving terms of reference which
could be submitted to the inquiry I announced yesterday. It is our desire,
as I am sure it is the desire of every member of the House, that these
matters hould be investigated expeditiously and findings given upon them.
Consequently I bring to the House what we propose by way of terms of
reference. My colleague the Attorney-General ( Mr. Bowen) will set as
speedily as he can about the business of finding what judges would be
available for this purpose. We would hope to make an announcement about
that as soon as this can be arranged.
I shall comment on one aspect not covered by the terms of
reference after I have given their detail, since it relates to a matter
raised in the debate by the honourable member for Hindmarsh ( Mr.
Clyde Cameron I as spokesman for the Opposition and was mentioned, if
a little obliquely, by the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Whitlam) when he
was questioning me yesterday as to what the terms of reference would
cover, We felt that in order that this matter could be dealt with with
reasonable promptitude and so that there should not be uncertainty
increasing the distress of affected persons, we should concentrate upon
those matters which we believed were exercising the attention a nd concern
of the Parliament and of the public. We recommend that the terms of
reference of the inquiry be
To inquire into and report upon:-
Whether any of the allegations made by Lieutenant -Ccmmander
P. T. Cabban in the document attached
That Is the document to which the Leader of the Opposition made reference
yesterday; I think it ran into about nineteen pages
regarding the drinking habits and seamanship of Captain
D. H. Stevens were true and being true established that
Captain Stevens was unfit to retain command of HMAS
" Voyager"
If it is found in answer to question that Captain Stevens was
unfit to retain command of HMAS " Voyager"
Did the Naval Board know or ought they to have known
of such unfitness to retain command and were they at
fault In failing to relieve him of command?
( ii) Should the findings made in the report of the Royal
Commission relating to the loss of HMAS " Voyager"
be varied and, if so, in what respect?
Whether the allegations in the document disclosed evidence which
was available to counsel assisting the Commission and was
improperly withheld from the Royal Commission. / 2 
-2
I think honourable members will agree that this concentrates
the inquiry on the salient matters which were of concern to them. The
other matter to which we did give consideration, but for reasons which 1,
shall outline we did not include in the terms of reference, was the aspect
raised by the honourable member for Hindmarsh as to the circumstances
in which the Government came to settle a number of claims of dependants
of those who went down with the ship. I think a little reflection by the House
will confirm the soundness of the view we have taken that to include an
item of this sort would prolong the Inquiry indefinitely and would confuse the
issues on which we have concentrated in the terms of reference that I have
read out. The Government has no desire, in this particular aspect, otber
than to see that the inquiry is able to concentrate on the matters which
primarily engaged the attention of the House.
Concerning the aspect of the settlein of claims, the Attorney-
General ( Mr. Bowen) would be entirely willing to confer with the Leader of
the Cpposition and his colleagues or, for that matter, other interested
members, explaining why this procedure was followed. I am sure that most
honourable members will be able, from their own practical good sense, to
come to the conclusion that this was the desirable and sensible course to
pursue. Firstly, there was a Royal Commission which was taking
evidence and which necessarily would extend over a considerable period of
time. Litigation is inevitably a protracted process and even dealing with
the claims by way of settlement has, in some instances, been drawn out since
the disaster until either late last year or even early this year. Thirty-nine
claims have been settled and I think one claim remains outstanding because the
claimant has not yet furnished certain particulars which were required. If
each of these claims had to be litigated upon or even if some of them had
to be litigated upon, in a period in which there was a Royal Commission with
its findings to be resolved, then there not only would have been delays which
would have been Inconvenient to dependants in need of financial assistance,
but the whole process for them would, I suggest, have been of a more
harrowing, painful and, indeed, embarrassing kind. So this was the
background to the course of action which the Government pursued.
If further detail Is required on this aspect then, I repeat,
the Attorney-General will be happy to supply it. Of course, it Is always
open for the Opposition, if for any reason it felt dissatisfied with the course
pursued, to take appropriate parliamentary action in relation to it. I do not
believe the Opposition will do this. I think that on reflection members
opposite will agree that It was not appropriate for this matter to come into
this particular set of terms of reference. The inquiry will necessarily
take the form of a Royal Commission, because it is under the legislation
concerning Royal Commissions that we can set up the inquiry. To do it
any other way would call for legislation.
Mr. Hayden It will not be another whitewash, will it?
PRIME MINISTER That remark is quite unworthy of the honourable
gentleman and it would not be echoed by his colleagues. I hope I do not
have to stress again that the purpose of my predecessor, as it has been of
myself and my colleagues, has been to see that the truth emerges and that
justice Is done. 


24th May, 1967.
REFERENDUM: THE "YES" CASE
Talk by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
(This is the final radio and television talk by the Prime Minister in support of the "Yes" cases for both referendums. It will be programmed by the A. B. C. in all states this evening.)
You are being asked, on May 27th, to approve two measures passed by the National Parliament to alter the Constitution. That is why the Leaders of the three main parties represented in Federal Parliament are asking you to say "Yes” to both questions.
First, we ask you to say "Yes" to the proposed law “to alter the Constitution so that the number of Members of the House of Representatives may be increased without necessarily increasing the number of Senators".
Secondly we ask you to say "Yes" to the proposed law to alter the Constitution insofar as it affects our aboriginal population.
As to this second question, there was no dispute nor argument in the Federal Parliament. It was adopted unanimously in both the House of Representatives and the Senate. The alteration is designed to remove from the Constitution certain words which appear to discriminate against Aborigines and to provide that Aborigines are to be counted in reckoning the population. Just as the Parliament was unanimous, we expect that you will wish to vote "Yes" to this proposal.
As to the first question, a case for "Yes" and a case for "No" has been sent to all electors. I hope that after reading these cases the issues raised are clear in your minds and you appreciate the strength of the case for a "Yes" vote.
Some may still be puzzled about what is called the nexus between the House of Representatives and the Senate. It is in fact, a provision in our Constitution which says that the House of Representatives cannot be enlarged without at the same time increasing the number of Senators on a basis of one more Senator for each two added to the House of Representatives.
If you say "Yes" to the law passed by both Houses of the Federal Parliament, it will be possible to look at membership of the House of Representatives and membership of the Senate as two separate matters. It will be possible, when thought necessary, to enlarge the popular House; it will be possible, when thought necessary, to enlarge the Senate. But, we won’t be compelled as we now are, to increase the membership of both the Senate and the popular House at the same time.
That's what the nexus referendum amounts to in simple terms.
But, as well as breaking the nexus, the new law we have passed in Parliament would write into the Constitution for the first time a provision clearly restricting the rate at which the House of Representatives can grow. It will be tied to population growth and tied to a figure of population represented by each Federal Member nearly twenty thousand greater than he represented on average when the present size of the Parliament was fixed in 1949.
You should understand also that every member of the House of Representatives voted for the proposed change, and in the Senate the voting for the alteration was forty-five to seven.
The authors of the "No" case tell you that Parliament's proposal would weaken the position and authority of the Senate. This argument will not stand up. The Senate of sixty members is made up of ten from each of the six States. The powers and role of the Senate are defined in the Constitution, and nothing in our proposal would change these powers. We believe that at the moment sixty Senators can adequately discharge their responsibilities as members of a House of Review and as a States' House. I might point out that, although the Senators are elected from the individual States and members of the House of Representatives from individual electorates, all members of the National Parliament (whether Senators or MP's) come from the States. They are all in a very real sense State men and women in a Federal Parliament.
You would imagine from the "No" case that while Senators retain their State identity all the members of the popular House suddenly, upon election, cease to have any identity at all with the States they come from. This is nonsense!
The authors of the "No" case don't argue the practical and common sense proposition that the link between the Senate and the popular House is clumsy and that it makes for more, not fewer, parliamentarians. They say, in effect, "If we can't have more senators, we'll rubbish the House of Representatives and say they are an incompetent lot anyway". This is childish.
The House of Representatives, the House in which governments are made is constructed upon electorates and electorates are constructed on population. They change as the population changes. They should grow in a reasonable way as the population grows. From time to time, since Federation, when the population was small, the popular House has ben enlarged. By the time the next election comes round, it will have been twenty years since the size of the House of Representatives was last reviewed, and the population will have grown by fifty per cent - from eight to twelve millions over that period. The time has come for another look at the numbers required in the House to make it truly representative of a growing population - a population conscious of the changes and developments occurring in our continent. If there is to be any increase, a "Yes" vote from you, because of the safeguard it incorporates, will ensure that any increase must be modest.
The oddest feature of the " No" case is that while its authors protest that we have enough parliamentarians, a "No" vote would perpetrate an out-dated system whereby if we wanted twelve more parliamentarians we would be compelled to have eighteen more, and if, just by way of illustration, we wanted twenty-four more we would be compelled to have thirty-six. There is an Alice in Wonderland kind of logic about this idea; yet, when you strip away all the fancy talk, the authors of the case are not really arguing for fewer parliamentarians. They are the champions of a stay-put situation guaranteeing more parliamentarians every time only a few are needed.
We, on the other hand, are asking you to vote "Yes" as a mature democracy looking sensibly at a practical parliamentary reform. It is neither sensible nor practical to keep the Senate and the House tied together like Siamese twins.
CANBERRA. 24 MAY 1967.
 



AUSTRALIAN WiOMEN'S LIBERAL CLUB, MELBOURNE V " ARY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR., HARCLD HOLT 24TH MAY, 1967
Lady Coles, Sir Henry, Parliamentary colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen:
First, may I thank you on behalf of Mrs. Holt and myself very warmly
for that gracious welcome you gave to us and for all the friendly support that
this received from those around the room. Secondly, may I join with you in
the congratulations you have expressed to our good friend Henry. It was a great
joy to me, I can assure you, not only to see him back again, but for the proof
it brought that Liberal support was as strong in this State as it has ever been.
And for him to achieve that after twelve years of office and some difficult
decisions, as I said to him at the time, or said publicly at the time, was a
personal triumph and a notable political achievement. And this State can count
itself fortunate that we have his sane, balanced, progressive leadership for the
years that lie ahead I would think as mar y years as he cares to choose on
the form that is so far disclosed.
And may I also congratulate Mrs. Goble on having been elected and I
say this in an Australian GVomen's Liberal Club. Vie are becoming more
enlightened I think as we go on, we Liberals. WVe managed to elect a very able
lady to the House of Representatives, the first time we've had one there for
many years. In the Senate where we can organise these things rather better,
of course, we are well represented by several lady Senators and I am glad to
see Senator Breen here with us today and our joint friend Ivy ' iedgwood who
chairs the Government Members' education Committee is also a very significant
and valuable figure in the work of our Party. So that Henry and I have good
cause to say thank you for what you are doing in giving us your support and
from time to time sending from your membership people who can be good and
worthy representatives in the Parliament.
It sometimes makes me feel a little uncomfortable to realise that more
than half my life has been spent in the national Parliament and in my early days,
the only effective organisation we had in this State was the AWomen's organisation
the Australian Viomen's National League as it was in those days. And I recall
with great appreciation and gratitude the strength of support which they gave to
us at that time.
Sir Henry may be interested to know that at one stage when my electorate
had become rather enlarged and I represented 80, 000 voters, 48, 000 of them
were women voters, 32, 000 men voters. That gave a substantial majority of
three lady voters to two men voters. I don't draw any significance from that
because things have balanced out since that time and we've managed to maintain
much the same sort of majority. But it gave me good reason to dwell on the
value of the women voters in a particular electorate and on the support which
came to us at the time from the women's organisation. And you've gone on
giving us that loyal support down through the years.
Now, after seventeen years of Liberal leadership I think we can all take
some pride and a modest satisfaction in the state of our own Australia and those
of us who have supported Liberal policies and Liberal leadership through ' hat
period, either in the Federal or the State sphere, can justly claim that this has
made a notable and significant contribution to the Australia of today. And
whatever test you care to apply, I think we can fairly claim that this leadership,
these liberal policies, have been good for Australia. 2/ 
In the material tests we've more than doubled the gross national product
of the country, we've developed the highest percentage of home ownership to
be found in the more conspicuous evidence of an affluent society. We are a
fortunaite people. And I would only hope and wish that sometimes those who are
so critical of what they find in Australia would pause and count the blessings
they enjoy in this country. It is I think unfortunately a weakness in our national
life at the present time that we are always looking for trouble and the things
that can be criticised rather than taking stock of how well we stand as a country
and as a people and in comparison wi-th others around the world.
However, having got that comment off my chest, let me turn to a couple
of matters which are of topical significance politically for us. One of course
is the political event immediately ahead, the referendum. I hope you won't
mind me saying a few words about this because we haven't had the kind of
opportunities we would normally enjoy in an election campaign of getting our
message across as widely as we would wish. No political party has had the
financial resources to conduct a large campaign on this matter and yet it does
have an importance for good government in Australia and for Australia's standing
in the eyes of the rest of the world.
And when I say that I refer to two proposals I will take them in their
inverse order, having stated them as I have, because I do believe that what we
decide about the aborigine proposal will affect Australia's standing in the eyes
of the rest of the world. I have every confidence that there will be an overwhelming
YES vote. It is unthinkable that it could be otherwise. The purpose of the
proposal is to remove from the Constitution references which in the one case
produce an outmoded and outdated situation that is the item which talks
about aborigines not being counted in relation to a census. Well, this was
inserted in the Constitution at a time when aborigine people couldn't effectively
be counted they were living either a tribal life or a nomadic life, and there
weren't the facilities for checking that there are today. And it has no continuing
place in a modern Australian Constitution.
The other one which we suggest to be excluded is the only other reference
which appears in the Constitution to aborigines, and although properly understood,
it doesn't discriminate unfavourably against aborigine people it is regarc~ d
widely both inside this country and outside this country as having that effect.
And because we can still deal satisfactorily by the combined efforts of the
Commonwealth and State Governments with the problems of people of aboriginal
race without these specific references in the Constitution, and because there
is lingering around the world a belief that somehow through this provision we
discriminate against people of aboriginal race, we thought it should be out of
the written text of the Constitution.
But the other proposal is the one which causes more complexity for people.
In the first place, it has associated with it the word " nexus". Some people have
doubts as to just what " nexus" means, what its political or Constitutional
significance may be. But it is really quite a simple business. In the early
stages % lien the Constitution was being drafted, there was a feeling that more
States would be created. So that there should not be an enlargement of the
Senate relative to the House of Representatives which would diminish the stature
of the House of Representatives, the planners of those days thought there ought
to be a provision ensuring that the number of members of the House of
Representatives was always at least twice that of the members of .~ ae
' Well, as time has gone on, although there has been a lot of talk abou States,
it hasn't come as yet to anything and there is no increase in the number of
States in sight. But there lingers on in the Constitution this provision which
throws on the House of Representatives the neceEsity, if at any time it wants to
increase its numbers, of increasing the Senate to the extent of half of any
increase in the size of the House of Representatives. o 3/ 
Now,, I don't think there is much doubt around the community that a Senate
of 60, and it was enlarged to 60 from 36 back in 1948, is large enough for
Australia's needs at this time. -1he are not proposing that the Senate can never
be increased. Vie are saying that we don't want to have to increase it every
time growth in population and other f'actors would appear to make desirable some
increase in the size of the House of Representatives. And so we want to gret rid
of this formal obligation that we must increase the Senate any time we increase
the House of Representatives. Very understandably, there are people who might
think, "' Well, in those circumstances, won't there be a danger that the Senate
will be reduced to too small a size, seeing that the Constitution at the moment
only provides for a minimum of 36 Senators, whereas you have 60 in practice,
and won't it leave it open to the House of Representatives to just increase its
numbers at will to any size it chooses?" In order to meet that kind of concern,
we have inserted two new safeguardsi or propose to insert them if the people
will only give the affirmative vote we need. One safeguard is that the
minimum number of Senators prescribed by the Constitution will henceforth
be 60 as is the present number in the Senate, not 36 as the present Constitutional
provision requires. And the sece-nd thing, is that we say you can't increase the
size of the House of Representatives beyond a point taiat would leave a mk. I'mum
of 85, 000 persons on average to e;-ch electorate. Now that is a very effective
brake on the size of the House of Representatives.
The authors of the NO case have made a quite misleading, and I would say,
dishonest reference in the case that if the " nexus" is removed the one braking
device in the Constitution groes with-it. iWell, I've already pointed out that
there is this other very effective braking device, that you can't just go on
increasing the size of the House of Representa-tives inordinately. It must relate
to a minimum of 85, 000 persons. Now, how does that compare with other
countries? In 1948, when the size of the House was increased, the increased House
produced an average of 66, 000 persons. At the present time, there is an
average of 94, 000 and if the Parliament runs its full course, it will get up to
97, 003, and of course as other years go on, unless some change is made, the
number to be represented by any one member will go on increasing.
Well, you may ask why do we need more members, and in any event, why
should we do this now? As to whether we need more, that's a practical question
which I think could be sensibly argued. You need effective representation.
When you get the member trying to represent too many people,. the individual
elector doesn't get the same service that he or she is entitled to expect. And
already the Australian National Parliamentarian is representing more people
than a member of the House of Commons.
Now, in the United States Parliament, they represent many more people
but, in order to meet that situatiop, they had to build up big staffs around the
member and instead of being able to get to your member to discuss your problems
with him, you are liable to be with a second, or first, second, third or fourth
secretary dealing with your particular situation. Now that's not in the British
tradit-on and practice and we don't think Australians, accustomed to getting a
persor. al response from their own member, would welcome the intrusion of some
official betwveen uhenm ad the man or woman they have elected. And so we have
picked on what seemrs tc, to be a reasonable minircum. You don't have to
have a member C75, 000. It can go higher thalt. But you can't
make more mrembers than a mpinimum of 85, 000 would stipulate. So there is
this safeguard in the Constitution. 9 4/ 
And there can be no argument e&amp; y one of us who has been in the
Parliament for many years would be Able to affirm quite definitely that the
complexity, the number, the scope of Commonwealth activities, these things,
have grown enormously. As Henry and his colleagues here will know, in many
fields which were originally exclusive to the States, not from choice on the part
of the States but simply because of the demands of the electorate and financial
and other limitations the Commonwealth has been brought into such fields as
education, housing, into health and a variety of other matters. And then, of
course, immigation. That programme has brought with it a whole range of new
problems, and at the same time added many people who are not on the rolls
as voters but whose needs have to be taken care of. With Australia's involvement
in military operations and other commitments around the world, again you have
repatriation problems, personnel problems of men and women in the Services,
-which all have to be dealt with.
But this, I repeat, is a matter of judgment. Whether we do it now, whether
we do it five years, whether we do it ten years, fifteen years hence, is something
for the Parliament to decide. The fact of the matter is that until you remove the
nexus ( tape damaged) at the same time as you increase the size of the
House of Representatives. And don't imagine that this is something that is going
to happen very often. It's only happened once up till now in the history of our
whole Federation. It took 47 years, from 1901, before the sizeof the Parliament
was increased. If we go on to the next election, the House running its normal
course, it woWd be 20 years since there was any increase, and the most that
is proposed would be an increase of the order of 12, 13 or 14 members in the
House without any addition to the Senate.
WNell, you may say, why should we be bothering about this now? First,
I would say, and on the evidence that we do this so rarely, it is very difficult
to get a time when the three principal parties are all agreed that a change of
this sort should be made and that this is the opportune time to do it. If this
opportunity slips by I don't know when it* will occur again.
The second thing is that we must have a redistribution, of the electorates,
not to gain any political advantage for one party or another, but simply because
over the years, and with the enormous growth around Australian cities in
particular, they have become quite unbalanced. Mr. Calwell and I both
represent, I think, electorates with less than 40, 000 voters, but Billy Snedden
out in Bruce represents now well over 100, .000 by the time we get to the next
election it will be nearer 120, COO. And this is not an isolated instance. Wherever
the new growth has occurred around the capital cities, you find these abnormally
enlarged electorates. In the heart of the cities, as people become more
prosperous, they've tended to move out, and so the inner electorates have
become smaller. Common decency and justice demand of us that we have a
redistribution of electorates to help to balance out the representation. If we
are going to do that, and if we have at any time over the next several years
in contemplation some modest addition to the number of members of the
Parliament, then surely it is appropriate we decide on that first and then have
a redistribution on the basis of the numbers with which we agree should be
brought into our account. And this is why, a very rare event for the Australian
Parliament, you find the three leaders of the three principal Parties, the Liberal
Party, the Labor Party and the Country Party, all coming to you urging at the
one time that you give a Y21S vote on both of these proposals.
Now the opponents are to be found in the ranks of the Democratic Labor
Party, the two Senators in Canberra, and in a few Liberal and Country Party
Senators who haven't gone along with the majority. In the House of Representatives
and this I think is an impressive fact the voting in favour was unanimous, 9 0 
from all parties from all around Australia. In the Senate, although there is
this handful of Senators who are taking the opposite line, the voting was 45 in
favour to 7 against. And I think most people who have any doubts on this matter
might have sufficient faith in the judgment of their representative and the
democratic system to feel that when you get such an overwhelming support in
favour of proposals as is evidenced in those voting figures, you can go along
-Safely with what is recommended to you.
I don't want to spend a great deal of time on the NO case, but there are
just two or thlree aspects which I would like you to carry in your mind in case
you encounter some waverers yourself. The NO case, the official NO case as
printed, is I believe, a deplorable piece of argumentative presentation. I would
have hoped that having a case prepared by members from Parliament, in this
case from the Senate, we would have had a calm, logical analysis of the case,
the arguments for, the arguments against, and we have tried to do that in the
YZES case perhaps it has made it a rather more tedious and duller document
for people to read but at least anybody who takes the trouble to go through it
will find that this is the way in which the case has been presented. But the NO
case sets out to conjure up all the fears, all the bogies, the whole string of the
cliches you'd expect to find in some of the less responsible areas of the press
about politicians too many politicians and howmuch they cost us, what damage
we'Ire going to do to the Senate, and the damage-we're going to do to country
interests. Well, let me take a few of those arguments in reverse order. The country
interests -there are representatives from country electorates in the House of
Representatives in each of the three Parties. The Country Party itself, of course.
I n the Liberal Party we have as many representatives from country electorates,
and the Labor Party has members from country electorates. And yet every one
of those representatives from a country electorate ( tape damaged) a unanimous
vote. The Senate is traditionally regarded as the custodian of the interests of the
States, and yet, here again I repeat, 45 out of 52 voted in support of this. So
you don't get much comfort out of that argument if you are a NO voter. Well,
then, without going through all the rest of them, let me just say a word about the
cost of all this. A great bogey is conjured up: " We've got enough Parliamentarians,
we don't want more. It's going to cost us more in taxes. Well, I gave a figure
in the House of Representatives the other night that the cost of the House of
Representatives and of the Senate taken together worked out at less than 40 cents
a year per head of the population as I put it just a little more than the price of
a packet of cigarettes. And the cost of an individual senator or member of the
House of Representatives and this includes his travelling expenses and matters
of that sort worked out at about J of one cent.
Now if we were going to increase members by about 12 or 14, the cost of
those extra members of the House of Representatives would be somewhere between
3 and 4 cents per head of population. I don't think that's going to represent too
much of a financial burden on anybody. A par in the " Melbourne Herald" on
Saturday night questioned my figure of 40 cents and said the figure was nearer
79 cents. Well, my information had been given to me by officials in my own
office having studied the Year Book which sets out the cost of Parliamentary
government. I went over it again myself today and I found the only way you could
build up the cost of the House and the Senate was by including furniture and
services and matters of that sort. So I threw those in too. The argument was
about additional members of Parliament, so you don't bring in the cost of the
extra salaries of Ministers and extra Ministerial travel because the argument is
not whether we have more Ministers we are not likely to have any more
Ministers even if the number of the House increases slightly. And even throwing
that in, it got up to a figure of the two Houses combined of under 50 cents or if you
like a year. So don't be frightened by that particular bogey. 6/ 
6.
Now, what I would like to say before I conclude and it does have a
reference to the Senate is a word or two about the course of conduct puvzsued
by the Senate in this last Session of Parliament. As you know we came back from
the last elections with a record majority, an all-time record majority in the House
of Representatives. If ever a Government was entitled to claim that the people
had given it authority, a mandate to govern, we could fairly claim that. And we
have set quite briskly about the business of putting into effect the policy undertakings
we gave at the election time. Several of them have already been given
effect and others are well advanced, but we are finding increasingly that the
composition of the Senate at present, in which you have the produce unfortunately
of two deaths of staunch Liberal Senators, a situation now where the Australian
Labor Party with the help either of an independent Senator, Senator Turnbull,
or one of our own Liberal Senators who decides to desert us on a particular
occasion in order to record a vote against us, or any one of that combination of
the ALP plus the DLP can defeat the Government in the Senate.
Now, the Senate was never designed for that course of conduct. It was
designed es a House of Review so that it could study in a more leisurely way
legislation coming up from the House of Representatives and send back suggestions
for the consideration of the House of Representatives. It was designed, in
addition, to see that the rights of the States were not trampled upon. But it was
never intended to act as a block upon the legislative process and the capacity to
govern of a democratically elected government. And I would never have assumed
that a Labor Party which is pledged to abolish the Senate, would turn to the
Senate, to use the Senate to defeat a democratic ally elected Government not
just on some monor matter or some clause in a Bill but to defeat the financial
programme of a government. Now I can say to his credit that this would never
have been acceptable to the former Labor Leader, Arthur Calwell. Nor do I
know any Labor leader in my time in Parliament who would have used the Senate
or his numbers in the Senate in this way. ii. hen I have heard Mr. W. hitlam speak
on occasion of the respective positions of the Senate and the House of
Representatives, it would have been difficult to imagine that he would have lent
himself as he has in recent times to this veto on the bill we put through in
relation to postal charges.
Now, we all know that increases in postal rates are urpopular. Of course
they are. No government likes to put up charges for the services it gives. But
if the wage bill is continuing to rise, and the Post Office is a very large user of
labour and cannot escape the extra costs which regular increases coming out of
the Arbitration Commission bring to its employees, then there has to be some
adjustment. In point of fact, over the period since 1959, when these charges were
last raised, consumer services have gone up on an average 22/ 0. In the Post
Office the increase proposed was in the order of 1570 to meet the growing costs
and to offset losses which were likely to accumulate. But the merits of the proposal
is another matter to argue and we as an elected government have to accept
responsibility for these decisions we take. What I'm putting to you now as a matter
of high principle is whether a government, democratically elected as oulshas
been, should be subjected to the resistance and the effective veto of a chance
majority from a hostile political force in the Senate. I believe that, if the Senate
pursues this course already, of course, it will have thrown out of balance our
Budgeting for the next financial year we will have to review the whole financial
position as a consequence of the denial to us of the extra revenue we believed to
have been needed. But it is set now on a collision course with the government and
with the House of Representatives, and is building up a constitutional issue of
major dimension between the two Houses. I would hope that inside our own Party
there is a clear appreciation that this is more than a piece of Party manoeuvring,
more than an attempt to score a political point or two. The Senate would appear
under the new Labor leadership to have set itself quite resolutely upon a course
which must inevitably bring it into collision with the House of Representatives and
with a democratically elected majority of record proportions. 7/ 
,4 7.
Now, how we deal with this in the future remains to be seen, but I hope
we shall have your sympathetic understanding in any action that we have to
take in relation to it.
Now, that took me rather longer, Lady Coles, than I had intended to
occupy you. Thank you for your very attentive hearing; thank you again
all of you for the support you continue to brin. to our Liberal Party, 



FOR PRE S: P. 11. 17o. 53/ 97
Q~ JLEUID FLOkODS" co ON'.&gt; i mjT
AS S I OT A' C E
St-itement by the Prime T-linister, H-irold Holt
In i. sth-tement on 29th 1967, my colle. iiue
the Rio-ht T) IHP onourr ble John McElaen, is Acting rime 141ister, s .1id
thait tte Premier of Queensh-nd h-d requested ' assist'rnce in respect
of flood dcim'g e in north Queensbind ?-nd thtt the Premier been
informed th-it the Commonl. elth . vould. pirticipite with the Stite on
the customary dollair for dolh-r baLsis f or the relief of personal
hairdship. 11r. M,. cE1wTen added th it when the Queenslmid iovernment
haid forwairded -in aissessment of da-m ite done -to other issets, the
Commionwe-ilth w,. ould A* ve prompt consideation to the cuestion of
aissistance to the Slate to help in flinancing the r~ sior-. tion of
tho.; e aissets. Since then the Premier of Queensland has provided
anm assessment of the fin'rncial'-issist-ance needed for the relief of
person-il hardship and distress, '-nd for the restora tion of -ov-rnment
md murici palC property d-tamag ed by the floods. These are the -ire , s
in 1.-. hich the Comm., onwe lth hi-i. s b.-: en pripared to tssist with relief
in disisters of this order.
The Quuensh-nd authorities aissessed the imount
required for the relief of p-rsond-. he ' rdship . A 1 ,250 000 rind
the Common:, z ilth ha-s idvancead 625,000 is its estim-AeA sh-ire
of this rtlief.
prop.. erty da) rn,.-ed ' b. Jy ithth er et o-rodd st, o t" hoev ePnrmemenite r aneisd tiLmoctatle1d Atuht,' h. to rtihtye cost
of restoration -wou ld be about 41.5. m. The Conm -nw,-ealth's policy
is to aissist the " t. te concerned, on a, dollatr for do. Llar ba. sis, in
the restor-ition of such as2sets ,., here t he cost involved wi-ould Lue
anm undue burden on the StAe's finainciail resources . and I haive
informed the Premier thait the Commron-we J--th is prepaired to uive
assistance on this b-isis in aIddition to the fin~ incia-l help it h-is
given for the relief of personal hai-rdship.
1



RANSORIPT OF * 1R 4SS CONFE3RENCE BY THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AN'D
MINISTER-FOR TAEADIUTR( * A'SD p
133 JUN 1967
Question: Mr. Mci~ wen has emerged as something of a hero after the
recent Kennedy Round talks, yet Australia was forced to
accept a rather reduced price in wheat than she was
negotiating for, how does this work out?
Answer: Well, the answer is quite simple. What I was talking
about before I went was the price that we would
receive for our wheat. What we were arguing about in
Geneva was the minimum price below which we would not
sell our wheat nor below which anyone would ask to buy
our wheat. What we did in the finish was to reach an
agreement, which is technical in certain aspects. The
end result is that the minimum price now is 19 American
cents higher than the minimum price of the previous
prevailing agreement. This itself, is a very big
improvement. Raising the minimum price doesn't mean
that you sell at that price. It means that you don't
ever sell below that price and no one seeks to buy below
that price. All the experts in Geneva believe that
raising this minimum will raise the actual average
market price. It will fluctuate, but the estimate
there between all the experts is that it will raise the
average market price, above that prevailing now, by
from 8 cents some say, 16 cents others say, up to
cents. If wie are going to get our minimum, that
is 19 cents above the price which previously prevailed,
and a market price that, if you take the
average of these estimates, would be 12 cents above
that which is currently ranging, then this is an
enormous increase. Last year we harvested a crop of
about 460 million bushels of wheat and will export
nearly 370 million bushels. But on a 300 million
bushel export, every cent that you increase your
return is worth $ US 3 million to Australia. So if the
average price increase turns out, as the experts
estimate it to be, 12 cents above the present prevailing
price, that would be, on that calculation,
$ US3 36 million a year for Australia. If anyone
can satisfy themselves that that is a defeat then 
he is a difficult fellow to argue with.
Questi on:
An sw er:
Quest-ion,;
Answer:
Question:
Answer: Mr. McEwen, pushing this a bit further, with millions
of people starving, is it right and good for the world
that the price of wheat should be increased?
Well the real point is that you can't produce wheat
in the wheat-producing countries and sell it to the
affluent countries at a figure that is related only
to the price which starving people can pay because
taking it literally, starving people can't pay
anything and they don't pay anything for much of their
wheat which is given to them. So what we have done
now is to arrange that the commercial transactions of
wheat will be at a price satisfactory to Australia.
An argument that I first introduced more than
years ago is now accepted. That is, for those
people to whom wheat must be given, the responsibility
should not only be with those countries which grow
wheat in surplies to their own requirements, but that
all the affluent countries of the world should
contribute either in wheat or in money to buy wheat
and this is now part of the wheat scheme.
On the European Common Market, Mr. McEwen, which of
the primary producers are going to come off worst in
Australia when Britain joins.
Well, you say when Britain joins. I think it would be
better if you said if Britain joins. I can't answer
that until I know the terms on which Britain joins
if she does join. Britain has said bravely that she
will not join unless she can defend the vital interests
of the Commonwealth countries and that is a very
heartening statement; but it is a very broad
indefinite statement. I can't answer your question.
Mr. McEwen, it has been said in some quarters that the
real result of this agreement will be merely that the
rich get rich and the poor get poorer. How confident
are you that the Kennedy Round will fulfil its aim
to boost all world trade and not just benefit the big.
trading nations.
I would like to feel that you didn't invent that
because I have never heard anyone say this. 
Question: Answer: Question:
Answer: Question:
Answer: Questi on: This was reported in Italy, Sir
It's a long way away, Ilve never heard of it. I don't
believe it's true. I dont think anyone responsible
has said it, but the truth of the matter is that none
of the poor countries has been required to accept any
obligations for the benefits it will receive under the
Kennedy Round discussions. If all the rich countries
were to do what Australia has done give special lowtariff
entry for certain products of the underdeveloped
countries they would get a tremendous
boost.
Well Sir, all reportage to date on the Kennedy Round has
been particularly vague on what Australia has agreed to.
There has been some mention admittedly of Australia
excluding herself from some of the tariff cutting
agreements. i-n-what fields are we committed to tariff
cuts, and briefly, in what fields are we excluded.
Well you haven't been reading what I have been saying.
What I have said is that three years ago from now I got
Australia excluded from the linear cuts on tariffs. I
said whatever benefits we turned out to get in the end
we would pay for. That has been accepted, not three
years ago but four years ago, and we liva up to it.
No, but in what fields sir?
In the fields where we can give tariff cuts without
impairing the protection to Australian manufacturing
Industry. What I was getting at Sir, was, what particular fields
in manufacturing have been submitted to these tariff
cuts and in which ones are we remaining protective?
The answer I just gave you was that no fields of Australian
manufacturing industry which are protected
have had any essential tariff protection reduction at
all. There are a number of imports that carry tariff
duties which are not protecting Australian industry;
it is in this case that duties will be reduced.
Well as the major markets in Europe and North America
are reducing their tariffs by one third on industrial
goods, will this help our manufacturers in any way?
For example, can we sell them Holdens without buying
Toyotas or in fact do these manufacturers miss out
because of our own exclusion? 
Answer: I don't follow the question at all.
Question: Well what I was driv-ing at Sir, is will this
agreement by North America and Europe to cut their
tariffs by one third help our industries in any way?
Wlnswer,: Well, we have a modest export of manufactured goods.
I think about œ 150 or œ 200 million worth of goods
have been exported and to the extent that these items
will now have lower tariff barriers to get over in
some countries and we actually export some
manufactured goods to Europe we would be helped.
Question: Is there any outcome yet, Sir, on the discussions that
were being held on meat? Is Australia likely to
increase her share of the meat market?
Answer,: Yes, it is but these discussions are not yet complete.
The position is that America has had to have her
discussions completed by now, that has been done. The
other countries are not under exactly the same
pressure of time and we are still in the late stages of
some discussions about meat, particularly with the
European Common Market and Japan. I have complete
confidence that in each case there will be a
satisfactory outcome for Australia.
uestin: What about agreement relates to hard
winter wheat whereas Australian wheat, of course, is
soft. Do you expect our market price to rise as a
follow through to this agreement?
Answer: Yes. The position is that the price is not to be read
as the price at which we will sell our wheat. This is
the price below which we will not sell our wheat nor
anyone seek to buy our wheat. It is a floor. This
floor compared with the hard winter wheat that you
refer to is 19 American cents higher than the
previous prevailing floor price for that quality of
wheat. That is a very, verj substantial increase.
The estimates of the experts, both of the importing
countries and the wheat selling countries at Geneva
was that this higher floor price would raise the
current average actual market selling price by,
according to different experts, from 8 cents a
bushel to 15 or 20 cents a bushel. I take a figure
of an average of 12 cents a bu3hel increase, which on 
Question: Answer: Question,: Answ er: a 300 million bushel export would give us an
additional income in wheat of $ US 36 million a year.
On this question of wheat or grain. On the food aid
programme giving 4-21 million tons of grain free a year
to hungry countries, how is this going to be financed
and what is Australia's share in it?
Australia's share is 225,000 tons a year. In the last
three years we have, without any agreement at all, given
150,000 tons a year. So our record is pretty straight.
It is going to be financed by a country like Australia
contributing in wheat which the Government will lbuy
from the Wheat Board 5C/ o of the 41-million tons.
Other countries that have wheat will give their share
in wheat and other countries such as Japan which haven't
any wheat to give away will provide the money and they
will buy the wheat to give it away.
Well,, going, across to the Common Mvarket problem now
Mr. McEwen. H-ow do you rate Britain's chances of
entering the Common Market? If she does, how * i&amp; ng do
you think it will take?
I don't really feel confident to form an assessment of
her chances of getting in. Tn-ere is not the slightest
doubt that Mr. Adilson has made it very clear that
Britain is going to make a determined effort to get in
and there is not going to be niggily about the
conditions. I hear people in Europe who are knowledgable
on this say that well, it would take at least six
months before it was clear whether this was a real
goer and perhaps a couple of years before a decision
is reached. That's not my opinion, it is the
opinion of others, / 64 a. 
question: Answer: Quest ion:
Answer: Answer: Britain's Foreign Secretary, Mr. Brown, has been
quoted as saying that Britain's application
contains no conditions or stipulations. In the
light of' this how serious are our key exports to
Britain likely to be affected?
I don't know what Mr. Brown says. If You quote
him correctly and I don't doubt that at all
it would not be consistent with what Mr. Wilson has
said. He has said that in entering the Comnmon
Ma,-rket, Britain would require that essential
Commonwealth interests should be safeguarded.
Along this line, the Cha. irman of the Aastralian
Dairy Produce Board said this week that it would be
impossible for Australia to find an immediate
replacement market for her dairy products if
Britain's entry into the E. E. C. was swift.
This is completely right. There is only one big
importer of butter in the world and that is Britain.
If Britain's entry into the E. E. C. it impossible
for her to buy our butter in the quantity she has
been buying it, then frankly I don't know where
else we could turn to find a market for butter. The
problem with cheese and dried milk and other dairy
products is not so bad. The truth of the matter is
that you can't make dried skim milk powder without
producing butter.
Well, what practical steps have been, or are going to
be taken in any way to protect these export industries
by the Government.
Well, just by trying to diversify our markets which
I have been engaged in for years now, by stressing to
Britain and to the European Common Market, the practical
problems of the Australian dairy industry; and New
Zealanders are doing it, of course, because they would
be more desparately affected than even we would'be. / 7 
GENERAL PRESS CONFERENCE
Question: How long before the tariff cu~ ts come into effect?
Answer: When the various Governments ratify the agreements
and sulfLicient Governments have ratified it for it to
be quite clear that the agreement is going to live.
Question: Would you put a point of time on it? Would it be a
year or so?
Answer: I couldn't guess. I would hope it would be a shorter
time than that. Can I point ou~ t something so that
this is understandable. There are two instances in
history of this kind of thing where an agreement has
been reached. First the League of Nations after the
First World War. America agreed and then the American
Congress threw it ou~ t and they were never in it. More
recently in 1947, the A~ mericans convened a great trade
conference from which was established an international
world organisation which, for example, oa~ r Government
said we would join as soon as itmerica and Britain
joined. America never joined it and America not joining
the organisation which they had proposed, no one else
joined it and it never came into existence. That
illustrates that when you reach an agreement, it isn't
automatically in existence but I would mislead you
completely if I led any of you to construe from this
that I think that could happen on this occasion. I
state it in relation to a timetable only. Is that
clear?
-Question; Mr. McEwen, what influence would the Kennedy Round
Agreement have on the British Commonwealth trade talks
that you are going to come u~ p with.
Answer: It will have a quite substantial influence on it. The
United Kingdom/ Auastralia Trade Agreem/' nt, which is
the technical description of the system of preferences,
is an agreement designed to give a balance of advantage
to both countries. Now when the Keniedy Round was 
first mooted there was a conference of Commonwealth
trade ministers in which I, speaking for my Government,
said that wve wculd prefer to stay with the known
the preferential reciprocal arrangement with Britain
rather than go into a Kennedy Round. The British
Government of the day said well, we have decided that
we will go into the Kennedy Round and we will go in
and offer tariff cuts. We said right'o, we'll take
it from there. What this meant, and this is the
answer to your question, is that on going into the
Kennedy Round the British offered to cut nearly all
of their tariffs by 50%. Giving us a preference means
that they have a tariff on somebody else where they
don't have one at all on us, and offering to cut
their tariffs by 50%, they were in fact offering to
cut our preferences by 50 o. Now, in the course of
the negotiations they went through with a cut of
on many items and withdrew and didn't go through with
the cut on other items. SoI said at that time, which is
now about five years ago, well, when the KEonnedy
Round is finished we'll get together then and have a
look at what would represent an agreement which
would have a balance of advantage for both parties.
I have now reached agreement with the British in
London that as soon as the Kennedy Round is over,
and it is now over, our officials will start to
examine the change in trade relationship. They
will be doing this within a month or two months.
As soon as that study has gone on sufficiently, then
no doubt the Governments and Ministers will, get
to-gether and have a look at it. It would be the
objective of Australia and the objective. of Britain
to write another trade treaty which, having regard to
what had been altered, established a trading
relationship which had a balancing advantage to
both parties.
Question: Mr. McEwen, I would have thought that you could'nt
have a floor price for wheat unless you had some
know quantities of wheat involved.
Answer: No, that's not so.
Question: You can have a price without worrying about quantities?
Answer: Well, you can worry about quantity but nature, more
than anything else, determines the quantity. You
really can't commit yourself to a quantity. The
concept here is that, in relation to transactions 
Question:
Answer:
Answer: Question:
Answer: Question:
Answer. Question., in wheat between countries which are parties to the
agreement, no one will be willing to sell at less
than the floor price and no one will seek to buy at
less than the floor price.
If you have a glut then how are you going to maintain
it? Isn't someone going to go out the back door?
Isn't someone going to break the agreement, because
that's really what your suggesting; I don't mean
you are proposing it, but it would only not stand up
if someone did break the agreement. Wheat is not
like chocolate, if I could make a comparison.
Excepting the very hungry people, most people don't
eat more wheat because it is a little cheaper. They
do eat more mieat and they may eat more butter,
they certainly eat more chocolate if it is cheaper;
but the whole trading history shows that the price
of' wheat has very little relationship to the
consumption amongst those who have the capacity
to buy wheat.
Will this price be reviewed from time to time?
Yes, it can be reviewed from time to time.
Under some sort of Kennedy umbrella or under G. A. T. T.?
Well the whole Kennedy Round is part of G. A. T. T.,
it is conducted under the G. A. T. T. and at some period
of time it will be reviewed. If a great surplus
developed without this agreement then obviously price
cutting would commence and the whole benefit of the
agreement is to have a lot of countries committed by
contractual obligations not to engage in price cutting
or not to attempt to induce others to engage in price
cutting. The tariff cuts.,. will they affect cars?
No. No. I want to emphasize that there will be no
tariff reductions here on items which are necessary
to protect Australian industry. Wie have our g; roat
motor car manufacturing industry; our tariff is
designed to protect it. This w. 1as the fight I
won in 1963 where I got Australia excluded. The
only three countries excluded from the obligations
to make linear tariff cuts were Australia, New
Zealand and South Africa.
Mr. McEwen, the wheat aid, is to be held somehow or
other by this international -pool, just to be given 
11.
Answer. Question:
Answer. Question:
Answer for emergencies, or cavn vie use it as capital aid?
Wie have used wheat as capital aid in the past,
havn't we?
We never have
say India they raise capital with it locally.
. ell, let me see if I can answer the question.
Thffen we have given wheat we have never a'utached any
condition to it at all. If asked for wheat vie have
given it to them finish and they no doubt ive
it out to those who need it. On the other hand some
countries and America is a great example when
America gives wheat aid what she does is to sell the
wheat at a price but for payment in the currency of'
the country, the currency of India in that particular
case, Its a cLu-rrency that's understood that can't
be converted to dollars or sterling. So the United
States, under Its ublic Law 480 sells the wheat to
India. It's not going to receive payment in America,
but it will receive or be due for payment in India.
Then the kAmericans may attach a condition. They may
say the understanding is that you iill use some of
this money to build an irrigation dam or they may
say we will draw some of this money to pay for the
expenses of our Embassy. If they say well, you
must use some of the money that you are due to pay
us to build an irrigation dam, well, that's capital
aid, In all the aid that we give, whether we give
money or tractors or technical assistance, or food, we
give it and rule off the book. . ie attach no
conditions, no repayment.
Mr. Mc~ ven what reasons do the Americans give for
imposing their duty on wool?
On wool? Well, the reason they advance is that they
have a woollen industry of their own and they must
protect it, and that is the simple reason. There are
related reasons which may be at least as important
and maybe more important and this is, that under
their law they have a certain relationship between
the protective duty on raw wool and the protective
duty on imported woollen textile piecegoods or
garments and under the existing law to alter one
automatically alters the other and this might
be the milk in the coconut. 
Quesion: Speaking about the Common Market, a while ago you
seem to stress the word Is there an even
money chance that Britain will get in?
Answer; W~ ell, talking to the people that I met in Geneva.
and they were a pretty well-informed group of
people on this I don't think you wiould have got
a bet at much better than even money and that's not
my opinion. You askfl me my opinion and I just say
I'm sorry I don't know. President De Gaulle's
press interview wasn't very encouraging but our
Australian Government's attitude is quite olear.
If the British Government feels that it is in
the important interests of Britain to join the
Common Market, then wie would regard it as quite
improper for us to try, directly or indirectly,
to prevent her from joining. This is in balance
with our resentment if anyone tried to interfere
with what we thought was a necessary policy in the
interests of Australia. Having made that principle
clear, then it's legitimate to point out where your
owm interests are and say to someone who said
I will look after your interests, to say well,
here, this is what our interests are.
Question Do you see any benefits to us if Britain enters the
Common Market?
Answer, I think there is only one benefit which has been
canvassed and I can't evaluate it, and that is that
it will be good for the strength of the British
economy I'm not offering my view now, I'm
quoting that it will be good for the strength
of the British economy and for the prosperity of
Britain if she joins and that therefore as a
country which is a trading partner, it must be good
for us if she becomes stronger. I can't evaluate
that at all.
Question: , Phat is our position in respect of butter?
Answer: Our position in respect of butter with Britain has been
that we had a preference of 15/-a cwt. over' nonpreferential
supplies. Notwiithstandinig that, two
or three years ago the price was extremely low.
This was not only hurting us it was hurting the
British Government who had to bridge the ap from the
Treasury between the market price and the guaranteed 
S 13.
Question: Answer: Question:
An-swer: price to their own producers and this was
becoming very costly. From this they suggested
and we agreed, that instead of the duty to protect
us, to give us preference, that they should
introduce a system of quotas to prevent an excess
of butter and therefore lift the price. We agreed
to this, New Zealand agreed to this. It was put
into operation. It did lift the price. N~ ow that
has not been an issue under discussion in the
Kennedy Round, therefore butter in our principal
market has not been affected one way or another
by the Kennedy Round, and it has'nt in respect of
the E. E. C.
Mr. McEwen
Just let rme add a sentence to this. We have a wheat
agreement. ? 7e -had hoped not only Australia,
but all those interested we had hoped to have
a dairy agreement. The Kennedy Round set up a group
to study dairy products in the direction of a world
agreement. It was discovered that there was. no* V'
hope of an agreement and that just dissolved.
11r. MoEw-en, in London you viere quoted as saying that
Britain's decision to seek entry into the Common
Market meant that she was obliged in the Kennedy
Round to press for world commodity agreements that
safeguarded Australia's agricultural exports. Did
Britain press for that?
Well, can I just state the position. W1hen Britain first
contemplated joining the Common THarket I think
this was 1961/ 62 there were discussions between
Britain and the Common Market countries before Britain
had applied, where Britain pointed out how her
joining would have repercussions on Commonwealth
countries and other trading partners unless spegial
provisions were made to cover them. Out of those
studies the conclusion reached was that if Britain
joined the Common Market, the best way to protect
the interests of these people, which include Australia,
would be not to deprive them of their preferences
overnight, but to phase them out over a period of
years and this was one proposal. The other
proposal was that in respect of items such as 
14.
wheat, where no preference exists, world agreements
were the best solution of the problems of these
countries. Britain subscribed to that and Britain
has said that she will protect the interests of
Commonwealth countries. So it was against that
background that I said from Geneva that Britain
was more obligated than any other country to support
world commodity agreements because she had agreed
that this was the most direct way of protecting
the interests of countries which might be impaired
by her joining the Common Market. I also said that
a meeting of Commonwealth Trade Ministers in June
last year had again confirmed as the general
poliQy the whole Commonwealth including Britain,
support for world commodity agreements which would
give satisfactory prices. So you can see there the
grounds on which I said Britain was obligated
and more obligated than any other country to support
them. Well, she supported this agreement she's a
member of it did start out by suggesting
a price of about 160 cents for wheat.
Question: Mr. IMIcEwen, was it agreed at all at the Kennedy
Round whether the wheat price would come up for
any periodic review or discussions?
Answer: The period for reviewing the price that we discussed was
three years. iIy memory won't permit me to say whether
this is written into the final understanding
it's just a slip of my memory. They contemplated
three years and I think it will probably turn out
that this is the point of review.
Question. Mr. Mc-hven, would it be possible to say whether
the talks with Britain over the trade agreement will
come up this year or in a matter of weeks?
Answer6 Well, what I have said is that talks between officials
will comrence in the quite near future. I would think
within a couple of months talks bet-ween their officials
and our officials will commence. They will be
studying what has happened within the Kennedy Round
and outside the Kennedy Round to change our trading
relationship. Their reports will go to higher
officials and their reports will go to Governments
and so on and I expect before we reach the end of 
1
Question:
Answer: Question:
Answer,-Question:
Answer: this year the picture will be clear enough to warrant
the Governments getting together. That's my
estimate of time.
Was sugar raised at all?
No, sugar was not raised at all, on the ground that
there has been an International Sugar Agreement which
is in suspension; that the International Sugar
Council is still functioning and that the overwhelming
percentage of the countries which export sugar are
less developed countries and the venue to which the
less developed countries are looking for trade
discussions is not the G. A. T. T. but UNCTAD United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
there has been one or two ministerial meetings on
sugar in UICTAD and there will be another ministerial
meeting on sugar. It is expected well inside a year
from now. The exporters of sugar who are not to be
classified as developing countries would be such
countries as Australia and South Africa. All of the
others, the est Indies, India, Mauritius, Fiji
a colony, of course are all developing countries and
I think they would resist the discussion being removed
from UNCTAD.
Mr. McEwen, on the Conon Market, has the Australian
Government been kept fully informed on the British
application? Is there any arrangement whereby we
will be told what is going on in the negotiations.
Yes, the British Government has told us privately
and stated the same thing publicly that as they get
into negotiation, they will keep us informed and
consult closely with us.
Mr. -cEwient, o use an Australianism, do you think
they are " fair dinkum"?
Of course I've got to take the British Government's
statement as bona fide. On the meat side, I have
said in this written press statement that apart from
wheat, this is the big area of gain to us. We've
secured, in the very final stages, a reaction from te
Common Market countries to a request that we have been
pressing, that vie have access to their markets for
our frozen meat on better terms than have existed
and better terms than they were proposing. The
relationship between the Argentine and Australia and
the Common Market countries is not bound to the 
16.
same timetable as the American. I mention the
Argentine with Australia because wie, with the
New Zealanders, are the principal suppliers of
meat. So when I left Geneva to go to Romania
these discus-' ions hadn't been completed in detail.
I have been travelling, I think they are completed
now but I'm not qaite sure, but my written statement
says I am confident of the outcome. Now that's in
that area. The other next important meat market
for us is Japan. Again we are not under the same
pressure of timetable as with America and again I've
got to say words that sound unsatisfactory
I'm confident of a good outcome. That isn't just
double talk, I am just confident that there will be a
satisfLactory final position with both Japan and the
Common Market countries. The importance of this is
that we have only had two really assured markets for
meat 13ritain and the United States and if you
get a difficult marketing situation in one or both
of those countries if you get it in one, you're
trying to force all your meat into the other
remaining market and this is always embarrassing
to the country that's under pressure to receive it.
If we can look forward to say four important
markets, then the meat trade is a lot safer than if you
have only two.
Que-stion: Do you envisage any new markets for meat?
Answer: Oh yes, wie are keeping on pressing, We have developed
a quite good market for sheep meat in Greece, 



Ca.~ 8 U .16
FOR PRESS:* U 8N 1967
L18 R A9
STATEMENT BY THE RT. HON. J. McEWEN, DEPUTY PRIME INISTER
AND MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY, ON HIS RETURN
FROM OVERSEAS ON 26TH MAY, 1967.
1. KENNEDY ROUND GENERAL
The Kennedy Round started as a proposal that practically
all world tariffs of the GATT countries should be cut in half.
Very early, less developed countries were excluded from this
proposal. There is quite a wide range of trade in which countries
deliberately ensure that they do not increase their cost of raw
materials and food, by imposing import duties. Australia is a
predominant exporter of these items. Therefore, under the original
Kennedy Round proposal, Australia was invited to cut her protective
tariffs in half but with no balancing tariff reductions on what
she exported. You can't cut a nil tariff in two.
In 1963 I visited the United Kingdom and told the British
Government that Australia would prefer to continue its reciprocal
Trade Agreement with Britain, to whom we have exported so much,
rather than go into the Kennedy Round with all its doubt and risks.
The British Government intimated they had firmly decided
to go into the Kennedy Round, and would offer a general 50% cut
in practically all their tariffs.
For the things we export to Britain, the Australia-United
Kingdom Trade Treaty mostly gives us duty free entry, with an
obligation on Britain to impose a tariff on our foreign competitors.
For-this benefit we, in return, impose higher duties on Britain's
competitors in our market. In 1965-66 90% of Britain's total
exports of SA759 million to Australia benefited from these
preferential tariff arrangements in our market.
The British Government's position amounted to leaving
Australia's right of free entry unaltered but to halve the tariff
obstacle raised against our foreign competitors. 
Upon this British declaration, Australia said she would
enter the Kennedy Round discussions constructively, and examine at
the end of the day, . wh ether there were sufficient benefits left
for Australia in the British market, to justify a new trade treaty
with Britain. That was the situation when we entered the Kennedy
Round of negotiations. The next step in 1963 was for me to argue before the full
assembly of the Kennedy Round countries, about 80, that it was
unreasonable, and impossible, to ask a country circumstanced as
Australia was, to cut all her protective tariffs by half, for the
very doubtful prospect of being given advantages in the export of
her primary products and raw materials.
It was a very important part of the Australian case that
because of the great variety of barriers other than tariffs to
improved trade in agricultural products, and because of the ling
history of unsuccessful negotiations to reduce or limit those
barriers, agricultur2al exporting countries should only be expected
to pay in tariff cuts, for overall advantages accorded their
agri cultural trade.
I intimated that if at the end of the day we had been
given important new advantages for our commodity exports, we would
give balancing advantages by appropriate tariff reductions to those
who exported manufactured goods to us, This was accepted, and
it is on that basis that since 1963 we have participated as a big
importer and exporter in the Kennedy Round discussions.
It wNas always made clear that Australia would not destroy
its existing manufacturing industries by cutting their protective
tariff in half. However because of the fact that Britain had
offered to foreigners to cut our preferences in half, we would be
entitled to pay in part for whatever advantages we gained, by some
balancing diminution in the preferential advantages accorded to
British exports in our market. 
We also have a very wide range of imports of items
which we do not manufacture but on which customs duties already
exist. Many of these Customs duties are there for some
historical reason of the past. On two occasions I have asked the
Tariff Board to advise, whether, in respect of a very great range
of items we could reduce duties without detriment to Australian
industry. This advice of the Tariff Board has been available in
the selection of items for which we have offered tariff reduotions.
This sets out the general history and nature of Australia'w
position in respect of the Kennedy Round from before negotiations
commenced, our consultations at that pmint with Britain and right
through to the near-final situation of today. 
2. KENNEDY ROUND WHTEAT AND WHEAT AID
Mr. MoEwen said: " The major achievement for Australian
agriculture was the negotiation of the basic elements for a new
international agreement of wheat."
It is intended that the new Agreement reached in Geneva
between the world's major grain exporters and importers should
in due course, take the place of the existing International Wheat
Agreement which has been " carried on" with a number of temporary
extensions while the GATT negotiations have been going on in
Geneva. The major objective of this new GATT agreement on grains
is to put a floor under world wheat prices. This was a concept
within the old International Wheat Agreement.
However, the new Agreement will not only establish the
floor at a higher level than under the but will establish
a floor that is really firm, a floor below which prices do not fall.
The old International Wheat Agreement has neve~ r been
really effective on this major objective. That Agreement set the
minimum price only for Manitoba No. 1 the highest quality wheat
commercially traded. The great number of lower quality grades of
wheat below Manitoba Nn. 1, were left without specific minimum prices,
and without " agreed differentials" of price a very lmose, unfirm
situation. The minimum or floor price that had been finally agreed
in Geneva for a middle grade of American wheat known as Hard Red
Winter No. 2 ( ordinary) wqs $ IJS1.73 per bushel the price being
fixed on the basis of shipping from ports in the Gulf of Mexico.
This is an increase of some 19 U. S. cents per bushel over the
equivalent I. W. A. minimum for this grade of wheat.
Around this central minimum -price for the " base" wheat,
as it is known minimum prices for other wheats have been
determined by establishing firm " differentials for quality" for
wheats higher in quality and lower in quality than U. S. Hard 
Winter Ordinary. In this way minimum prices have been arrived at for a
number of the important wheats that are traded internationally
and a schedule of minimum prices is set out in the agreement.
This innovation of establishing a schedule of minimum prices for
a number of wheats will help greatly in making the new floor
price for wheat firm and effective.
In Australia's case the minimum price for f. a. q. wheat
has been set at 5 U. S. cents below the minimum price of the base
wheat. This is accepted as a satisfactory margin.
All the minimum prices are expressed in the Agreement
f. o. b. Gulf of Mexico to put them on a comparable basis. It
should be noted that they are not the c. i. f. prices which customer
countries pay for their wheat delivered, nor are they selling,
or offering prices at which wheat must be sold. They represent
the prices below which wheat cannot be sold or bought.
Mr. McEwen went on to say: " The new floor prices represent
a substantial improvement on existing floor prices. The
new floor price for f-a-q. wheat will not be high enough to
cover the present Australian " cost of poutn" under the Wheat
Stabilisation Plan while prices are at the minimum but actual
selling prices of wheat will vary from time to time depending on
supply and demand.
" These prices may fluctuate above, but cannot fall below
the new agreed minimum price of $ US 1 .73 at Gulf for U. S. Hard
Winter Ordinary Wheat.
" In the opinion of the experts from wheat exporting and
wheat importing countries gathered at Geneva, the establishment of
a new minimum at substantially higher levels than the old minimum
would substantially lift " market" prices.
" The opinions of these experts on the extent of the
likely increase in market prices ranged from about 8 US. cents tn
16 U. S. cents a bushel. On the basis of 300 million bushels of 
6.
exports from Australia, which we should be able to count on for
our exports in the future, each additional cent increase in price,
increases our export earnings by $ US 3 million a year. An 8 cent
increase on 300 million bushels exported would increase our
earnings by $ US 24 million and 16 cents by $ UJS 48 million.
If one assumed that the increase would be between these
two extremes, at 12 cents, Australia could look forward to increased
export earnings of ZUS 36 million a year on such crops. This will
be a net increase in the Wheat Board's sales.
Another new and important feature of the Agreement
negotiated in Geneva, is a commitment on member Governments, both
exporters and importers, to provide developing countries with food
aid equivalent to 4T1 million metric tons of grain a year. Australia's
contribution to this new programme is 225,000 metric tons which
compares with aid given by Australia in the form of wheat over the
last 3 years at an average rate of approximately 150,000 a year.
Mr. McEwen said: " The new food aid provisions in the
Agreement are important in a number of ways. They are a recognition
by the affluent countries of the great need to provide more food
for the hungry people of the world. This is of enormous importance
in a world in which millions of people are on the -erge of
starfation, with consequent political instability.
Moreover, the food aid provisions are a great step
forward in winning acceptance of the principle that affluent
countries as a whole, should share equitably the responsibility, and
the cost of supplying food aid, and not leave food aid to those
countries which produce wheat in surplus to their own iequirements.
" I am sure that Australians everywhere will be pleased
to see Australia doing its bit in this new programme for. feeding
the hungry. I am personally very pleased also that the principle
of joint responsibility for food aid, a principle which I have
advocated for at least 10 years, is at last gaining recognition." 
3. KENNEDY ROUND MEAT
Australia had been negotiating on a number of other
important primary products. Originally it was hoped that negotiations
similar to those for grains, could be undertaken on both meat
and dairy products. Negotiating groups similar to the Cereals
negotiating group were set up for these other two commodities.
It proved impossible to negotiate world arrangements
for meat. However, Australia has meat arrangements with its two
major markets, Britain and the United States.
At Geneva we have been in intensive bi-laterial
negotiations with both the European Common Market countries and
Japan in an effort to improve trading opportunities in those tw')
markets. A reasonably successful result for beef and veal with
these two countries is expected.
An arrangement is being discussed with the Common Market
countries on beef that could allow Australian exports of frozen
beef to have access to the E. E. C. markets with a modest customs
duty, and without payment of import levies for a 5 month period
from mid-April to mid-September. During the remaining 7 months
of the year it is proposed that import levies lower than at present
will be applied. Such an arrangement would be a-signi~ ficant
break-through into the very large and affluent European market.
Discussions have taken place also with Japan in the hope
of securing improved access to that market. The results of thqdiscussions
have been encouraging.
If within the Kennedy Round we succeed in getting access
improvements, permitting a steady expansion of Australian exports of
frozen meat to these markets, this will provide the added safety of
greater diversification of our meat markets. 
4. KENNEDY ROUND WOOL, DAIRYING OUR GAINS AND OUR LOSSES
Referring to negotiations on wool, Mr. McEwen said that
he had entered the Kennedy Round confident that Australia would
be able to negotiate a reduction in the duty which the United
States maintains on imports of raw wool. The United States is
the only country to have a substantial duty on raw wool and had
indicated willingness to cut the duty in the course of the
Kennedy Round. It was a matter of immense disappointment that at this
stage Australia has not secured from the United States improved
access to the American market for wool or for that matter, within
these negotiations, improved access to America for any product
of important trade interest to Australia.
On dairy products, the Kennedy Round negotiations were not
successful. This had been a great disappointment not only to
Australia but also to New Zealand which is the largest exporter
of dairy products.
Mr. McEwen said: " The Agreement on cereals and the prospect
of improved arrangements for beef prompt me to say that it is
the wheat and beef industries that will gain most directly.
" It is not just the farmers who will benefit from this..
The benefits will flow to the whole community as a result of the
higher earnings of foreign exchange, and greater spending power
in the hands of the wheatgrowers and beef producers. To the
extent that wheat prices rise, there is a reduction in the costs
to the Commonwealth Treasury arising from the obligations under
the Wheat Stabilisation Act, which guarantees that Australian
wheatgrowers shall not receive a lower figure than the
guaranteed price for 150 million bushels of wheat exported."
" Australia will suffer losses as a result of the British
decision to make a 50% cut in tariff items which had been designed
to establish Australia's preferential position, under the U. K.-
Australia Trade Treaty. 
The list of products on which Britain originally proposed
to make a 50% cut in the duty paid by foreign countries and
hence at the same time reduce Australia's preferences in the
United Kingdom, covered a great many items of Australia's export
trade. Some of these offers have now been withdrawn. Amongst
those which now stand to lose 50% of their preferences in Britain
include raisins, sultanas and currants, canned peaches, canned
apricots ( but not canned pears) and canned pineapples, unmilled
rice and leather.
The effect of the cut in preference is of great
importance to the industries concerned.
Looking at the negotiations overall, 4ustralia's gains
will much more than offset her losses.
When the Government is considering adverse effects on
particular industries, from the cut in their Commonwealth
preference arising from the Kennedy Round, the overall National
gain will be weighed in relation to particular industry losses." 
BRITISH APPLICATION TO JOIN COMJMON MARKET
UNITED KINGDOM AUSTRALIA TRADE TREATY
Mr. MoEwen said that his visit to Europe provided an
opportunity to discuss matters of common interest with British
Ministers. There was discussion related to the Kennedy Round
which was approaching the criticial negotiating -period at that time.
At the time of Mr.. McEwen's visit, British Ministers
were considering whether to apply to join the European Common
Market, and this topic was discussed.
Australia's attitude to British entry of the European
Common Market is the same as it has always been. The decision
to apply for membership is one for Britain alone. The British
Prime Minister has said that safeguarding essential Commonwealth
interests is an essential prerequisite to British entry and has
promised also to consult fully with Commonwealth countries during
the negotiations for British entry.
Australia's trade relationship with Britain is based
on a contract, the United Kingdom-Australia Trade Agreement. As a
result of that contract each country has built up a substantial
trade interest in the other country.
Britain's exports to Australia amounted to $ ZA759 mil. in
1965-66 and about 90% of those imports receive preferential
treatment in the Australian tariff. That is to say, about
of British exports to Australia entered Auetralia at lower rates
of duty than were charged on the same products from other countri., s.
The Department of Trade and Industry has made a
calculation of the value of the present Preferences the
United Kingdom has in Australia, by comparing the United Kingdom
share of the Australian import market, with the share the
United Kingdom has of non-preferential markets such as the U. S. A.
This comparison has been made on a farily detailed productby-
product basis. The calculation suggests that if the United 
11.
Kingdom lost all its preference in Australia on entering the
European Common Market then it could, in the long term, lose
about $ A400 million of its trade with Australia.
This kind of figuring makes it pretty plain that Britain
has a very big stake in the Australian market.
Australia also has a very big stake in the British
market. The view is widely held in Europe that because Australia
has diversified its trade so much in recent years, the effects of
British entry will be very much less than they would have been in
1961. It is quite true th-at Australia has diversified its trade
but in spite of this the value of our trade " at risk" if Britain
enters the E. E. C. has actually increased in total since 1961.
Since 1961 Australia's exports of wool to Britain have declined
markedly. Wool is one commodity which would almost certainly be
unaffected by British entry, but it is now relatively less important
in our trade with Britain.
The value of our trade " at risk" has increased from
$ A 310 million in 1959-60 to about 3$ A 375 million now. Nor is it
much comfort to the dairy industry faced with the loss of
important preferences in the United Kingdom, to know that Australia's
sales of iron ore to Japan have increased.
The threat to Australia's trade, if Britain enters the
European Common Market does not come only from the loss of
preferences on our important export commodities. It comes also
from the " reverse preferences" that will be created against
Australia when Britain enters the E. E. C. A product such as
dried fruit, not only faces the loss of important preference in
the British market, it also sees the creation of a new Preference in
favour of Greece and Turkey by reason of their associate membership
of the E. E. C. 
12.
Possibly an even greater threat than the loss of
preference comes from the overall agricultural policies of the
Common Market. Under many of the agricultural policies of the
E. E. C. the European farmer is insulated from outside competition
by a water-tight system of variable import levies on agricultural
imports. The Common Agricultural Policy, of the E. E. C. provides
very high internal supports, and with the water-tight import
protection E. E. C. agricultural production has increased enormously.
From being a net importer of wheat a few years ago the
E. E. C. has now become a net exporter. Large surpluses of butter
exist in Europe. Meat production has increased rapidly. We
know that agricultural production in the E. E. C. has further
potential to increase, and that if Britain joined, the agricultural
policies of the applied to British agriculture, could
expand production considerably to fill a large part of their
existing import market.
Mr. McEwen said: " These were the kind of issues that I
discussed with British Ministers in the course of a very frank
exchange of views."
Mr. McEwen also said that now that the shape of the
final Kennedy Round package was becoming clear, Britain and
Australia would shortly be holding talks to discuss the
future of the United Kingdom/ Australia Trade Agreement. Mr.
MoEwen recalled that review of the Agreement had been deferred
pending the completion of the Kennedy Round negotiations. 
13.
6. TRADE TREATY SIGNED WITH ROUMANIA
Mr. McEwen said that from Geneva he went to Bucharest
to conclude a trade agreement with Roumania.
Czechoslovakia alone of the countries of Eastern
Europe is a member of the GATT. Many Western countries have in
recent years negotiated Trade AgreemenTs with the countries of
Eastern Europe in order to provide a formal basis for trading
with those countries.
Mr. McEwen said that over the last two years Australia
had written Trade Agreements with the Poland and
Bulgaria in addition to Roumania. In all of these agreements the
central provisions were a mutual undertaking by each country to
extend to the other " most-favoured-nation" tariff treatment.
In fact, Australia has extended " most-favourednation"
tariff treatment to Roumania for many years. The
Trade Agreement formalises and guarantees conditions of trading
that already exist.
Mr. McEwen said that the new trading links that had
been established between Australia and Roumania were designed
to be mutually beneficial. Trade between the two countries had
increased markedly over the last twelve months. Australian
exports to Roumania totalled :' A433,000 in the first seven months
of this financial year, mainly cattle hides, rutile concentrates
and wool tops. Imports totalled A119,000 mainly specialty
cheeses and wood and cork manufactures.
The potential for increased trade clearly exists,
given the assurance of established access conditions as provided
in the new Agreement. 



FRe' S 1
-31 MAY 1967 4
FOR PRESS: 1-8 R A R P. M. No. 55/ 196
RESULT CF R! T ' R'NDUMS
Comment by the Frime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
On the aborigine question, I was delighted with the overwhelming
vote in every State of the Commonwealth favouring the e~ mination of those
references in the Constitution which smack of discrimination. The grant
of power to the Commonwealth in relation to aborigines which follows from
the vote will enable it to play a useful part in ensuring justice and social
acceptance for people of the aboriginal race.
The vote will not only help the aborigine, it will contribute to
Australia's international standing by demonstrating to the outside world
our overwhelming desire to give full acceptance to the aboriginal people
within our community. The adverse vote on the nexus proposal, while not altogether
surprisiUg, was disappointing. I said prior to the poll that a majority for
NO would be a victory for prejudice and misrepresentation against calm
reasoning and good sense. I still hold that view, and indeed, the detail
of the vote tends to conf irm it.
In New South W~ ales where political forces and press, generally
speaking declared their support for a YES vote, a majority for YES appears
to have been obtained. On the other hand, where press and political
forces waged a campaign of misrepresentation based on prejudice, there
has been a strong NO majority. It is never difficult to whip up opposition
on the slogan " No More Politicians". The fact that the proposal put
forward meant something very different was either ignored or imperfectly
perceived. It seems clear that in the smaller States there was a fear that
their role in the Federation would be diminished in a larger House of
Representatives and an unchanged numerical strength in the Senate. W.. e
attempted to meet this understandable concern by pointing out that each
representative from the smaller States in the House of Representatives
had voted in support of this proposal, and a large majority of Senators
from the smaller States had similarly supported it.
In fact, there was a unanimous majority in the House of
Representatives in support of the YES proposal; there was an overwhelming
majority 45-7 in favour of it in the Senate. It was strongly supported by
the Trade Union movement. It was supported in every State by the
organisation of the Liberal Party. It was supported by several newspapers
which are generally regarded as ranking among the most thoughtful and
responsible in Australia.
The majority of electors chose to ignore the advice of those
to whom they normally look for guidance on political issues. / 2 
-2
The outcome leaves some difficult problems. There is general
agreement that there must be a redistribution of electorates before the next
general election. Due to rapid growth in outer suburban areas of the
capital cities, there are gross dispar~ ties between electorates in the same
State and even in the same city. Some metropolitan electorates J n
Victoria, for example, have only about 40G, 000 voters; others more than
100, 0c, and with continuing population growth, the gaps are widening.
There is an overwhelming case for a redistribution which will produce a more
equitable balance. One conisequence of the varying rates of growth of population
in different parts of the Commonwealth could be an actual reduction of
seats in one or more States and, despite the degree of tolerance permitted
to redistribution commissioners, in rural representation. These are
problems which the Cabinet will have to study closely.
S-' Iaturday's vote was not so much against the breaking of the
nexus with the Senate as a vote against more politicians of the National
Parliament. This view, however ill-advised we might regard it to be,
nevertheless must be accepted as representing a strong persuasive force
at least during the life of the present Farliament.
I shall be consulting my colleagues after my return from
overseas as to the course that should be followed.
CANBERRA, 28th May, 19,67. 



VISIT TO US, CANADA AND UK
SYDNEY DEPARTURE
PRESS CONFERENCE AT MASCOT AIRPORT, SYDNEY 28TH MAY, 1967
PRIME MINISTER gentlemen, I thin k the range of matters we shall be
discussing on this visit must rank amongst the most significant that any
Australian Prime Minister has been called upon to undertake in the course
of an overseas journey. As you know, I shall be seeing President Johnson,
the Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Pearson and the Prime Minister of
Great Britain Mr. Harold Vlilson, in addition to other senior members of
those three Administrations. The subject matters themselves will be
tremendously important.
In the United States, I shall be canvassing with President
Johnson a number of matters of mutual interest to us. In the international
field, Vietnam, of course, will loom largely in our discussions, as will the
British intentions in relation to their military presence East of Suez. There
will be discussions between us, I would hope, on other matters of mutual
interest relating to Britain's entry into the European Economic Community,
but apart from that, there will be talks about matters of interest of Australia
in the trade and economic fields,
In Canada, we have no problems as between Australia and
Canada of any significance, but we do have important mutual interests.
17, e are both senior members of the Commonwealth of Nations, and the
Commonwealth is going through a period of difficult movement in which the
future is not easy to perceive. Both of us, I think, would want to see a
continuing role for the Commonwealth. Both of us have a consciousness that
as our own two countries develop in population and in economic strength
and they are both at this time countries of considerable economic sigrifcance
and strength both of us have significant relations with the United States.
I would want to talk with Mr. Pearson about the future role that our two
countries can play in the kind of world which we see developing around us.
I like to think sometimes of where Australia and Canada will be by the end
of this century. I won't be here, of course, to do much about that, but
our two countries, with a growing population there and a growing population
here, able to make our policies and our influence felt amongst such countries
as the United Kingdom and the United States, can, I think, usefully influence
the course of events in various policies which will emerge internationally.
So these are things that he and I will have an opportunity of canvassing
together in the quite intimate discussions I shall be having with him during
the weekend I shall be spending privately with him, and in my talks with him
and other members of his Cabinet.
Of course, the stimulus for my visit to Canada at this time is
Australia's participation in EXPO-67, and I am looking forward to being there
on the day specially set aside to celebrate Australia's participation in this
important international exposition. But Mr. Pearson and I will have
opportunities together for useful discussion on many matters of mutual
interest. W~ hen I get to the United Kingdom, there will be matters there
which are of critical importance for Australia, and amongst these, the most
significant undoubtedly will be British intentions in relation to their military / 2 
-2
role, not only East of Suez, but the global role which the United Kingdom
sees itself pursuing in the years ahead.
As to their entry into the European Common Market, the trade
aspects of this can, of course, be dealt with more appropriately by my
colleague the Minister for Trade, the Deputy Prime Minister, who is our
specialist on these matters and who has returned recently from overseas and
from his own discussions in Europe and in the United Kingdom. But events
move swiftly ir, this era, and by the time I get there, no doubt there will be
further clarification on British prospects and I shall be able to have direct
talk with the Prime Minister who has set aside the whole of the Tuesday
morning immediately after our arrival on the Monday night in London for his
talks with me, and some later opportunities in that week. There will be
other Ministers with whom I shall be in discussion on matters which also ane
of significance for us the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Minister for
Defence, the Minister for Commonwealth Relations, and the Minister for
Trade. These are just highlights, as they occur to me, of the discussions
I shall be holding. In America, as you will see from the detailed itinerary that has
been circulated to you, I have a number of important speaking engagements
which I am hoping will prove helpful to American and Australian interests
internationally. In the United Kingdom, .1 haven't public speaking commitments
as yet, but there will be there the close and intimate discussions with the
Prime Minister and senior members of his Ckabinet.
Altogether I am hoping that this will prove a visit to each country
of great value for Australia. Certainly it will be informative for me and my
colleagues and I hope that I shall be able to conv~ ey Australian views in a way
which will have some impact on the policies which each of these countries will
be pursuing in the future.
C. On the Referendum, Mr. Holt, could we have your reactions?
PM: Well, first as to the aborigine people, I think we can all as a
nation take satisfaction in the overwhelming support given to the proposal to
remove any trace of discrimination, as it has appeared to many people, in the
Australian Constitution. It will not only be of benefit as I see it to pecple
of the aboriginal race in that it will enable the national government to
co-operate more closely with the Governments of the States in ensuring just
treatment and full acceptance in the Australian community of the aboriginal
people, but I think it will help Australia's image abroad in that so many
Australians have shown their determircation to give full acceptance to people
of the aboriginal race in the Australian community.
As to the nexus proposal, here as I said before the result, a
victory for NO would, in my judgment be a victory for prejudice, for
misrepresentation of what was involved in this, and an expression on the
part of many people of fears not very clearly felt or understood, but leading
them to a judgment that when in doubt they would vote N 0. / 3 
-3
I don't know what it is about New S1outh Wales that has given them
the special merit of giving the Government such good support, but my own
interpretation of it is that in this State there was, both at the political level
and amongst the press, a more temperate and responsible presentation of the
case for the breaking of the nexus and this was re flected in the vote. In some
of the smaller StatE, under standably, there was a fear that their own relative
importance in the national Parliament might be diminished in an enlarged
P arliament or with a Senate held where it is now. But I pointed out at the time,
and others supported me-in this, that representatives from those small States
in the House of Representatives unanimously for the proposal and in the Senate
there was an overwhelming majority, including a maujority of Members from
the smaller States who voted in support of it.
It was, I concede, a disappointing result in that we did not secure
our objective, but that has been the decision of the Australian people. I feel
that as time went on and there became a clearer understanding, support
developed, but we were not able to get the majority we needed.
However, we shall now have to proceed in the knowledge that this
is the judgment which has been expressed on the national scale. I have no doubt
in my own mind that there must be a redistribution in the life of this Parliament.
There are electorates, even in the same city, where one Member has to
represent more than two and a half times the number of electors of a n. other.
I, myself, would not wish to go through another general election without a more
equitable and balanced representation Inside each of the States of the ' Commonwealth.
However, the details of these matters have yet to be discussed between
myself and my colleagues. W~ ork will be done on the implications of this
outcome before I return, and I hope -after my return to be able to talk closely
with them about it.
Tha-nk' you. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 56/ 1967
MINISTERS' MOVEMENTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, announced last
night that during his absence overseas, the Minister for Trade and Industry,
Mr. John McEwen, would act as Prime Minister.
During the absence overseas from 26th May to 1st July
of Mr. Fairhali, Ar. Bury will act as Mnister for Defence. Senator
Anderson will act as Postmaster-General during the absence of Mr. Hulme
from 29th May to 14th July, and Mr. Freeth as Minister for Immigration
during the absence of Mr. Snedden from 29th May to 13th July.
CANBERRA, . cth May, 1967. 



ca* 5 JUN 1967
VISIT TO US, CANADA AND UK L 18R Alt
LOS ANGELES, USA
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT AT LOS ANGELES AIRPORT. 29TH MAY, 1967
PRIME MINISTER: I am on a journey this time to have talks with President Johnson
and with Prime Minister Lester Pearson and Prime Minister Harold Wilson,
and senior members of the administrations of those three countries.
It is always a valuable thing for an Australian Prime Minister to have
discussions with the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom. As for the Prime Minister of Canada, we usually catch
up with each other at Prime Ministers' Conferences.
But the timing of this particular conference is linked up with EXPO 67.
June 6 has been marked as Australian Day at that Exposition and the President,
learning that I am coming for the Exposition, very kindly invited me for talIs
with him. They will be very timely talks as there are several matters of major
consequence we will have to discuss together. We have a very substantial
concern with matters concerning Vietnam, British intentions East of Suez,
the British entry it it is achieved into the European Economic Community,
and there are always, with two countries that trade so freely together, trade
and economic issues which call for some discussion between Heads of
Government and Cabinet Ministers of our two countries. These are a few of
the principal items which I refer to as looming large in our talks together. I
I hope not only to have the opportunity of the talks in Washington but th9
President has very kindly invited me to stay with him for a time and I expect
to do this on my homeward journey. It would not be practicable for me to
do this on my way over to the United Kingdom as I have a series of commitments,
some here in your own city, but in Canada apart from EXPO and Australia's
events there I am looking forward to meeting Prime Minister Pearson. I
think that our two countries, both growing in economic strength and, projecting
your minds forward some years to the time when they will have a considerably
larger population, growing in economic strength and numbers together. And
having in mind our special relationship with the United States and United Kingdom
we'll together be able to play a useful role.
In these days with less emphasis placed on Commonwealth meetings, I
think a closer contact between Canada and Australia is certainly desirable.
The projected entry of the United Kingdom into the European Economic
Community poses some curious trade problems to Australia. The United
Kingdom has a preferential entry into Australia and for our part we have a
preferred entry for much of our primary production and inevitably it seems to
us that some arrangements can be made and that there will be some adverse
effect upon Australia's primary industries and I suspect a weakening of the
United Kingdom's preferred position in our own country.
So we have this to talk about, but overshadowing that in a sense is the
future that Britain has to maintain East of Suez. There is, as is well known,
the British intention to reduce its military establishments East of Suez. How
far this will go and at what pace is a matter that concerns your own country
and certainly concerns ours. I have been assured by Prime Minister Wilson
that no final decisions will be taken on these matters until we have the
opportunity of a talk together. So altogether my journey will involve me in
some of the most important discussions I think that any Australian Prime
Minister could expect to hold. 
While in this country I have a significant number of speaking
engagements and at these I hope to outline in more details Australia's
attitudes in relation to its participation in South-East Asian and Pacific
affairs, and the trade matters which concern this country and the other
countries I have mentioned.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you have been to Vietnam on two occasions and
you have had a first hand look at the battle. What is your assessment of
the situation?
P. M. Well, I made the comment when I first returned that I was entirely
confident that we could not lose the war in Vietnam. I felt at the same time
it could be a long and protracted struggle there, unless the North Vietnamese
could be persuaded to negotiate. We had, as you will know, experience with
other Communist forces in Malaya as it was then known. It was a much less
complex matter, far fewer people were involved, but it dragged on for very
many years. But I have seen what has happened to Malaysia as it now is,
now that Communism has been brought under check and I would certainly
hope that, if we can bring Communism under check and restraint in South
Vietnam, there will be the same economic and political progress there that
we have seen so favourably marked in Malaysia.
Q. There was a growing indication here that people were against the war
and of course there was when President Johnson was down in your country.
What is the general concensus of the Australian people now?
P. M. On the first proposition, I think all sensible people are against war.
It doesn't suit any free democratic or liberty-loving country to be invoilved
in military operations. They are costly in terms o-flife even happiness
they are costly in a material sense and I can assure you that we are just as
fullhearted as any other people in seeing a just and enduring settlement
come out of the Vietnam conflict.
But at the same time, while the stress is there we believe that it must
be resisted. This is not our first contact as I have just instanced of Communist
aggression in South-East Asia. It can manifest itself in other places as well
as in South Vietnam. I have only to mention Thailand as one of the
possibilities and in Laos where I was quite recently I was told of the tens of
thousands of North Vietnamese forces already infiltrated into that country.
So that we feel that the struggle must be continued until there is a satisfactory
outcome a just and enduring settlement. So far as my own people are
concerned I think that I can illustrate it best to you this way. The last general
election was foi, ght on Australia's participation in Vietnam and the involvement
there for the fir'st time in Australia's history of men brou, ht in on a draft
basis. The fact that we secured an all time majority in that election aigainst
the strong opposition of the Australian Labor Party indicates the Australian
attitude of mind. It is interesting to note that since th. en the spokesmen for
the Labor Party have modified their outlook quite considerably. The Deputy
Leader of the Party, Mr. Barnard, who has been touring South-East Asia
and has been on a visit to Vietnam in recent days was quoted before I left
Australia as having said that they would have to have a fresh look at their
policy, that he was not convinced that it was not a civil war or merely a
guerilla war, but there was evidence of the infiltration of Communist forces
from the north. This modification, in fact this drastic alteration of attitude
on the part of the Deputy Leader of the Labor Party following views expressed
by Mr. Whitlam, Leader of the Party, the watering down of the attitude
disclosed at the election time, I think will bring a greater unity amongst the
Australian people on this issue. Certainly the determination of my own
Party and of the Country Party which forms the coalition which I lead is quite
firm. We have had only one dissenter from the policy, one Senator who has 
since become an independent, but I think that we have only had one out of
a record number of Members of the House of Representatives and a large
body of Senators from both those Parties indicates the unanimity of the
feeling on the Government's side on this particular issue.
Q. Do you consider President Johnson has done everything postible to
negotiate with the North Vietnamese?
P. M. I am sure he is sincere in his desire to produce an early negotiation.
Indeed, I think he has gone a very long way in regard to the important
objective he mL~ st hope to secure out of any negotiation on behalf of the
proposals which have been put on behalf of the United States administration.
I have seen a good deal of him as you are aware during the past twelve
months, possibly more in point of fact than the head of any other government.
The circumstances which brought me here twice last year, his visit to
Australia, our participation together in the Manila Conference, gave me
many opportunities of seeing him and talking closely to him, and we keep
in close touch by correspondence. I believe he is genuinely concerned to
bring about a peaceful settlement as soon as that can be arranged with
decency and honor and justice.
Q. Your country has a considerable military combat force in Vietnam. As
a military participant in that conflict do you, Sir, see any hopeful sign for
a settlement?
P. M. You can't claim to see a hopeful sign from anything that emerges from
Hanoi, but I am quite certain on the evidence and I had a briefing yesterday
which ran over the best part of two hours with Admiral Sharp of the US Navy
and officers in Honolulu on the situation there that it is evident that the
Hanoi administration and the people are taking terrific punishment. Now what
are they hoping to achieve? They can't win this war and they delude themselves
if they think they can. Surely there is enough realism for them to accept
that they can't win this war and that they face a continuing destruction of
their industrial assets, means of transportation and other things that go to
make a vibrant economy. They can't look at the present troubled state of
China with any confidence of a continuance of the present strength of
support from that source. I have had enough dealings myself internationally
and domestically with the Communist mentality to sustain a hope that even
when you . seem to be up against a brick wall in negotiations with them, once
they have decided that the game isn't worth the candle they can, without
regard to consistency, logic or anything that they have said before, stand
around and decide that the time has come to make a deal.
Q. What is your present commitment in. South Vietnam and is your
Government considering increasing that commitment?
P. M. I am not proposin-; to comment, but the size of the commitment is known.
The commitment in a national sense, of course, is clear. In the military
sense it is affected by our obligations in other directions and at the moment
it is not clear to us just what the British intention is East of Suez. But
Australia does not really need prodding by the United States or for that
matter by any other country to what it should contribute, having regard to
its resources. It is perhaps useful to remind an earlier generation of
Americans that my country lost more men killed in the first world war than
the United States did and we didn't require any prompting about that. ' We have
as I mentioned undertaken a major political issue in bringing in for the first
time a selective draft of Australian young men to fight away from our own
shores. WAe fought an election on it and put our political existence at stake. 
4.
Now at the present time not only do we have our political situation there
to consider, we have certain obligations in relation to the Malaysian-Singapore
area. We have recently been involved in meeting Indonesian confrontation,
we have defence obligations as we see them to Papua and New Guinea. Vie have
more than doubled our defence expenditure over the last four years. It may
interest some of you to know that as a percentage of our gross national product
Australia contributes more to defence than any Western country other than the
United States and the United Kingdom. And remember that although we are
geographically the size of the metropolitan United States, we are a small
country of 11-t million people against your 190 odd million people.
Q. Do I take it you are not contemplating any increase in your commidtment?
P. M. We have no present intention of increasing the Vietnam commitment, but
may I just add this. It is not perhaps generally known that Australia is the
only country assisting the United States which has representation from the
three armed services, the Army, Navy and the Air Force. We are also
contributing in civil aid and that we do this entirely at our own expense. The
Koreans have a much larger numerical strength, but as I understand the
position they are largely financed by the United States of America. We don't
receive a dollar of aid for the defence contribution we make.
Q. What will be the effect on Australia's defence if the British pull out of
East of Suez?
P. m. I am not going to deal with that hypothetical question. I am goi1' Ig to see
Prime M'Vinister Wilson and see if I can get a clearer view of his intentions
there. He has assured me that there will be no final decisions until we have
had some talks.
Q. How does the present crisis in the Middle E~ ast affect Australia's security?
There is a speculation that the Russians are using this crisis as a lever to
get the Uni-ted States out of Vietnam.
P. M. Well, on the first point; Australia, as its record in two world wars has
demonstrated, and as our participation in Vietnam dem~ onstrates remember
Australia was the first country to join you in Korea, and one of the few
countries to join you in Vietnam finds itself concerned wherever the peace
of the world is threatened, and we are naturally concerned with anything
which is likely to threaten the peace of the world such as the events occurring
in the Middle E~ ast. But Australia is not a significant factor in that situation
in the sense that we believe ourselves to be not without some significance in
respect of South Vietnam.
As to the Russians using this as a lever to reduce the American effort in
South Vietnam, well I can only express a personal view on that. I think that
is a rather far-fetched view. I don't even think the Russiars want trouble in
the Middle East any more than the United States or Great Britain want trouble
in the Middle East. I see this as a product of Middle East politics and in
particular the aspirations, the ambitions, the objective of Nasser and the
chronic ill-feeling that exists between Egypt and other Arabic countries and
Israel. Thank you gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister. 



S8JUN1~ 96
FOR PRESS: * 410
k/ BRAR,
AUSTRAIANPJ CONSULTANTS WIN U. N. CONTRACT
( Statement by Mr. J. McEwen-, Acting Prime Minister and Minister
for Trade and Industry)
An Australian firm had been awarded a large United Nations contract
to act as consultants during preparation of a 5A4.6 million
master-plan for intensive urban and industrial development of
Singapore, Mr. J. McEwen, Acting Prime Minister and Minister for
Trade and Industry, announced today.
The firm, Crooks, Michell, Peacock and Stewart of Chatswood, N. S. W.,
was believed to be the first Australian group to win a contract
of this magnitude and of this type.
Mr. McEwen said the contract, awarded in the face of strong overseas
competition, particularly from Euarope and North America, highlighted
the standing of Australian professional consultants. It underlined
the significance of the Government sponsored Mission which
recently surveyed prospects for Australian professional consultants
in South East Asia and the Middle East.
The number of Australian firms registered for consultancy work
with the United Nations and the World Bank had increased rapidly
over the last two years and numbered 32 at present. It was
hoped confidently that more contracts for work in South East
Asia would be won by Australian consultants.
Mr. MoEwen said the work associated with the first contract
would complement Australia's continuing drive to become one of
the major suppliers of goods and services to South East Asia.
Crooks, Michell, Peacock and Stewart would collect and analyse
data relevant to all aspects of planning, develep Singapore's
planning departments and train personnel to take over comprehensive
city planning and conduct extensive surveys. Such surveys would
;. over community environments, activities, goals, values and
economic -problems. Traffic and transport studies to enable 
-2-
effective future development would also be undertaken.
The firm would be associated in its work by up to four
universities, " The University of New South Wales would provide a
traffic consultant, Professor R. Blunden, also research
facilities at the N. S. W. Institute of Traffic and
Highway Research.
The University of Sydney would provide two consultants
and an urban geographer from its Department of Town
and Country Planning.
" Macquarie and Queensland Universities would provide
assistance where required.
Mr. McEwen said most overseas consultants received active support
from their Governments in efforts to participate in such
projects and the Department of Trade and Industry was prepared
also to assist firms interested in such export activity.
Canberra, A. C. T.
May, 1967 39/ 67T 



FOR PRESS EMBARGO: Not for publication
or broadcast before
9 31st May, 1967
TIEXT OF SPEECH BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER AND 1 3 JUN 1967
MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY, ' S
MR. JOHN~ McEVTEN, SA
AT THE EXPORT DEVELOPIOTIET COUNCIL DINNEKR,
HOTEL CANBERRA, 31ST MfAY, 1967
I recall when E. D. C. was established in 1958 to advise
the Government on the expansion of our expnrt trade. The thought
in my mind, which had the support s~ f the Gcvernment, was to invite
a number of highly experienced, highly respected and highly
competent people from the commercial world to join with a few
similarly experienced officials of the Gove rnm ent Service.
It is fortunate for the country that those who were
invited to join what became known as the Export Development Council
readily accepted the call to serve the country and establish this
Council under the Chairmanship of the late Sir John Allison.
Now, nine years later, no one would query a claim that
it has been a most valuable adjunct both to government and to
business. The Council has been fortunate in its Chairmen. First,
Sir John, then the late Sir Alfred Armstrong, and now Dave McGrath.
As exports expand, benefits should flow to those who
invest in, and to those who work in, the export industries. This
is essential. However, on the establishment of this Council, the
basic motive in my mind was more profound than that.
The majf'r cbjective was to generate for the nation aexcha~ nge
bigger earning of foreign exchange. Adequate resources of foreign/
are an essential to national growth.
With my official advisers and my Cabinet colleagues, I
join in working for the fast growth of this country, a growth
built upon sound foundations. I see growth sound growth
providing a widening level of prosperity, an assurance ' qf job
availability, and with these the basis upon which a great and
continuing migration programme can be confidently embarked upon.
Earnings from export represent the most natural generation of
holdings of foreign currency. Without sufficient foreign exchange,
no great plans for national growth could be carried through. 
It was as a Council concerning itself with the earning of
more foreign exchange through export that the Council was seen as
essential to the grand plan of fast, sound, national growth. It has
a long record of devoted service and a long record of successful
achievement. While the political government of the country can, and
should, plan for growth, both the industrial growth itself and the
earning of foreign exchange through export is predominantly in the
field of private enterprise, not of government. So what we sought
to create was a sense of partnership, the reality of partnership
between the Government and its senior officials and those in private
enterprise who have brought their wealth of experience and knowledge
and imagination into the partnership.
To bring big business so closely into association with the
admiinistrative side of government, both at the political and at the
official level, is the perfect setting to facilitate log-rolling by
vested interests. From the outset we all understood that the Export
Development Council was never tn be a facility for the promotion of
private interests, individually or collectively, through contact with
the Government. There are many things in connection with this Council of
which we may all feel proad. High on the list of these things I
would put the fact that there has never been an instance of the
Council, its committees, or its individual members ever attempting
to influence the Government at any level for purposes of individual
profit. In view of the close association of so many people with
government at high level and with those in government whose policy
and administrative acts bear upon the profitability of business,
this is something of which you can be proud.
Impartiality has been the keynote of E. D. C's. advice.
This is quite a record. I am sure it will be sustained.
We have big dreams of growth. To make these dreams come
true, we have big practical requirements.
I remember saying when addressing an Export Convention
in 1960 that those competent to make the calculation had satisfied
me that Australia needed to lift its earnings through export to a
higher level of œ 250 million a year within the next five years. To
all who heard me quote this figure, or at least most who heard me,
the figure sounded dramatically high, but to many it sounded
ridiculously high. But, having estimated our need, government and
private enterprise went to work to step up our income. The end
result was that at the end of five years our export earnings had 
increased by an annual rate, not of œ 250 million a year, but a rate
of œ 500 million a year.
You would not wish me to say that all of this is
attributable to the work of the Exprt Development Council. Of
course it isn't. But the Council has a long record of identifying
the things that should be done, could be done, by government or by
business to improve our export record.
The Government has now for many years regularly invited
those whom you choose from amongst yur members to come to the
Cabinet room and give the Government ynur advice twice a year.
Policies that the Council has proposed have been adopted by the
Government and have to a large extent produced the results in
business which were forecast.
This leads me to say " Thank you"; and leads mc. furthr
to. say YOUR WORK IS NOT DONE.
Australia's need + o increase its foreign exchange arning....
is as great to--day as it has ever been. What you have donc is tn
prove that a group such as those who -ompose this Council can make
a very valuable contribution to the sound growth of the nation.
This, I believe, must produce a very satisfying feeling in all whn
have. served on E. D. C.
Dramati c things are happening these days in Australia in
the mineral fields,. Expansion of lead and zinc production, a moder".
industrial nation now self-aufficiont in copper and with a surplus
for export. The formerly depressed coal industry transformed into a
bright setting. New production of tin and the revelation of our
immense resources of bauxite, of iron ore, of natural gas, and now
of nickel; a new confidence in oil! These are splendid discoveries
and splendid developments.
Australians P. we a Lot to all cf those who have contributed.
There are those who believe that our problem of earning
sufficient foreign exchange need no longer bp a worry, that the
metals will solve it,, True, minerals will become much more imprrtant
foreign exchange earners. E. D. C's. estimate of Australia's oxpnrt
needs of $ 5,000 million by the mid-1970' s means an increase of
about $ 2,300 million over our current level f exports. Minerals
will fill only a part of this gap.
However, let me put this issue of foreign exchange earnings
in its proper perspective. Foreign exchange is a form of money. We
will not be a great ationL through merely being a rich nation. 
Our objective, if you rmnember, was fast, sound, national
growth. That is, millions more people, millions more jobs, hundreds
of thousands more factories and farms. The objective of earning
foreign exchange was not an end in itself. It was a means towards
making possible that kind of national growth.
As I see it, while the minerals are exported as such, or
upgraded into metals, we will undoubtedly earn much exchange, but
that alone will not create jobs by the hundreds of thousands or
great industry. The kind of industries that you have been concerning
yourselves with to a large extent, the farm industries, the manufacturing
industries, will continue to provide the greatest basis for
wealth production. Alcng with the tertiary industries, they will
alsn prmvide the basis for job creation.
Let us salute the -owth of the minerals industries, but
not take this devel] npment as grounds for sitting back.
I have spoken on othor -' ccasirns our option to choose
the comfort of stagnation. For my part, and I am sure for ynur part,
we would all prefer to sufi the discomfort of growing pains, so
that we may leave a nation greater and stronger than wher' we found
it. I give you the Toast
" THE SPIRIT OF SERVICE TO THE NATION"
-o0o-



88J UN 196
VISIT TO U&amp; S, CANADA AND UK. L IBR W
LOS ANGELES, USA
EXTRACT FROM ' PEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT TO THE LOS ANGELES WTORLD
AFFAIRS COUNCIL 31ST MAY, 1967
Bombing of North Viet Nam
The American and Australian positions are the same. In February, 1966
1 stated ( soon after the end of the thirty-seven day bombing pause)
" It has consistently been the view of the Australian Government
that North Vietnam must not be permitted to remain a haven
immune from military risk, from which military aggresssion
against the south can be mounted with impunity.
The case for controlled bombing is strong, and it has been conducted
with great care and precision. Reasons are
* It upsets the flow of men and materials to the fighting zones and
damages the transport systems through which that flow goes forward.
* It helps destroy the enemy's base areas, thereby weakening his
capacity to fight and so saving the lives of allied fighting men.
* It ties up hundreds of thousands of North Vietnamese workforce
in repair and reconstruction.
* It demonstrates to the fighting forces of South Vietnam that
America and her allies are giving them full support.
* It demonstrates to the people of South Vietnam as a whole that
we do not expect them to suffer and fight the aggressor only
where he chooses to fight.
* It has the political and psychological effect of reminding the
North Vietnamese that they cannot hope to win the war.
There are critics of these operations in your country and in mine.
Bombing is regarded as a horrible act of war that, in the name of humanity,
should be avoided at all costs. It is said to be militarily unnecessary and
without advantage. It is said that it is politically foolish, serving only to
strengthen determination in the North to continue the conflict and at the same
time making it difficult for the North to enter into negotiations for a peaceful
settlement. Sicce~ it is said, the North Vietnamese Government will not
negotiate under duress, it is feared that bombing might lead to the war spreading,
For example by provoking China, the neighbour and supporter of North Vietnam.
The United States Government has not accepted these arguments, nor
has the Australian Government. We have supported the bombing operations.
This is not to iay that we ignore the humanitarian aspects and are blind
to the political implications. But those involved in the stern endeavour to stop
Communist aggression from the North against the Republic of Vietnam, must
face the realities of the situation. In a violent conflict of this nature, when 2/ 
2.
force has to be resisted by force, these realities are harsh. The Communists
from the North have, for many years, sought to overthrow the Government of
the Republic of Vietnam by defeating its armies and by destroying all prospect
of orderly, constructive government.
You know their record of brutal terrorism among the village population
and of the endless guerilla attack. Not a day passes in which the Communists
do not bomb villages and towns in Couth Vietnam by mortar attack. These
mortars all come from the North. They have also organised in an increasing
degree conventional, full-scale military operations. All these things could
never have continued if supplies of equipment, arms and munitions and
reinforcements of trained men had not continually come from tne North. It
is the Communist Government in Hanoi, in the North, that is directing and
organising this unrelenting attack in the South.
It is the Communist Government in the North receiving supplies from'
Communist Russia and Communist China that is giving the support of this
material to Communist-led forces in the South.
In our view, in Australia, if this aggression is to be stopped, the source
of it cannot be immune from attack. We are dealing with a military situation.
Major military measures are being taken against those resisting this aggression
that can only be combatted by military measures. Is the opponent to be allowed
to organise and despatch his manpower and supplies unmolested. Are these
only to be dealt with when they finally arrive in the battlefields of the South,
intact and in good trim? This does not make sense. It can only prolong the
conflict. It exposes the soldiers in the allied armies, among them your men, who
are making the major contribution, to greater dangers. In the Australian view,
attacks in the North on the camps and depots of the aggressor, on his armmaking
capacity, on his roads and bridges, his railways and sea lanes cannot
be avoided if the aggressor's capacity in the South is to be reduced and the
conflict is to be brought to an end. To refrain fromthese measures is to aid
the aggressor in his attacks and to encourage him in the hope of victory.
Of course such a policy involves risks. It involves risks of escalation,
of involving the innocent civilian population, of narrowing the prospect of
peaceful settlement. But how much greater would these risks be if the necessary
military measures were taken in some other way than by bombing from the air.
It is not our view that a wholesale military attack should be launched against
the North, engulfing the entire country in the full horror of war. Surely
controlled bombing, limited to military targets, is the best way of sparing'
the population and avoiding wider risks.
We believe that the effective use of United States power must profoundly
affect the attitude of the rulers in North Vietnam. They must come to see that
they can have no prospect of success. We also believe that the restraint
exercised by the United States in the use of its massive power, while fulfilling
necessary military requirements, would have a beneficial influence in China for
the cause of peaceful co-existence. China is not threatened. Nor is China's
neighbour, North Vietnam. But week by week the cost and futility of aggression
are clearly demonstrated.
Suspension of Bombing
It is in the context of these considerations that we must judge the question
of suspending the bombing, a demand repeatedly raised especially among those
who overlook the basic military aspects of the situation. It would be foolish to 
4 3.
say that bombing should never be relaxed or suspended. Military
requirements alone will fromn time to time make a different tempo and
scale of operations desirable. -/ hat wve do know beyond argument is that
whenever there has been a suspension of military activity the other side
has taken full advantage of this to build up supplies of men and material
as rapidly as possible. But the political aspect can never be neglected.
Should the Communists be prepared in good faith to enter into negotiations,
there is a substantial case for suspension of bombing. In this case, the
Communists themselves must be assumed to be demonstrating their good
faith by a suspension, or at least a major relaxation of their own attacks.
But there are no signs that the Communists are interested in negotiation,
and in these circumstances military operations, including bombing, must
continue. lii ® ® 4ilie* 



VISIT TO C. 1' DA XiD UTT' . K
LOS YIEL3S, U. S. A.
ADDfLS BY THE PRIME 7 ITiER, P õ R. HRPfOLD HOLT
TO THiE L03 . f TLELO 1TRLD AFFI2R CTJUICIL 51ST MAY, 1967.
It is a very great personal pleasure for Mrs. Holt and
myself to be here in Los Angeles. I don't supnose there is an
area of the United States where we have more close personal
friends than we do in this city and my problem usually is to
find some giod official reason for coming here and renewing my
acquaintance with them. Thank you for providing at least one
occasion which is a notable one even in the eyes of my own
compatriots, ecause the 7orld Atfairs Council has a prestie
which has reached out well eyond the shor s of your own country,
and I regard it as an honour to have the opportunity of talking
to this repr sentative and very distinguished gathering of citizens
from the * est Coast of the United States of America.
It is perharns not inannropriate that I meet you on the
day following your celebration bf 1, emorial Day. e have in
Australia a somewhat similar comnmemoration on what le call our
Anzac Day that is the day which really marks the emergence
of nationiood for my country when in 1 15, April 25, tie Australian
and Nev Zealand forces landed on the shores of lallipoli and there
forged, in their comradeship together, the word Anzac which has
come to mean so much emotionally to us over the years, and each
year, or the anniversary of that day, we hold what is the most
solemn non-religious ouservance on any day of the ye'ar in our
country, and so I can well appnreciate the feelings which have been
passing through the minds of aillions of citizens of this great
epuolic as you have commemorated American p'articioation in struggles
for freedom down through the years of your history and at a time
when so many of your young manood is involved in the conflict in
Vietnam and in pre. erving the peace in other parts of the world.
I have always an interest and almost a fascination in
this city of Los Angeles and, indeed, of California -enerally
because in the ministerial career to which Mr. iHodgkiss has so
kindly made mention, I was for seven years Iinister of Immigration
in my own country and we haive, as you probaoly know, a vast land
mass approximately t; he same dimension as the United itates of
America if you will allow me to exclude ' laska and Hawaii. But of
metropolitan United State3 we have approximately the same dimension,
but we haven't more than 190 000,000 people we are just pushing
up to 12,0Q, OO000 people, Yet there was a time not so very lonT
ago before . orld * r II when the population of Californiat and The
population of Australia was the same we both had 7,000,000 people
and I used to be told, as Minister of Immigrition, that you coul't
increase the population effectively by more than aoout 2Y/ o per
annum that the load on resources and the proulems, social and
others created would make this impracticable for you.
As I looked across the Pacific to what going on in
this State of Cqlifornia I could see a very much more rapid _ rowth
rate occurrin, there and of course, you have fir outstrippe us.
You are now, understan approaching your 20th million in this / 2 
-2-
country, while we are still moving towards our 12th, having
started tolether at 7 not so very long ago. But you won't mind
my saying That it is a rather different pro7osition to build
population when you have to draw on so many other nationalities,
and there are today fourteen nationalities substantially
represented in the Australian community most of whom have come
to us in the post-war years. When you do not have, as you are so
fortunate to have in this countr, the vast resources of capital
on which to draw in order to ouil the community, and fortunately
for California, fortunately for the United States and, I oelieve,
fortunately for the free world, California has been able to take
advantage of the movement of people from other ] arts of America
and the resources of capital which you have here, the more ready
assimilability of your fellow countrymen into the California
environment. But having said that and acknowledied it with appreciation
and deep gratification, I wouldn't want you to think that, because
we are a people of less than 12 millions striving as best we can
to increase by assisted migration from so many countries that we
are not a significant country in the scheme oi thin's and certainly
that we lack significance in an area of the world which is becoming
increasingly vital for you. Let me just give you a few facts to
support what I am putting to you.
In the first place, we rank amongst the first twelve
trading nations in the world. India is regarded very properly as
a very considerable country, it has 42 times our population, but
it has only twice the value of our gross national product.
Indonesia is re arded as a very considerable country in our area
of the world. It has a populition of more than 100 millions, more
than nine times the population of Australia. It has only one-third
of the value of gross national production of my country.
Je have a very special relationship with the United States
and with the United Kingdom which makes us a good friend and ally
and a helpful friend in particular situations. You mentioned, &gt; x.
Hodkiss, the fact that I had recently been to four countries in
South-East Asia. One of these, Cambodia is a country which does
not enjoy diplomatic relations with the United 3tates. Those
relations were severed as you will know some time ago. But
Australia represents the United States' interests in Cambodia and
Australia represents C. mbodian interests in South Vietnam. So we
are able, in our own way, to serve a useful and helpful purpose
in preserving good relationships and in assisting the transactions
which necessarily must occur between one country and another.
I think I can fairly claim that there can be very few,
if any, Heads of Government that can be found around the world
today who would have been accepted in all of the four countries
which I have just visited. Some could have gone to one or two or
three of them but very few people who would, on the known policies
of those countries, and Cambodia would probbolv be the most difficult
of access, have been accepted in all four. Indeed there is a ban on
Western journalists in Cambodia but a plane load of pressmen
accompanied me on my journey an this ban was waived for that particular
visit. So Australia, not possessing any taint in the eyes of the
countries of . sia of having a colonial power nast, is accepted as a
friendly country. They know that we have hid to strugrle with the
problem of developing a vast continent, not all of it favoirable
in either its climate nor its terrain, but which has lent itself to
rich development thanks to the energy and courage of a pioneering
people. They have watched this and they welcome the guidance we
can jring to them. While it is fashionable in some intellectual
quarters to talk about the desirability of getting, to put it in / 3 
-3-
the crude terms they express, white faces off tue mainland of
Asia, all our experience and all the trends, or cattiinly
the more significant trends of contemporary history, are moving
in the other direction. -e are finding a desire t0 co-operate,
a desire to team together for mutually helpful purposes. I
have only to mention such recent institutions as ASPAC, the
Asian Development Bank, the sort of collaboration which occurs
in SEATO, the teamwork which was represented at the Summit
Conference at Manila as instances of the kind of thing I mean.
You have mentioned Mr. Chairman, that I shall be visiting the
United Kingdom to discuss British intentions regarding their
troop dispositions East of Suez, and I can assure you that,
knowing fully the mind of the Governments of Malaysia and
Singapore, they welcome our presence and the British military
presence on their territory as a factor contriouting to stability,
moderation and security in that area of the world. So you will gather
from these facts that this small country, measured in terms of
people but rich in potentil, with considerable agricultural
production ranking us amongst one of the great exporters of the
world, with fabulous mineral resources, the new discoveries of
which we are finding l. imost week by week with the kind of
influence we can exert through our friendship with your own
country, with ! reat Britain and the countries of the Commonwealth,
and the friendships we have develoned in Asia, Australia is able
to play a role which is not without significance for free people
and for the causes of freedom thro uhout the world today. .' e
haven't asked others to do the job for us.
It is true that we are linked with the United States in
the AIZUS Pact under which the United States, Australia and New
Zealand have agreed to come to the aid of each other in event of
aggression against one or the other, but we don't feel any sense
of eith: r condescension or inferiority in this because we have
played our own part in two . orld 7ars. It may interest some of
you of the younger generation who have perhaps not oeen made aware
of the fact, that Australia actually lost more man killed in the
First World Wir than did the United States. We were the first
alongside you in the struggle in Korea and we have been early with
you in the struggle in Vietnam, and there we are a great land
mass lying on your Pacific flank.
, e know that it would be against the security interests of
the United States ever to have Australia in unfriendly hands. For
our part, we are determined to do what we can to ensure that this
will not happen. Again it may interest you to know that not only
do we withhold from consumption for our own needs a higher percentage
of our gross national Product than any other country, with the
exception of Japan, an we need to do this for purposes of defence.
7e need to do it for the needs of our growing population.
You in California have had a very rapid rate of growth
and, I am sure, those who are in official positions here and have
to cope with the problems of rrowth know just what those stresses
can mean to a country, but taking the United States as a whole,
the annual growth rate in terms of population is not all that
fret. It is higher than in the United Kingdom. It is considerably
lower than it is in my own country and if you had to cope with t. 0
rate of population growth comparable with thit in Australia you
would find it necessary to construct an additional 500,000 homes
for your growing population with the schools the hospitals, the
trmsport ition systems, all the other capital facilities that a
growing population requires.
So we have on the one hand these pre.: sures on our resources / 4
r 
-4-
in order that we may grow is nation, we hive the obligation
which we cheerfully accepted to make a reasonaole contribution to the
joint defence efforts in the area and our proportion of gross
national product going into defence is greater than that of any
of the Western countries, with the exception of your own country and
of the United Kingdom. Je have not overlooked the obligations
we have in the field of civil aid outside our country, and again
it may interest you to oe told, seeing that we give our aid without
any strin s attached, no loans, all in the form of rrants or
technical assistance that per head of population, the civil
aid flowiny from Australia ranks third amongst the countries
of the world and is even higher than that pei head of the United
States or of the United Kingdom.
Now, let me say something about Vietnam in particular.
You mentioned the Middle East, Chairman. I don t claim to
be any considerable authority on that area of the world and
indeed, fr-nkly although I know it is occupying a reat deal
of attention and exercising a considerable amount of concern at
the present time, I don't myself see it developing as seriously
as some of the pundits would suggest. I don't oelieve for a
moment that any of the major powers want a Third iorld ' r and
it is my own celief, ner aps an optimistic one but it is a
jud-ment, that this flurry in the Middle East will settle down
in the course of time the ill-feeling uetween the Ara. ic
countries and Israel has been chronic ever since Israel has
struggled to establish a nation here under most difficult
circumstances and, for my part, I don't see it as becoming a
matter of glocal concern in the sense of global involvement,
but we have never from the word " go" been under nmy illusion or
delusion as to the . oriousness of the issue in Vietnam. Just
as we were the first to declare ourselves alongside you in Korea
when we saw this as a purposeful communist attempt to establish
domination over that area'of the world, and felt that if this
were allowed to go unchecked so this process would continue
down through the rest of South-East Asia and, indeed reach out
to other ' arts of Asia is well, so we hive seen the Vietnam
conflict in much the same terms from the outset.
This has been a much more complex and difficult business
than that which we faced with aritish and other Commonwealth forces
in what was then known as Mnalya, out there you had the challene
of communist guerrilla activity seeking to sauotage destroy and
subvert the community there, with a view to having finally communist
domination in that area of the world and it took us many long
years in a situation which ' as not nearly as complex as that we
Tace in Vietnam, where the numbers were very much smaller, but
we finally succeeded.
' hen I was over here last year I did make considerable
reference to the gains which had alrea y been achieved as a result
of the American contribution in South-East Asia and, in particular,
in Vietnam.
( Remainder of the transcript incomplete in parts).
There was a good deal of talk about a domino theory.....
argued the premise that, thanks to the American intervention and
the strength of American participation, we were seeing the domino
theory operate in reverse. ' e were seeing countries that were
formerly being threatened re-establish themselves social, economic
and political conditions, and we saw this in such countries as
Korea and Taiwan.
In the course of my own most recent journey I have had
an opportunity of seeing some of the. e things at first hand myself.
I have seen the improvement which has occurred in Malaysia since
we have overcome the communist threat there, and what h. s ooen 
happening in Thailand. Thailand, with suostantial American
assistance has set out to ouild up its strength aginst the
communist threat in that country and I would only wish that
the press which gives this episoaic treatment day by day of
what is going on in Vietnam, would occasionally point to the
substantial achievements which have resulted from your participation
in the struggle there the strength thit you have given to other
countries the rebuilding and the strenpthening which has gone on
as a result of your participation and then, indeed, of the
importance of the conflict there than is readily apprehended
by some meubers of our r.: spective communities,
I want to say something in very particular terms aoout
one aspect of the Vietnam operation, because I have noticed with
some concern that the bombing policy which has been carried out
very thoroughly by the United States has come under question
in various quarters. It has oven put, on the one hind, that if
we were only to cease the bomoing the negotiations for peace
would commence. Jell I know that your President wants peace
and he hasn't spared himself in the search for peace.
I can assure you that my own country is hankering for
peace. . e have a vast country to develop. Quite apart from the
loss to Australian life and l0b, the damige that is done, we
can ill spare the resources that go into the military operations
there and if a just and enduring peace could je secured by
nevotiation we will support every endeivour to secure this result,
but I have followed this as closely as any human being can. The
messages we hive received from all the sources where these
attempts have been made there hAve jeen well-meaning efforts on
the part of the Secret-ry-jeneral of the United Nations, there
have been well-meaning efforts on the parts of a numer of
countries including Canada and Italy. But there is no substantial
reason of which I am aware to believe that Hanoi is prepared to
enter into negotiations and to use the pretext that this would
happen if only the bombing would cease is runnin against all
the evidence that comes to us. Every time there as oeen a
lull in the bombin, this has been seized on with alacrity in
order to build up the supplies and strength of the other side
to the damage and to the detriment of our own cause. Now on
this the American and the Australian positions are, I believe,
identical. WSEGTIO3S liD ARS. ERS
Q. Do you think an embargo would De effective ag. inst North Vietnam?
Mr. Holt I think in suostance as far as we are concerned, there
is a trade embargo. There are other countries, of course, supplying
goods but that would involve a major decision as to either the
attack on the shipping in Hai Pong or the mining of Hai Pong. I
know this is a m~ tter which is exercising the minds of your own
administration a good deal. I prefer, since the decision does not
lie in my hands, but virtually in the hands of your own administration,
not to express a view which might be an embarrassment to them but
they have to allow th't in taking this action they might involve
to a very much greater degree, not only China but Russia, who is,
of course one of the principal suppliers of North Vietnam. Je have
made it clear that it is not our purpose to destroy Vietnam nor to
subjugate their country, but we do intend to press on with action
which will prevent the aggression and infiltration proceeding from
North Vietnam.
7ould you care to make a forecast on how you think the war will
end? Y'hat are the various steps involved?
P. M. I wish I knew how the conflict would end. It would, I hope
proceed from a will to negotiate and, apart from oeing an optimist
by temperament, I don't put that beyond the ran; e of possibility / 6 
-6-
in the not-too-remote future. I have had some contact nd
experience with the communist mentality. je hive seen this in
the 3erlin airlift, in the Cuoan crisis, in many examples in
contemporry history both in the internal field and certainly
in some of the domestic issues which have arisen inside countries
such as my own, where there has some of our
industrial organisations, and you have found . hat where there
seemsto be a complete impasse a brick wall created between you
and the opposing side, that it some point they make up their
own mind that the -ame is just not worth will
decide themselves The time to call it a day and I believe that
particularly over recent weeks when the gooA weather his
persisted in North Vietnam, must make the leaders ponder and
ask themselves where are we going to pet to if we persist
with this? They can't win the war on tie ground. They can
only go ahead taking punishment indefinitely. They might look
to the time when as in Malaya as the thing was, they could
carry on guerrilla operations, but the country as a whole would
be able to carry on is : alaya carried on despite this, and with
the punishment which is being inflicted industrially on the
country and prospects for future economic progress, apart from
the dama e which might be inflicted on the forces engaged in
the field and so on, I feel that the time must come when the
say this is when we negotiate. Now, for us and for you and
you in narticular because you have the large share of the burden
on this matter, it is not merely a matter of negotiation in order
to stop the agression, the fihting. There must be a settlement
which will stick. There must oe a just and enduring settlement
which will enable the people of South Vietnam to decide their
own destiny in their own way, and it is not to be peace at any
price much as we all lon Tor peace, jut when that time comes,
we will all Oe better equi-ped to know just how we should conduct
our negotiations.
0 .' ould you co; iment on the position of Ho Chi Min in his own
country? Is he a -eorge hington or a Benedict Arnold?
P. M. I think that that largely depends whether you are a communist
supporter or a supporter of a different system of government.
There is no doubt that he has enjoyed a strong support from those
who have been politic'lly inclined md accent the communist and
socialist way of life. In North Vietnam, as indeed in South Vietnam
and through much of South-East Asia, the greater part of the
population live off the land and do not look very far oeyond their
own particular area of cultivation and they have been accustomed
through the centuries to having one particular " ar Lord or one
dominant regime, usually extoring from them what can be extracted
and so there isn't the same individual and national conscience
thit we experience in c untries such as our own which have a
democratic libertarian tradition but I have seen the evidence
of an opposition building up to the Ho Chi Min regime. The
intelligence that we get out of North Vietnam is not very
considerable, but I would think that he still does exercise a
very considerable influence over his own administration and
over his country. It would be difficult to appreciate the effort
put into reconstruction after the damage that has occurred there
if this were not so. He is now of course, a very old man in terms
of normal public life. It may be that his successor will be no less
determined to push on the sort of policies that he has pursued.
I think it is fair to say that although there is a reat deal of
Chinese communist influence in North Vietnam the NIorth Vietnamese
don't want the Chinese there any more than the South Vietnamese . ant
the Chinese in South Vietnam, and if a negotiation could be conducted,
I think that a line of division and a course could oe established
whether it involves a movement as it did previously with people from
one area to another, in order thit those who wanted to live one
kind of life could go to a country offering that others who / 7 
-7-
v-inted the sort of life -:.-hich we hom ill develop in South
Vietrnm c iuld move there, but I don t think any o us ca-n
cla-im to be a-uthorities is to the thinking, or the state of public
opinion in 1' jth Vie tnaim at this time. 



VISIT TO US, CANADA AND UK
WASHINGTON, USA
EXCHANGE OF TOASTS BETVWEEN PRESIDENT J OHNSON AND
PRIME MINISTER HAROLD HOLT OF AUSTRALIA IN THE STATE
DININGROOM OF THE VHITE HOUSE 1ST JUNE, 1967
PRI SIDENT JOHNSON Prime Minister and Mrs. Holt, members of the
Cabinet, members of the Diplomatic Corps, members of Congress, members
of the Press, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Tonight we are fortunate to celebrate not one, but three very welcome
visitors the Australian Prime Minister and his lady, and the first day of June.
They make a very warm and happy combination. The Prime Minister and I
have spent a very fruitful day with each other. We have been doing what comes
naturally to each of us talking. Now, this evening, we have joined you at the
table, if only to demonstrate a first law of politics man does not live by words
alone. Prime Minister Holt, you and your gracious lady make this house a
very happy one tonight. After dinner, we hope to repay you with some
entertainment down the hall in the East Room. I think you will feel at home
there. It is the room where we Americans indulge in something very close to
an Australian blood sport but here in America, we call it a press conference.
On those occasions, Mr. Prime Mdinister, I am often reminded of you for another
reason. There always seems to be a boomerang loose in the East Room.
So that is one privaie bond between us. It gives personal strength to
the public ties that unite our two peoples. History already records our affection
and our trust and the partnership and alliances they invigorate. It will some
day record what the casual, the cynical, the doubting, the short-sighted, or the
impatiently critical may miss. That is our shared success in helping to build
a secure, stable, and prosperous new part of the world the new Asia.
The nations of free Asia many of them new to independence have already
turned a corner. They are determined that aggression will not turn them back
and, Mr. Prime Mlinister, so are we.
This climate of hope owes a great deal to an Australia that offers
Asia an example of what freedom can mean. The free Asian need only look
south to see his tomorrow. He will see an Australian Government, led and
directed by a competent management, elected by the people, and devoted to
the people's interests. He will see the free and vigorous Australian people
-whose living standards are amon--the highest in the world who share widely
intheir nation's wealth who hardly know any poverty at all and who are
virtually each and every one of them employed who have the highest rate of
home ownership to be found anywhere in the world.
All Asia can see hope when they look at this happy land a land where
government and private industry put the fruits of the earth to increasing good
use for all, with the help of Ed Clark. As the Ambassador said to me for the
last 13 days awaiting your arrival, ' Let us all look to tomorrow and when we
look to tomorrow, let us look to Australia.'
Let us honour the shining record and the promise of our good friends
and our good partners the Australians. Ton~ ight, to those few we could crowd
into this room and this is one dinner where we didn't get any rejections I
ask each of you to toast one of their bravest and one of their best the Prime
Minister of Australia. 2/ 
7-2.
PRIME MINISTER HOLT Mr President, Mrs Johnson, members of the
Cong ress, the Cabin-et, the Diplomatic Corps, the judiciary, all the other
many distinguished people who are here tonight.
I am, of course, gravely handicapped by the fact that there has been a
misfunction in this particular instrument. So the President either by accident
or design has assured that I shall be speaking to you off the cuff. Frankly, I
prefer it that way because when one speaks that way, one speaks from the heart.
Tonight, my heart is very full. It is a great honor to the Australian people; it
is a great honor to the Australian Prime Minister and his wife, and to his
government to have a function tendered to him in this fashion and to hear as
I have heard tonight the moving words which have come from the President
of the most powerful, the mightiest, richest, strongest nation in the world.
So I say ' Thank you, Mr. President as President of the United States.
May I say thank you also to Lyndon Johnson and Mrs Johnson our warm
and very dear friends. I feel that the friendship which has long existed, cemented
in the comradeship of struggle in order to help others to achieve the liberties
and the freedom towhich we all aspire that has developed between our two
countries has been warmed by the growth of this friendship which has
developed between Mr. and Mrs. Johnson and Mr. and Mrs. Holt. Long may it
continue long after both of us have left the offices which we at present enjoy.
Vie are honored by the presence of you all. I was impressed by the
distinguished names that came before me as we received you together with the
President and Mrs. Johnson in the receiving line this evening. I thought, how
many Heads of Government could come to a-function such as this and find
themselves among so many friends close friends some old friends, and
some new friends. I don't know any people who make their friendships more'
quickly and abide more deeply than the friendships that develop between the
people of America and the people of Australia.
You have kindly included in the record of music, which we delighted
in this evenin-Y, the Australian tune some people have tried to make a
national anthem out of it ' Waltzing Matilda'. WNell, it hardly rates that. But
at least no Australian can hear ' Waltzing Matilda' without a beating of the
heart and a quickening of the pulse. And Mrs. Hammerstein, who has almost
been assimilated by you, stirred as that number came up.
Now, M~ r. President, earlier today, we had this exchange of words
to which you refer. I must acknowledge my gratitude and indebtedness to you
for the very valuable talk we had together, and for the talks I had later with
your distinguished and most able secretaries, Mr. Dean Rusk and Mr. Robert
McNamara. The unfortunate thing about all this is we can't say a great deal
about it. That, of course, is a large part of the value of these discussions.
They are intimate discussions. reveal to each other what we think, what
we know, in a way which could not be publicly disclosed without some difficulty or
disadvantage in one direction or another. But it has its problems. The press,
of course those people that meet you in this other room here Md prove
difficult to you in my own country, they prove difficult to me are always
anxious to know what it is we have had to say to each other.
I recall it particularly, because you may recall that on the last time
we met in this room, you had in the course of your speech a few words of
verse. I found it a bit hard to draw on my limited repetoire at the time to come
back with something that seemed appropriate. I was delighted to find that
tonight you hadn't extended me even further by some fresh presentation of some
classic tract from the beauties of English literature. But this was taken up by
a cartoonist in my country perhaps struck by the fact that not much came out
of our public communications and he drew a very graphic cartoon of yourself
and myself under which he had me making this statement " We had a frank
exchange of poems". .3/ 
1 did come along tonight prepared in case you did slip one out quickly.
It was three lines from, I think, ' Julius Caesar' by Shakespeare. I think it is
relevant to our respective problems.
' On such a full sea are we now afloat; and
We must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.
That sums up, I think, Mr. President, where you and my country stand in
relation to one of the most significant conflicts of modern history, a conflict
in Vietnam, which to my mind, overshadows in significance even the topical
and troublesome conflict which you see flaring up in the Middle East.
The conflict in Vietnam is fundamental to the future of free men. It
is a fine thing, that in the history of mankind, three Presidents of the United
States from different branches of the politics of the United States a
Republic President and two Democrats have seen that this was an issue
between men to be free or men to be slaves.
You are fighting the battle for men to be free. You, Mr. President,
I believe will go down in history not because you took up that struggle which
had been so clearly perceived by President Eisenhower and by President Kennedy,
but because more clearly than any other leader of the European race, you
have seen the Asia of tomorrow, the burgeoning, blossoming Asia of a new era,
that you have seen and I believe I have seen for my country as I moved about
it perhaps more than any other Head of Government not of Asian race himself.
The last time we were here, we talked of this together and you said
many things which were significant to the future, I believe, of mankind. Since
then, I have had the opportunity to go through more countries of this area.
Perhaps we shouldn't speak so much of Asia as if it were just a grouping that
described a whole lot of people in much the same terms, because there are
greater diversities of cultures, of traditions, of habits of life, of physical
appearance, of outlooks, than are to be found anywhere else in the world but
her hope. To my mind, the 20th century may have been the century of Europe,
but the 21st century will be the century of Asia.
If this be the case, it will be because an enlightened President of the
United States of America saw that in the prospect that the people of Asia had
to throw off the shackles of the past, to throw off the tribulation of the past, to
poverty, to disease, to illiteracy, to hunger, to ill health, to all the things
that have kept man bound through the centuriesand by modern technology, by
principles of freedom, by the friendliness and encouragement and help that
enlightened people in a modern age could bring to three-fifths of mankind, we
have virtually transformed the world in which we live.
This is the promise you hold out to us, Mr. President. I hope that
with the courage of resolution you have shown in so many other directions, you
and your people will have the courage, the resolution, and the vision to see
this hope of mankind realized. Thank you for your friendship.
May I say this final word. The President and I today were exchanging
views as to how we approach the problems of life. I said, " Well, I like to
base my philosophy on being fair, firm, forthright and friendly. He said,
" My objectives are peace, progress and prosperity. I said, " Let's marry
the two together and I think we have got it made.
Thank you very much. V/;* hue you are on your feet, may I ask you to
join me in a toast to the President of the United States of America, and
VMr s. Johnson. 



TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE ACTING PRIME MrINISTER AND
-AINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY, MR. J. McEWEN,
AT THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON,
CANBERRA, 1st JUNE, 1967
Index Foreign Exchange Vital
The Kennedy Round
Wheat Other Products
Gains and Losses
Questions Page 
TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER
FOR TRADE AND INDU . MSRT L JHNMW70
NAT ION AL PRESSWCLUB LUN RE ON2 CgAN BERRA
I am just back from the Kennedy Round discussions
and negotiations and these will represent the subject matter to
which I address myself today. These were interesting and important
in themselves but with possibilities and repercussions that not
everyone quite realises.
I thought that before I turn to speak to you of some
of the facts and aspects of the Kennedy Round, I might make a few
general observations of our trading circumstances that would bring
the Kennedy Round and he possibility of Britain joining the
Common Market into what I believe to be the correct perspective of
importance. FOREIGN EXCHANGE VITAL
Australia s a major trading nation. For us our balance
of payments are of tremendous importance to our economic growth.
Over the last 10 years our growth in Australia has
meant we have been geared to import requirements of about 13% of
our gross national product -a quite u~ nusually high percentage of
imports. In terms of current prices this means imports valued
at just over $ 2,800 million, to which must be added a bill for the
so-called invisible items such as freight, dividends, royalties, etc.
now in excess of a further $ 1,400 million.
We cannot develop without earning foreign exchange to
pay for these imports and essential services which are basic to
our development and which now are running at the combined level of
., s4,2OO mil. In 1965/ 66 exports and other invisible earnings
provided almost 80% of our foreign exchange requirements. The
rest came from the essential element of capital inflow Government
borrowings and private capital flowing in.
However, experience has shown this capital inflow to
be a fairly unpredictable element in our growth requirements. For
example, in 1965/ 66 we had a high level of capital inflow amounting
to $ 938 mil. whereas THIS YEAR we look like receiving ONLY HALF
this amount.\ 
Growth we must have and indeed growth we will have.
iff we are to achieve something approaching a
growth rate on average between now and the mid-1970' s, it is
reasonable to expect that expenditure on imports alone to meet
the demands of this growth could well be of the order of $ 4,700 mil.
compared with $ 2,800 mil. in 1965/ 66. This means that we can
contemplate a rise of exchange to pay for imports of 6% each year.
Allowing for capital inflow at a reasonable level,
by the mid-1970' s exports will need to be earning $ 5,000 mil. a
year to cover their share of our overall foreign exchange requirements.
I recount these figures to place in its proper
perspective the importance of the role of export earnings.
As a nation we will grow in strength, or we will
wither according to the adequacy of our export earnings. It is
against this that I propose with you to have a look at the
Kennedy Round.
THE KIENNEDY ROUND The basic aim of the Kennedy Roundwas to obtain a
significant reduction of trade barrier-s by wqy of an across-theboard
cut in tar-iffs and concurrently a reduction in non-tariff
barriers. Australia's tariff making policy with the Tariff
Board is designed to give sufficient protection to Austrialian
industries, but the whole concept of the Tariff Board is not less
importantly to avoid giving excess protection to our industries,
Clearly a proposal to cut all our protective tariffs
by 50% is a proposal that ould be completely destructive of the
Australian economy and entirely unacceptable.
So at the first Ministerial meeting of the Kennedy
Round in 1963 I had a fierce and long battle at Geneva to have
Australia absolved from the 50% cut and to have it accepted that
Australia should pay in tariff reductions only that which would
equitably reflect the advantages gained in the dismantling of nontariff
barriers to our major exports.
For the first time in negotiations in G. A. T. T. we
had the prospect of meagingful negotiations on the bulk commoditieswheat
and the coarse grains, meat, butter and cheese where the
tariff is of relatively minor importance. The real barriers here
are devices such as quotas and variable levies.
These were the objecl'-ives and opportunities presented
by the Kennedy Round. How does the outcome measure up? 
A -i -: comont ñ li n. be es,: e wvith-f I rIa
. a CC u a C. QiLg thle asic ciemcntaS of Ogemewre rrece
in th,: niLdI css. i oni waih ded on M~ ay 1 6th; iL will be some
w'? ks etbefoz-e the actual 0* KCcohlnsoo esziofs will be
f rJ. aLis e d It %, ril] e -en latcy' ho&amp; t.-iey al,? publ. ished,
. YLOJ", dmn
K ? gi; 7c~ Lr:! wee -ie rn&amp;) t v:. ce Lrnd he: sive ever
unerak,.-ii. A2. r-ot 50 co~'' m: c rizg _, or ab~ t80 of
wvorld tx-. ade acp d
L. esot. ce c: 1.4rff CU3averag-ing
~ bIt3% or, ao atd L0io 0n1 3.. r~ tep eC -t.
Tn n-rb.. dyl CDprg CDr .11
n~ wc2 . n -1 j-Cf&gt;, r-o j' Io L cen gl f
1, C, u Ir. 1 1 Y, . icl h
Cr,-P .0,. 2/ 10i1n 9\ 7 ab ~ F:, icd an. E;
thee a S~~ i
II&gt; 3 C. 3il0S''. O r&gt; h2tf. C -Ina4 if the
i~ more id2 Sfd uo a C. ri' : ccitlsoeJ lrf was profitable
&gt; j: nd a t Sa:. e rii rs 1' e u a ale-s v/ oal2d be at
hig9her -p irL as tu-he e i -I. Prt era w . JLJJd, Lecrn committin g
LtI. ems el' uo s Ko a~ n a -erno. n i-L rit e uicc:--whi: ch oive:'-a
2. ri od wculd, lhove Dek-tiro Ic e~ c-i: vpoi t ab I~-
TheTr, m ig'n Lc e 4 il. s hrigher ' L-r~ p2 a-ct'-ual
mia rk et-V p r-; c -s j. r 19 6' 1! 0 cr d i 1~ 56 4./" G-5 ct prices ca be
expected to flutute L abCve -the. new : ni' pun ch as the . y have done
during the cuircncy of er: x ar~' lnS
aC. Ce0 2 ' age le vzl-&gt; 2c;-uarkc--; pri-, es -brov. e the
midnimum cunnot, of coir--e', L c4: TCfo., cas--9u'ft there can
be no doubt-th;-at the S-4-Zn7 iCYeIj. : ~ i. h ivr.~ ap. L 
But there can be no doubt that the substantial increase in the
minimum price should move average market prices much nearer to
remunerative levels than in the past.
One aspect of the new agreement which makes it
better than the old agreement is that minimum prices have now been
prescribed for a wide range of different wheats.
. This will ensure that floor prices are much more
effective than in the previous agreements, where the minimum price
applied only to the highest quality wheat traded leaving great
scope for fluctuations of the discount differential for all
other wheats. In the judgment of some experts at Geneva, and
they were there from the exporting countries and the importing
countries, the increase in the average commerfial price of wheat
expected to result from the higher floor price should be, these
experts say, as muzch as 8 to 16 US cents per bushel.
If this is the case, the gain to Australia in
foreign exchange from an export of, say, 300 million bushels, a
year, and thats about the average of the last three years, would
be from $ US 24 million a year to $ US 48 million a year.
In addition we have obtained for the first time,
the commitment of affluent importing countries such as the United
Kingdom, Japan and the European Economic Community to accept
joint responsibilitity for providing food aid to the developing
countries. Australia has in practice extended its food aid in
the form of wheat. She now accepts with the other countires a
contractual commitment to provide wheat as food aid to the
extent of 225,000 tons a year in a total programme of 4-J metric
tons a year. 
In these various respects our export trade will be
more profitable,. our access to markets more secure. Affluent
countries will share with us the cost of wheat aid to the needy,
and in general our competitive position in world markets has
been preserved and improved.
OTHER PRODUCTS The whole thing is not ruled off yet but the
United States, for domestic reasons, is under compulsion to conclude
its negotiations to a very strict timetable. Other countries
are not under exactly the same pressure. For this reason our
negotiations with certain important other countries are not yet
quite finalised. In the case of some of these countries we are
confident that satisfactory arrangements covering a variety of
products will be successfully concluded but these cannot be
described at this stage as finalised.
On 1 -Pfm r-' nd veal we expect to finalise arrangements
which will improve our access to important markets such as the
Euro pean Economic Community and Japan.
Our industry will benefit not only from greater and
more predictable access to these markets but the new airangements
will reduce th4 possibility of having to divert meat -to some
other markets such as the United Kingdom and the U. S. A.
Important negotiations are still going on with the
European Economic Commnity, On beef and veal the E. E. C. has
declared its willingness to reduce -the Community tarifi' from
to 16%; but more importantly than that, over 5 months of the
year, to permit imports free of the import levy which might otherwise
have been imposed during that period, and which can make pale
into insignificance the cut in duties. 
This concession should really open up the Common
Market for Australian frozen beef and veal in our peak selling
season. Also there are a number of other products such as
honey, beef offals and tallow where there will be reduced tariffs
on Australian exports to the EEC, which is a most important market
for these products. In the case of Japan discussions have taken place in
the hope of securing improved access to that market. The results
of these discussions have been quite encouraging. The present
duty on sheep meats and beef offals will also be reduced.
Out of this I see these negotiations as having opened
up a much better, and quite worthwhile opportunity for expansion
in the export of all our meat products to Japan.
We also have from Japan an undertaking that some of
our most important exports to Japan wool, coal, iron ore and
hides and skins are to be assured duty free entry in the future.
In a number of other markets important for
particular products we also expect to make gains apples and
pears into Swe( den and Denmark, reduced duties on wool and zinc
ores into Norway and many others. The full extent of such
concessions cannot yet be catalogued.
We launched a campaign in 1961 to develop an export
consciousness amongst manufacturers.
Since then there has been an annual increase in the
export of manufactured goods of about 20% per annum. The current
rate of export of manufactured goods is more than double what it
was 5 years ago. Our manufactured exports will consequent upon the
Kennedy Round, benefit from the tariff cuts agreed amongst the
large industrialised countries. The concept is that concessions
given to one are given to all. 
On the other hand, and as a result of the negotiations,
some of our preferences in markets such as the United Kingdom and
Canada will be affected.
GAINS AND LOSSES There have been gains and losses for Australia as a
result of the Kennedy Round,
In the case of the United Kingdom we face the
prospect of a cut of in our present preferences on raisins,
sultanas and currants, canned peaches, canned apricots ( but not
canned pears) canned pineapples, unmilled rice and leather, and
perhaps some other less important items.
This is the outcome of the United Kingdom from the
outset offering a 50% cut in all her tariffs. It didn't eventuate
but their position never altered in respect of the items I just
mentioned. The original objectives of the Kennedy Round have not
been fully achieved. There was no success in the attempt to write
a world agreement on dairy products. However, the significant
importers of the major dairy product, butter, are so few in
num~ ber that the door is not closed against bilateral discussions on
this item. Sugar is one of cur great export items, but
-practically every sugar exporting country is a developing country.
These countries have decided to negotiate a Sugar Agreement within
the organisation of not within the organisation of
G. A. T. T. So it was never a matter up for negotiation in the
Kennedy Round. However, there will be a world sugar conference, under
the auspices of U. N. C. T. A. D. later this year.
At this stage we have not secured anything on wool
in the United States market. 
Overall, there is no doubt the net results of the
Kennedy Round will have been generally beneficial to Australia and
to the world at large.
When our gains have been evaluated we will be making
payments from selected items in our tariff. Let me describe this,
such payment on our part will have been made without in any way
undermining necessary protection of our domestic industries.
Over quite a major part of Australian imports, the
tariff to date has been free for British Preferential imports with a
nominal non-protective Most Favoured Nation duty on imports from
other sources. These m. f. n. duties wilibe eliminated over quite a
wide range of products, as our preferences in Britain have been
halved over a number of products. In addition some protective
tariffs have been reduced, will be reduced, where the Tariff Board,
being asked has found that a reduction in t~ e m. f. n. rate of duty
was justified. For some other items, there will be a reduction in the
margin between the British Prefcorontial Tariff and the m. f. n. tariff,
again without impairing the protection for Australian industry.
These are the types of concessions which Australia
is making, and with which we will pay for the advantages we have
gained. Of course, until the negotiations are complete the
individual concessions on offer cannot be revealed.
So much for the Kennedy Round. 
Time, I think, does not permit me to go, in detail, into
a discussion of what may occur as a result of Britain's application
to join the Common Market, but you have a question time. But let
me say this, in respect of Britain's application to join the
Common Market. Before she made the earlier application she went into
close consaltation with the Common Market countries, describing the
circumstances of her trading contractual commitments to countries
like Australia. Jointly they looked at what would be the effect of Britain
joining under the Treaty of Rome and what, if anything, could be done
to ameliorate the impact upon countries like Australia.
Out of that examination in 1962 Britain and the European
Co~ mmunity issued a statement that, if Britain should join, then for
the major items of world commodity trade world agreements would have
to be relied upon to safeguard the interests of those who had
hitherto depended on the historic terms of access to the British
market world commodity agreements.
The fact that in Geneva it was not possible to achieve
world commodity agreements on other than wheat leaves me with' little
confidence that we could rely upon the early conclusion of worthwhile
world commodity agreements as an alternative to our present
marketing arrangements in Britain.
All thinking Australians will follow developments in
Europe closely over the next few months. It's still too early
to say whether the British application will succeed. But we have
been served notice as a nation not to rest on our laurels nor to
rely too heavily on existing marketing arrangements With Britain.
These recent events must act as a spur to Australia
to-seek out new markets as a hedge against the future. The 
Commonwealth Government will do all in its power, and the Trade
Department as its instrument, to assist, but ultimately success
will depend on the initiative of individual industries and
individual traders.
What I've been seeking to say is that, with our dreams
of expansion that we have and the actuality of our fast growth,
there is one essential ingredient to growth, and that is command
of adequate resources of foreign exchange. And that, given the
most favourable circumstances of raising exchange other than by
selling goods at export, you still depend to the extent of
for your requirements on the sale of exports, the sale of export
goods. We must be efficient at home, we must be active at
home; but above all, we must have the right to sell. The days
were when one produced. something one could take it out and sell
it at best. To-day the world is full of countries who say, no,
we won't receive that item at all, we won't receive this item
without something like 100% tariff, we won't receive that item
except to the extent that we can't produce it at any old cost
ourselves. What we've been trying to do is to negotiate a way
through the totality of these obstructions to our opportunity
to earn the wherewithal to pay for the growth that we all insist
on having. We've had a bruise or two in this in the items that
I have mentioned, but over-all there are distinct, identifiable
gains for Australia and a new level of predictability in our
trading opportunities for the future.
-oOo-
QUESTIONS: Mr. Wood: Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can give us some
specific idea of the size and composition of the parcel of industrial
tariff cuts we' re offering Japan. And could you also comment
further on the proposed review of the U. K./ Australia trade treaty
which you mentioned on Friday?
Mr. McEwen: Well, in the nature of things, first of all let me say
whatever is offered to one country, if accepted, becomes agailable to
all. This is the essence of the thing. But to indicate that we've
offered to reduce a duty on an item would be completely dislocating
to normal trading. Th'is is one of the trade secrets. It's never
done.
Mr. Samuel: Mr. McEwen, you referred to the silliness of other
countries producing things at any old cost with tariffs of 100%.
I wonder if you've had time to look at the speech of Mr. Rattigan,
the Chairman of the Tariff Board. He referred rather critically in
many ways to the traditional appraach of both the Government and the
Board itself to tariff matters. One of the things he suggested was
that industries which were very high cost and required very high
tariff protection should be encouraged to phase out their production
over a period of time. I wonder if you've any comments on that?
Mr. McEwen; Well, now, you expect accuracy from me and I expect
it from you. I referred to the " silliness" of other countries
doing this? I did no such thing. I referred to the fact of it,
and it is a fact. I haven't read Mir. Rattigan's speech, but Mr.
Rattigan is the Chairman of the Tariff Board, a man whom I have
immense respect for. He was the Deputy Secretary of the Department
of Trade and we're personal friends. He expresses his views. If
he were expressing a proposal to the Government I'm sure he would
address himself to me. He's not done so. When Mr. Rattigan
addresses himself to me, when the Tariff Board addresses itself to
me, then I'll take this up and study it quite carefully. But 
the position is that we make no tariff alterations in this country
except on the advice of the Tariff Board, and the occasions when we
don't act completely in accordance with the advice of th.; Tariff
Board are very few indeed. And when we do depart from thie advice of
the Taiiff Board we explain why we departed from the advi. ce. I don't
know wy other country on earth which doesn't alter its , ariffs
exnept by having a public inquiry in which all interested parties
in its own country are free to go and give evidence in favour or
agairst, and in which every foreigner in the world who thinks he's
interested is equally free to go along and give his evidence.
Australian tariff-making is as clean and as open as anywhere on
earth. And the Government acts on the advice of this body,
or acts with the advioe, and
mostly upon the advice of this Body. If the Tariff Board, or Mr.
Rattigan as its Chairman, felt that there was aneed for us to
depart in our policy-making, I'm sure they would suggest it to ma.
If they thought there was a need for a review of some existing tariffs,
I'm sure they would suggest it to me. This has not been done.
If, on the other hand, there are interested parties in Australia
who feel that some tariff is too high and that it ought to be
reviewed, they are equally free to make a request to me to have a
Tariff Board hearing not for the purpose which is normal, to
consider whether the tariff ought to be increased, but for the
purpose important to them in the contingency I speak of, of
examining whether the tariff should be reduced. There's nothing
that isn't wide out in the open of what is done in tariff-making.
Therc's nothing in our tariff-making that doesn't preserve entire
opportunity for the Tariff Board and all the interested parties to
make proposals to the Government and when a hearing is on for all
foreigners to go to the Tariff Board and make their proposals,
Mr. Catmull: Sir, what do you feel Britain's chances are of
succeeding in its application to join the Common Market? 
11.
Mr. MoEwen: Quite frankly, I'm completely incompetent to answer
that question. I don't know.
Mr. Wood: Sir, as a follow-up to the question just before that
one, you say the Board has to get its reference from you,
could you give us some idea of when you'll be meeting the Tariff
Board, and are you still considering the idea of part-time Board
members?
Mr. McEwen: Just before I was going overseas Mr. Rattigan got in
touch with me and suggested to me that, in the opinion of himself
and the Board, it would be useful if we had a meeting I think
he used the word " informal", and I think, over a luncheon. I
instantly agreed to that. This will be when it comes off, my third
meeting with the Tariff Board in eleven years, so I don't stand
over them very much.
As to the question of part-time Board members, I made
a statement in Parliament explaining what prompted me to canvass
this thought and to consult, as I've always done is my ministerial
career, people who had an interested view on this kind of thing.
There was not much support for it, and that might be overstating it.
But whether as a result or not, I don't know, but I had at about
that time a letter from Mr. Rattigan explaining to me in convincing
terms that there were now circumstances in which the Board would be
in the future able to deal more expeditiously, have a greater
throughput of work, than had been the history over the recent
several years. And I accept this as a correct judgment. I think
that probably disposes of the matter.
Mr. Connors: Mr. Minister, Russia, who is a major member of the
International Wheat Agreement, was not present at the G. A. T. T. for
any of the current negotiations. Russia has been a major importer
in the past, and I believe, according to a B. A. E. report, that
she may be an exporter around 1970 or something like that. I was
wondering has Russia given any indication that she is agreeable to
what was negotiated at Geneva? 
12
Mr. MoEwen: No, I'm not aware of Russia indicating this at all.
What was agreed at Geneva is not fulfilled yet. There needs to be
legislation or the approval of~ Governments in all the countries: who
are concerned. I've no doubt this will occur. When this is done,
then I would imagine it may be fruitful at that point of time to
sound the Russian reaction, but Russia has never been a disruptive
influence in recent years as an exporter of wheat and the Agreement
itself commits all the traditional exporters of wheat to not sell
below the prescribed minimum, and I don-It think that Russia will be
a dislocating factor in the scheme.
Mr. WNood: Another one, Mr. McEwen. Do you have any specific
evidence, historic or otherwise, to support your contention that a
rise in the minimum price for wheat will lead to a rise in the
world price?
Mr. McEwen: Only what I mentioned. That is, that over the wh~ le
history of minimum price, sales have been more often than not above
the prescribed minimum price. P7irst point. The second point T
said and this is not my own judgment but the judgment of the
people who are engaged in their life in wheat transactions who were
there as advisers to the delegations, to every important delegation
at Geneva, the Americans, the Canadians, the Australians, Argentina,
the delegations of all the major importing countries in each
case it was accepted that the new and higher minimum price would
lead to a higher general commercial level. There were various
views. I know of no view expressed that the commercial level could
be expected to be less than 7ff cents above the prescribed minimum.
I tended to round that off in my speech to 8 cents. Others ventured
an opinion, 16 cents and one who spoke with considerable authority
said he though it would be 20 cents above. This is nct my view.
I can only Taote to you, and that's all I sought to do in my
speech, the expressed views of experts. 
Mr. Baudino: Mr. McEwen, if I could just changre the topic. In the
past you have been a critic of the principle of " one vote, one
value" in Australia. Redistribution has reared again at the
moment. Do you still subscribe to this?
Mr. McEvqen; Well, first of all I have never been a critic of the
principle of " one vote, one value". I have been a defender of the law
which has stood since 1900, 19012 which this is on the subject
you're mentioning, I'm sure stipulates that in electorates I
can't bring to my mind the description, but you'll know what I'm
talking about and its's there in the Law electorates where there
are vast areas, sparse population, population of different interests,
that the Electoral Commissioner shall have the right in proposing
boundaries to propose boundaries which would result in a differential
in numbers 20% above the mean or 20% below the mean. If this has
been a good law in this country for 60-odd years I've defended it.
I still think it's a gooa law. Was there another part of your
question that escaped me? No.
Mr. Hutchinson: I might intervene one on the same question, Sir.
Do you think that the difficulties of redistribution posed by the
fact that, as a result of the referendum, the Constitution will not
be amended and therefore the Parliament cannot be enlarged, do you
think those difficulties are surmountable?
Mr. Mcawen: I don't think there have ever been any difficulties
about redistribution. There was a challenge by me and my Party to
a particular proposal, which, let me remind you in one aspoct,
would have taken the State of Western Australia where for many
years the Country Party has provided about half the Government
and the Deputy Premier, and is very strong; a redistribution proposal
that would have drawn lines impossible for my Party to win one
seat in Western Australia, and by general agreement impossible for
the Labor Party to win more than one seat in Western Australia.
And the State of Western Australia, which is a third area of
Australia, to have its nine Members reduced to eight. This'll do
me for an illustration of what I objected to in that proposal, 
14.
which was thrown out. But from the day that it was thrown out
I have believed that there was no reason why the Government
shouldn't have gone ahead next day and reappointed Electoral
Coinmissiooiers to make a new proposal. How long ago's that? I
don't remember, but it's a good few years. : 62? 1 think in ' 62
we could have had a redistribution, and in ' 67, before the
referendum or after the referendum, we can have a redistribution,
and we ought to.
Mr. Hurst: Mr. McEwen, in your absence abroad your Government
has had its troubles in the Senate. Could you give us your
personal view on this? Do you think there's any, there is a case
for changing the Senate, or do you feel that it should be abolished?
Mr. McEwenj: Oh, look here now, be your age. No comment.
Mr. Long: Sir, when you were oerseas did you have qn opportunity
to discuss with anyone the idea of the proposed Industry Development
Corporation, and, if so, what was their reaction to this?
Mr. MoEwen: Nlo, I'm afraid the simple answer is that I did not have
an opportunity, or didn't seek an opportunity, to discuss this.
I had a pretty big job on my hand and I concentrated on that. 



-8JUNj
QS8RAVO
FOR PRESS I21.10 . 57/ 1967
" Tl T-IY7, IVT 3Y T ' E ACTII7PRIM!. E MiIT
B. JOHF1 M~ cE
The Actin-, Prime Minister, Vr. MlcEwen, said that he
had called a Cabinel meeting in vie,;. ' of. developments in the M, 1iddle
East, which Aus-traliai, in common .7ith all other* likeminded cm) ntries,
viewed with deep -ind -r,' iiin-, concern.
he1* d r. 1-cI'., en said thaIt, in vie, of the developinx tensions,
he -adthought it essential that Cbinet M'inisters shouil not only
oe kept informed of all that wa. s know,, n of the situa-) tion bUt shoulda
ha-. ve -in opportunity to consult.
Mr. Mvc.' wen said th-at he h . d ueen keeping in close touch
with the Prime Minister, w-ho h; a's himself had thje idvanta'e of
discussin.-) this with President Johnson -ind Secretary of tate Rusk.
Mr. Holt also hid anu e-arly opportunity of communicattion with Mr.
Harold ' Jilson, the 3ritish rime Mlinister.
Mr. McEwen saiid th-It he was sure it would be expected
of the Austr-ili-: n -Thvernment thA it should join wi th others in
evHery ittempt to qvoid tensions in t'he Middle Eist developing into
conflict ue t . ieen the arties confrontin::, each other ther i.
Mr. IvcE . en said tha-t I reait principles a-ffecting the
freedom of passcie over mercantile saa laines were -A issue aind
this was of crit'ical import-ince to Ire A intern.-tional traing
nations. A".. so involved wa--s the right of independent member states
of the United . latons to a-secure, O peacfl ex; 3ene
Hle sfaid th.-t, on the question of the olockg-de of the JTulf
of Agaua, a'Ith-oritaitive st. Aements by the Minister for External
Affarlls Ave falrea. dy oeen made renresentinZ the view stron fly held
by the AIustraIli,-n JTovernment thit thle Stra-iits of Tir. In musl oe
re'-rded : in internationail waterwty through w., hich vessels of all
ntAions haive a right of pa'-ssagie.
21 CD JUTh', E 1967. 



VI SIT TO US, CANADA AND UKAR Y
WASHINGTON, USA
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT, AT BLAIR HOUSE, WASHINGTON _ Np JUNE, 1967
PRIME MI NISTER: Ladies and Gentlemen, I am not prepared to make a direct
statement, but thought it would be useful if I could just give you some sort of
a picture of the talks I had yesterday.
Of their very nature, they don't lend themselves, of course, to any
detailed exposition of it. I wouldn't be received for the talks if I immediately
go out and orate what I have come a long way to talk about and some very busy
men an d very important men have been good enough to provide the time for
me to discuss with them.
But you can assume that I went over the ground, first with the President,
on the principal issues in which Australia is interested in its relations with
the United States. These would include the Vietnam situation, various aspects
of that, the Middle Zast situation, of which I don't claim to be very well
informed myself, but was able to get some valuable information in talks with
the President and with the Secretary of State and with the Secretary of Defense.
Then, of course, because that will be the principal matter I shall be discussing
with Mr. Harold Wilson, in London, the questi6n of British troop di c-positibnC
East of Suez in the future.
I did touch on, with the President, several trade matters and economic
matters of interest to Australia, but did not develop these in any detail at
this point. Wehad agreed that we would make known our views on certain
of them, say that these could be studied in some detail between now and the
time that we shall next meet, when I have part of the week-end with him at
his ranch on my return journey. But I did go into rather more detail on these
matters with Mr. Rusk, and I shall be following them up.
There is one aspect which it now appears cannot wait for treatment
until we get to the ranch. That is the question of the wool duty which applies
to Australia, and on wW ch we had held hopes, as part of the Kennedy Round
negotiations, that there would be a significant reduction of the GT rate.
This has not so far emerged, and we are taking that matter up again with Mr.
Rusk in the hope that we can find a solution to it.
I don't know that there is much more that I can say about the talks, because
as I mentioned earlier, these were to enable a development of views between us.
I think it is well known that the President and I have very much the same view of
the Asian situation generally, the potentialities which are building up in those
countries where Communism has been brought under check, and we both see a
brighter future for Asia if we can bring the Vietnam struggle to a successful
conclusion. Q. Mr. Prime M~ inister, yesterday, I believe, in your arrival statement,
you mentioned the possibility that the war in Vietnam could wind up a lot
sooner than some people expect, and soonier than the surface evidence
indicates I think this is what you said. Would you explain your tninking
along those lines? 2/ 
P. M. Wiell, there are two, at least two bases for that. It is not put as a
confident expectation, or even as a solid judgment. It is put as a possibility.
Ibase it on these two lines of thought: first, the North Vietnamese are
undoubtedly taking a severe punishment to the economy from the intensive
bombing which has been going on. While I was in Honolulu, I was given a
detailed briefing by Admiral Sharp, which included a survey of the bombing
results. This was accompanied by illustrations in many cases of the
industrial establishments before and after the bombing.
While I know there is a school of thought that the bombing has not
reduced significantly the degree of infiltration and the movement of supplies,
I think there is little, there can be little doubt that continued material
punishment of this sort not only has an effect upon the state of the economy of
the country, but ties up some hundreds of thousands, which is estimated in
the neighborhood of three hundred thousand, members of the work force for
the repair and reconstruction. And the damage to the industrial assets
gas stations, steel works, and the like has been very considerable.
Now, I do not believe that even the most stoic and enduring community
car take that kind of punishment indefinitely without the leaders asking
themselves the question, is this worth it, is the prospect that we have for'
the future worth the sacrifice that we are making now? They can't entertain
any optomistic view in the military campaign against the evidence of their
own losses and the rebuffs they have had in recent times.
So that is one line of thought which leads one to conclude that there
comes a point of time in which the communist leadership has to ask itself
whether it is justified in going on when prospects are held open for it of a
negotiation which at least will leave its own, leave North Vietnam secure.
We have made it clear that we don't have as an objective the domination of
North Vietnam nor the destruction of its economy in the long term.
So the second line of thinking really proceeds from the first. It is based
on some experience we have had of communist, the communist mentality at
work, but it is in the international field and inside Australia in the industrial'
field, where communists have been in charge of some of our more important
unions; we found that althoug,,-, h we have seemed at a particular point in time to
be up against a brick wall in negotiation, with no prospect of a solution
emerging, without forewarning, without regard to consistency or whatever has
gaone before, the communist leadership, having made up its mind that the
time has come to resolve the matter, does so.
So it is on these two possibilities that I make this statement that while,
on the surface, it would appear that there is no crack in the edifice of resistance,
it could come more rapidly than the superficial indications would seem to say.
Q. Don't you think the North Vietnamese could take the same line in view
of the heavy casualties that have been suffered by the Americans?
P. M. I don't think you could compare the two countries from the standpoint
' nf their respective strengths. I am not wanting to understate the American
casualties, but relative to a country of 190-odd million people, it is not a
degree of loss which can't be sustained. The individual loss is grievous, of
course, to the people concerned, but looking at the respective countries, the
loss to North Vietnam is much less capable of acceptance than the degree of
loss which America has been maintaining. 3/ 
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, with regard to the disposition of British troops
East of Suez, did you find an identity of view here in Wiashington?
P. M. Oh, I think you can take it that the United States shares the Australian
view that British presence, military presence, East of Suez, is important for
maintaining British position in the world and for helping to maintain stability
and act as a moderating influence in relation to that area. It has a bearing
clearly, also, on the United States' position in the Asian region. It will not
be a welcome development to the United States to find itself the only major
power maintaining a military presence on the mainland of Asia.
If you consider the various bilateral arrangements of a security kind
undertaken by the United States, you find that from the arc running right
around from Korea to Thailand, that in respect of a number of countries
* namely, Korea, Taiwan, Japan, Thailand, itself, and currently, of course,
South Vietnam the United States has accepted security commitments and
has left this one area to the Commonwealth, regarding it as a Commonwealth
* responsibility. That is the Malaysi a-Singapore area. But as for the rest of
that arc you find that the United States has accepted a very considerable
obligation and burden for its security.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, in view of what you have said about the North
Vietnamese bombing, would you favour an increase in the tempo of the bombing?
P. M. Oh, I don't wish to comment on that. America is carrying the large
burden of this matter. I think that the American military judgment should
be looked to to be sure that they get what they regard as the most effective
results from it. I don't think it is for us to tell them what they ought to be
doing, when they are provid~ ing the wherewithal.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you mentioned that you discussed the Middle East
situation with the President. I was wondering if you would be kind enough to
tell us what conclusions you arrived at and what decisions you might have made?
P. M. The only comment I can make on that is that the proposal for a declaration
* by certain maritime powers was discuesed and I was able to indicate, this
matter having been under discussion between myself and my Cabinet colleagues
in Australia, that if there were other powers joining in such a declaration,
Australia would join with them in it.
Q. Would we participate in any international military force?
P. M. That question doesn't arise at this stage, and it was not raised with us.
Q. Could you elaborate on those remarks you made do you see any hope
* of salvaging Kennedy Round discussions if you didn't get any concessions?
I can't develop it very much, Max. This is a matter which Mr. McEwen'
has been pursuing very actively. What I was hoping to arrange was for a
briefing on it to be made available to me so that by the time I came back to the
discussion at the ranch, I would be in a position to pursue it further. But I
have since been advised by Mr. McEwen that there is a timing problem on this,
that while some of the other matters with which you are familiar yourself,
can wait for that point of time for discussion, this is one which we have to try
to resolve before the time runs out for the Kennedy Round negotiations.
Q. How are you going to resolve it before the time runs out?
P. M. How are we going to? 
Q. Yes.
P. M. Our representatives here will be able to take it up with the Department
of State people. I think the atmosphere which has been created already by
my own talks should prove at least helpful in providing a receptive atmosphere
for this discussion.
Q. So it is not that all hope is gone of getting some concession?
P. M. I would hope not.
You say that there is a time limit. Is there an actual specific day and
hour by which time the problem must be resolved or otherwise?
P. M. This was a factor in th'e negotiations at Geneva. I understand that there
has been a time limit virtually set by the Congress.
Q. Do you know what date that is?
P. m. I haven't it in my head. I have an idea it is around the end of this month,
but don't hold me to that.
Q. Sir, is this a special bilateral arrangement that you hope to reach with
the United States?
P. M. Well, usually, an arrangement of this sort is achieved on the basis of a
negotiation in which concessions are made on both sides. That is where it
becomes a more technical matter for the Department of Trade. I have merely
put it on the basis that the United States is the only country in the world which
maintains a tariff duty on raw wool.
Q. Wihat type of reciprocal offer would we make?
P. Mv. Again, I wouldn't want to be openly exposing what possibilities might exist.
But this becomes a matter of negotiation. It will bear on some import item
they have.
Q. Mr. Holt, will you speak onthis matter cf economic matters generally
in London, also? Will you take it coming back?
P. M. Wiell, the EEC matter, I expect there will be some discussion of that
there between us. But mainly to learn from Mr. Vilson what view he takes
of the British prospects. Mr. Mc. Swen has been there quite recently, so
Australia's views as to particular commodities are well known.
Q. You have no specific problems or questions to ask?
P. Ivi. No, I have none. There are specialists on those matters. I would merely
wish to have a general view from the Prime Ainister of the prospects as he
sees them, what he may have in mind by way of safeguarding what they term as
essential Commonwealth interests, what definition they put on " essential".
I mean it may be essential for a man to reduce his production of dried fruits;
he may have a market to sustain for his dried fruits. But it might be the
view of the British Government that " essential" means that the economy is
able to go on substantially untouched. As Mr. MciEwen said in London, it
doesn't help the grower of dried fruits very much to tell him that we'll be
much better off letting him die off. 
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, there is a report that Egypt would consider closing the
Suez Canal to the ships of any nation that might try to break the Israel
blockade. Would Australia consider this as a hostile act?
P. M. You mention it as a report. I have no information on that. I wouldn't
wish to comment.
I would just air that Australia, as one of the principal trading nations
of the world we rank among the 12 largest trading nations of the world
has an interest in seeing that there are no limitations placed on international
waterways. We joined in a declaration some years ago of a comparable kind
to that which is being sou., ht now. -V. e would therefore be expected to tuke a
direct interest in any limitations which any country might propose on what
has been regarded as international waterways.
Q? Would you say what your talk with Secretary-General U Thant might
develop or what you might hope to achieve by it?
P. M. WAell, I would hope that we could explore each other's thinking. W-e
don't agree, quite obviously, on our interpretation of events in Vietnam. I
would hope that one or the other of us would be open to persuasion, if that
is justified from the changed point of view. Different people place a different
interpretation upon events, as I found when I was in Cambodia. Sihanouk
doesn't see events in Vietnam the same way as we do. I think it is quite
obvious thiat U Thant doesn't.
For example I don't want to be on the record on this as a direct quote
from me, but some of you may recall that I did make some comments some
time ago when the Secretary General was reported as having said that Vietnam
was not a vital interest for the West. 11-ell, more recently, he described
Vietnam as leadin), to a third world war. I would find those two statennts
quite inconsistent. Surely if the situation is leading to athird world war, it
is a matter of vital interest to the countries of the Wiest. I have thought all
along that Vietnam was a matter of very substantial concern to the countries
of the West.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, as we are increasing buyers of American defense
equipment, have you raised with anyone here the obvious inefficiency of the
American forward costing system as demonstrated by the skyrocketing costs
of the F-111?
P. M. Not in any detail. I did in the courseof my discussion with the Secretary
of Defense I think it was Secretary Rusk who mentioned this as one of the
matters which affected the considerable purchase we have been making of
defense equipment in the United States, which, of course, has its own impact
on the balance of payments situation.
Q. Did you suggest the Sydney Opera House as an example of our own
planning? ( Laughter)
Q. Mr. Holt, did you mention, or will you be mentioning the possibility
of Australia gretting some exemption from the interest equalization tax on
money flowing out from America into Australia?
P. M. That is an old concern of mine. I raised this matter in the time of
Douglas Dillon, when he was Secretary of the Treasury. You can take it that I
always felt that if an exemption were justified in the case of Japan and Canada,
Australia, which has highly adverse balance of trade with the United States and
which is making very substantial repayments of borrowed money to the United
Eltates, has a strong case for the exemption, at least up to an agreed level, also.
This is one matter which I shall be pursuin.; further before I return to Australia. 



VISIT TO US, CANADA AND UK
OTTAW~ A, CANADA
RESPONSE BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
TO THE OFFICI AL WELCOME BY THE PRIME MINISTER
OF CANADA 4th JUNE~, 1967
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Pearson, distinguished members of the
Diplomatic Corps, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a very great personal pleasure for Mrs. Holt and myself, and a
privilege in which my Government and my countrymen share, to be with you on
a period of your national history which has such significance for you.
This is my second visit to your country and I regret the interval which
has elapsed since I was last here. But that also was an occasion of some historic
significance for Canada. It was the year 1952, in which In this distinctive
Parliament building you were host to the Parliaments of the Commonwealth
through the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. It was my great honour
to be Chairman of that notable conference. I have long, wished since then to be
able to see something more of your country and to meet more closely with your
people. Although I had heard and read much of the great economic and cultural
development which had occurred over the years, I confess to still experiencing
some surprise at the remarkable growth which has occurred in this capital city
of yours, at seeing how imaginatively you have developed your architecture and
the beautification of the city. This I believe symbolizes the notable growth which
has been occurring throughout Canada, strengthening your economy and making
you a more significant member country of the United Nations.
Your contribution there, of course and this has been particularly
marked during the period of office of your distinguished Prime Minister has
been influential well beyond the numbers of your people. Vie like to think that
as you, with populations that are not large as world populations are marked
these days and as the populations of many other countries can demonstrate, that
we do have a performance out of relation to our numbers and even an influence
going well beyond our numerical strength and I welcomed very warmly, Mr.
Prime Minister, the things that you have said in your short but very meaningful
speech here this afternoon of the desirability of the closeness of our two countries,
which have so much in common, which have built a friendship in the comradeship
of war and in the pursuits of peace, in the growth of trade between our two
nations. Vblth so much in common, if we pursue them as closely as we can, our
policies together can make a contribution growing in significance with the years
ahead of us. You and I have already talked of this in an informal way. I hope
that in the years ahead, not only as our populations increase and our economic
strength develops, but as our own contribution to a peaceful and progressing
world is enhanced, that our discussions together, the better knowledge we shall
I hope develop of each other, will contribute more significantly to the peace,
to the progress and the prosperity of the world.
You have spoken of our participation in EXPO ' 67. It has not been in
the Australian tradition to take part in these great international expositions.
Wie have felt that we could make a more significant contribution in relation 2/ 
to our own national situation if we took part by ourselves from time to time
in the expositions of individual countries. But when we took into account the
significance for Canada, our historic Commonwealth partner, in the
celebration of its centennial, then we came unhesitatingly to the conclusion
that Australia should be there. And it gratifies us indeed, Mr. Prime Minister,
to feel that you have judged our contribution to be a worthy one.
Certainly the attendances already have more than flattered our
expectations and we hope that this experience will continue throughout the
period of the Exposition. As to the talking chairs, I must confess that while
at one time rabbits were regarded as the principal plague in Australia, there
are fellow countrymen of mine who think that talking politicians now rank in
the same category and it is perhaps not without some appropriateness that,
as you recline in a comfortable chair in the Australian pavilion, one of our
more notable citizens, sometimes in the political field but I hope more
frequently in other fields of science or culture, will address you on some
matter of national moment.
You were good enough to say that we had established some degree of
international supremacy in the fields of tennis and swimming. ' We hope to
maintain that. But being an ambitious people, we think that before the year is
out we may have chalked up another notable gain by taking for the first time in
its history, I believe, the Americas Cup back from that country to Australia.
If we can get it there, I think our American friends and allies will find it even
more difficult to regain outside the Heads of Sydney Harbour than the Davis
Cup on one of our tennis arenas.
However, I am sure that, despite the friendship you have with your
great neighbour, you will be wishing us well. We smaller countries always
like to see the other tackle the bigger fellow and succeed. It is a commendable
ambition and one in which I am sure we shall have your good wishes.
Now I don't want to add another chapter to the record of long-talking
Australian politicians by abusing your patience on this warm afternoon. Your
record for hospitality has been evidenced again today in that, after a period
of cool weather, you have turned on a sunny Australian day with a temperature
that must be very uncomfortable for that handsome guard I have just had the
honour to inspect. And so I must not detain you at length.
But thank you again for the warmth of your welcome to Mrs. Holt and
myself and our party representing as we do in your eyes the Australian
Government and people. We are greatly looking forward to the remainder of
our stay with you and we are delighted to have an opportunity of contributing
by our presence to the success of the ambitious and imaginative project which
you are so successfully carrying out.
Long, may Canada prosper, long may it strengthen in its influence
and its economy, long may the friendship between our two countries be
successfully sustained. 



VISIT TO US, CANA. DA UlK
MONTREAL, CANADA
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR HAROLD HOLT
AT MAYORAL DINNER, CITY HALL, MONTREAL JUNE, 1967
Mr. Mayor and Madame Drapeau:
It was a very happy decision of the Australian Government to
decide to be represented at the Montreal Exposition. Our motives were
largely stimulated by the friendship over so many years with the people of
Canada and our desire to join in celebrating the centennial of this great
country of yours.
You mentioned some of the origins we have in common and you
hrought to mind a little jingle that was originated about the early period that
you mentioned in the history of my own country:
" True patriots we, for be it understood
Wle left our country for our country's good."
But I think that our Mother Country, if it could look at the results that the
offspring have produced, would be sorry to have lost them and be very
proud of the achievements through those years. It is also, I understand, not
merely the centennial of Canada but the 325th anniversary of this beautiful
and historic city of Montreal. I say you have cause for a double celebration.
Although the principal purpose of my own visit here was to join
in celebrating Australia's special day, I feel that already there has been
added benefit for us from the very valuable discussions we held with your
Prime Minister and members of the Cabinet, the new knowledge that we have
acquired of the remarkable growth which has proceeded in Canada since my
own first visit here for the Parliamentary conference in Ottawa fifteen years
ago. I scarcely recognised Ottawa. I found it equally difficult to see
in the Montreal I had visited for only a short and inadequate few hours on
that occasion the beautiful city ou have here today. But we have a strong
feeling, and I was delighted to fhcS your Prime Minister echoing this,
sentiment that our two countriesfgrowing in strength with their economies
burgeoning, with their populations growing rather more rapidly than those
of other countries and with a special relationship with some of the m jor
powers of the world you oniented principally as you have been 4n the past
towards the North Atlantic and the North America, we with a growing and
special place in Asia and the Pacific. If we can contrive to keep closer
together in the years ahead than we have in the past, if we can think closely
together on the great international questions which will affect the future
of mankind, then I am certain that Canada and Australia together will be
able to make a significant impact for constructive and useful purposes on
the thinking of other countries of the world, and it is with that object in
mind I have pressed your Prime Minister to come and visit our country. / 2 
-2-
I hope there will be an increasing stream of Canadians who will
find if they attempt the journey that it is not so formidable an undertaking
as they might have imagined. There are some very agreeable stopping
points along the way Tahiti, if you must practice your French; there is
Honolulu, if you wish to see how a multi-racial community has turned that
lovely island into a thriving economy and a very enjoyable place to stay; and
then Australia, the oldest continent but with some of the youngest and the
liveliest people that you will find on the earth.
Je regrette profonddment, monsieur le Maire, que je ne peux
parler francais bien. Mon francais, mon professeur a mon ecole etait un
ecossais. Ainsi ce'st difficile pour moi parler en francais a vous.
Mon secretaire, however, in order to meet this situation, has given me these
lines which I am very happy to adopt. Vous avez une ville ancienne et
gracieuse et vous en avez fait cadeau a toutes les nations pour cette
exposition brillante. Au nom del'Australie, je vous apporte nos meilleurs
souhaits et nos congratulations les plus cordiales et chaleureuses.
You must be tremendously gratified with the success which has
already become evident for this imaginative courageously planned,
ambitiously projected exposition. You, Mr Mayor, have become something
of an institution in your own right. I became very envious when I learned
that of the 48 members of your council, you can count upon the regular
support of 45 of them. That is a majority which any politician like myself
would very much envy but I am sure that it is due to your own drive, your
own courage, your own enterprise that this marvellous exposition has been
brought into being and has become a success to be admired around the world.
We are greatly looking forward to visiting it ourselves. We are
proud that Australia should be accorded its own national day of celebration.
I hope we shall prove worthy of it. I am told that just about four times as
many people have visited our pavilion as was estimated for us, in advance.
I don't claim that it is because those who want to rest there find themselves
addressed by people like myself as they recline in those chairs; indeed,
it has been cut down quite considerably. Well, if that is a mark of popularity,
perhaps I should take that hint myself and content myself with saying on
behalf of all my party here with me and indeed on behalf of Australia, which
is proud to be represented here with you and I am sure will derive advantage
from our presence with you, the best wishes for the continuing success of the
Exposition and our warmest congratulations, Mr Mayor and your gracious
wife, and to all associated with you in this marvellously conceived project. 



VISIT TO US, , CANADA AND UK
DTTAX. A, CANADFA
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVE~ N BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT JUNE, 1967
PRIME3 MINISTER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning, ladies and
gentlemen of the Press and others whom I see here.
First, may I say what a pleasure it is to be back in Ottawa. You
mention my Parliamentary experience. It was in that capacity I was here
fifteen years agro as the Chairman of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Conference and as I entered into the Parliament buiklingr this morning, I had
some nostalgic recollections of the very interesting, fruitful talks we had
there then. I have in my office in Canberra a nice big group picture of your
Parliament building, with the representatives of so many Commonwealth
Parliamentarians shown in it.
You have asked me if I would go over the ground that I had coveredi
in discussion with the Prime Minister and members of his Cabinet. You will
be aware, ofcourse, that the Prime Mlinister and I have had other opportun~ ties
of talking at very much greater length than was possible this morning, and:
it can be assumed that we covered just about all the topics that a Canadian and
Australian Prime Minister would wish to canvass together, most of them of
a rather serious and official sort, but other matters as well and I shall say
a word or two about points of detail before I conclude.
This morning I had an opportunity first of having a talk with him and
Mr. Martin before I saw the Cabinet in relation to the Middle East crisis, and
it was very useful to have the up-to-the-minute information which was reaching
them. Later there was some discussion on this inside the Cabinet. There are
two good reasons why I will not be going into detail on this: first of all, it is
not for me to discuss confidential Cabinet-room discussions I would not be
invited to many more if I did but the second reason is that the Prime
Minister has I understand already made some public comment and I do not
think that he would object to my saying that he intends to make a statement
to the House when it meets this afternoon.
V'd. hat I would add is that naturally we are all deeply concerned by these
dramatic developments. Those, who have been close to the discussions, from
the United States, the UK, this country, and other interested countries, had not
anticipated that events would move so rapidly, and before there had been
prospect for some definitive United Nations decision.
But there they are; they have moved. There are conflicting accounts
as to what has occurred. In these situations it is usual to find each side
saying that the other started the fighting first, and it may be some time before
the facts can be sufficiently sorted out for us to come toany judgment on that.
There was not time in all the circumstances for me to discuss in any
very great detail in the Cabinet the full range of matters which I would have
liked to cover, but there are three in particular which I can mention.
The British intentions East of Suez have, as you will be aware,
concerned my own Government, that of the United States, New Zealand, Malaysia,
Singapore and other governments in the area. What may not be so widely
known is that around the arc which runs from South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, 2/ 
South Vietnam itself, the Philippines, Thailand, and of course Australia and
New Zealand under the ANZUS Pact, there are security arrangements which
the United States has entered into in the countries I have mentioned.
The one area which has been regarded as a Commonwealth and
primarily British responsibility is the Malaysia-Singapore area and it is a
matter of obvious concern to the United States and ourselves if the British
were so to reduce their military presence in that area as to cease to have
effectiveness for our joint purposes. However, this is a matter on which
Mr. Wilson has assured me no final decisions will be taken at least until I
have had an opportunity of discussing the matter with him in London in a few
days' time. I am sure this will have featured in his discussions not only with
the President but with the representatives of other interested countries.
I say no more on that at this moment because the two matters which
I felt were more directly of interest and concern to Canada were these:
Canada and Australia have been leading members of the Commonwealth, the
old Commonwealth and the new Commonwealth. I have been a Commonwealth
man all my life, hoping to see this great concept of a multi-racial association
made to work effectively. I could never see how unless this could be accomplished,
we could have a United Nations working effectively. If those of us who have so
much in common interest are not able to co-operate in a constructive way, it
is hard to see how the United Nations, with all its divergencies of interests and
national cross-currents, could succeed in doing so.
But over recent years, we have been concerned to find that there has
been less emphasis on Commonwealth co-operation. Meetings are tending to
become less frequent: it is unlikely, I gather, that they are meeting this year,
and with the United Kingdom seeking entry into the European Economic Community
there may be a reluctance to meet too early at a time when problems arising
from that will be concerning so many countries of the Commonwealth. It was
through the meetings of the Commonwealth that Australia and Canada were able
to maintain a fairly close contact with each other.
What I have been putting to your Prime Minister and to his Cabinet
colleagues ( and I am very glad to say that they have responded in a very positive
way to this) is that Australia and Canada must try to meet together more often
at a governmental level and perhaps even in other ways, that we must get to
know each other better, get to know more about what goes on inside our
respective countries. One of your Ministers is coming out, I gather, to us
in July and I welcome that, but I have also urged the Prime Minister to make
a visit which will be only the second visit ever made, as I recall it, by a
Canadian Prime Minister to Australia. He has assured me that he would hope
to do this, and perhaps towards the end of the year this will be found possible
for him. We have two countries growing in economic strength, growing in
influence throu.-, hout the world. We have a special relationship, each of us,
with the United States and the United Kingdom. Canada, which has developed
a considerable influence through the United Nations and in particular areas of
the world such as the Caribbean and in the continent of Africa, and Australia,
which is developinr a growing influence in the Southeast Asian and Pacific area,
together I think can contribute very valuably to international policy-making of
the future and can contribute valuably, both of us being quite liberal aid-givers,
to the economic programmes of the countries where our assistance is given.
And so it makes good sense that we should not only get closer to each other,
but consult much more frequently with each other. 3/ 
I have a vision of a Canada and an Australia at the end of this century,
when your population will by then almost certainly have doubled and ours will
have doubled; and with the skills and the energies of our people, the enterprise
we demonstrate in our countries, I feel that together we would be a significant
factor in the consideration of international problems. So the more we can
understand why the other adopts a certain line of policy, the more we can
harmonize our policies on these international questions, the better it will be
for this process in the future.
There is the other good reason which I have also canvassed with the
Prime Minister and his colleagues. I believe that there is a substantial
Canadian self-interest in taking a much more active interest in what is going
on in Asia and the Pacific. By the end of the century certainly there will be
more than 60 per cent of the world's population in which we broadly term Asia.
I think that if you take East of Suez now, there is probably three-fifths of human
kind to be found in that area of the world, and most of the countries are countries
unlike those of Africa, even unlike to a degree the countries of South America,
and countries which have thousands of years of civilization behind them, and
skills which have accumulated, but they have never been able to exploit their,
skills or their rich resources because of the turbulence which has been a
feature of life on the mainland of Asia.
Now as different countries, and I speak of those particularly around the
arc that I have mentioned, are able to bring communism under check, and are
able to develop a greater degree of cooperation with other countries in the area
and countries such as my own, the economic progress has been quite striking.
In both Taiwan and Korea, they have developed two of the highest rates of
increase of gross national product to be found anywhere in the world.
It may interest you to know that Australia, which had a negligible trade
with Japan in the years after the second world war has now developed its
trade with Japan to a point where Japan has become the largest purchaser in
value of Australian exports, outstripping even the United Kingdom. The
growth of our trade East of Suez has moved from about 15 per cent in the
early 1950' s to 40 per cent of our total export trade, and this export trade is
a very much greater volume of course than it was in those earlier years.
Now, Japan has evidenced, as have the two countries I have just mentioned,
a very remarkable growth rate and there is a rising curve still in these
countries. There are other countries which have the potential but which have
not yet taken off in quite the same way. I can illustrate that for you by these
figures: India has a population about 42 times that of Australia. It has a value
of gross national product only double that of Australia. Indonesia has a
population 9 times that of Australia, but it has a value of gross national
production only one-third that of my country, and yet beyond argument it is
a country vastly rich in resources and now that it has a more stable administration
and is disposed to be more cooperative with the countries of the western world,
there is some reasonable prospect that growth can develop much more rapidly.
And so I say that Canada which has its own Pacific border and from British
Columbia looks out across the Pacific, should, in its own interest, I believe,
be taking an increasing activity and increasing interest in the affairs of the area.
This is not in any way directed to the short-term problems that we have,
for example, in Vietnam. Your position there is well understood, but I would
hope that, taking the longer view and with these favourable developments which
can be pointed to in so many countries, we would find a growing Canadian
interest and through that interest a growing Australi a-Canadian cooperation. .4/ 
Again I find your Prime Minister and his colleagues very receptive to this
point of view, and indicating that they themselves see the value in pursuing their
general courses along tiLA-se lines, while not of course neglecting their historic
and traditional contacts with the United States and with the countries of Europe.
Now the only other two matters I would like to mention and I will do
this as briefly as I can: Last night it was my pleasure to present to the people
of Canada as a centennial gesture two Australian pictures, one from our
pioneering past a picture of about 1850 by George Hamilton who was one of
the very early settlers. It is quite a historic picture in a sense, and the n-2rk
of a good gift is that it hurts you a little to give it away, and it is a picture that
we do not part with other than a degree of regret, but with a sense of pleasure
that it is going to a very great friend in the Canadian people.
The other one is right at the other end of the time spectrum, in that it is
the work of one of our most distinguished painters, Sir W illiam Dobell. It is
a painting which he was actually putting together for one of our Government
galleries, and the paint was still wet on it when I snatched it from him. But I
thought you had there a good Australian representation something out of the
past, something from one of our very successful and more modern painters.
The other thing is, as you know, we have a pavilion at EXPO. It has proved
very popular. The expectation of the percentage of visitors we would receive
given to us by the EXPO authorities has been greatly exceeded, perhaps in the
order of three times the percentage that was indicated to us. This has had one
consequence which some of us politicians and others might not welcome: the
talking chairs which record us and our views on certain Australian matters have
had to be adjusted, so that the time of speech has been severely truncated.
Well, perhaps you would wish that could happen here. But we have made it known
I did this last night to your Prime Minister and I felt it was appropriate that
this should be made known as from Government to Government that Australia
would wish this pavilion to remain with you, and I would look to the notable
diplomatic skill of the Prime Minister to sort out as between his Government and
others how it might best be employed in your country.
Wlell, thank you for hearing from me to that degree. Now, in the time that
is available, I will be glad to make myself available to you.
Q. Sir, have you any comment to make on the outbreak of war in the Middle
E~ ast and Australia's views on that war?
P. M. No. As I say, your Prime Minister has made some comment and will be
commenting agrain in the House. I certainly would not want to make public
comment on the matters we discussed together. I was given all the information, of
a factual kind and it is still a little confused, understandably that was in the
possession of your Government. I think I mentioned earlier that we were deeply
concerned, as were all peace-loving countries, in a development of this kind,: but
until we can see what comes out of the Security Council, I do not know that there
is a great deal that one can usefully add at this point of time.
Of course, we regret the outbreak of fighting; we would have-hoped that the
processes of conciliation, the good offices of the United Nations, could have been
emp'oyed to find some solution of this matter. The Security Council has gone
into recess, but the members are at call and I understand will be meeting again
later this afternoon. But there, both the representatives of Egypt and of Israel
have claimed that the fighting was initiated by the other and I am in no position
to offer a judgment on that. It seems clear that there have been serious
casualties already and much damage done to aircraft and military installations,
and one particularly unfortunate developmnent is that the thrce Indians in the
United Nations force there have been killed. 
But other than that I do not think I could usefully make a comment I have
not had an opportunity of consulting my own Australian colleagues on these
latest developments. Vie had indicated earlier of course that if there were to
a be a declaration by maritime powers comparab . to the one into which Australia
entered some years ago, we would join in that declaration but that is the extent
of positive action that we have been asked to consider at this point of time.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you were quoted late last week to the effect that you
were in favour of continued bombing of North Vietnam, perhaps intensified
bombing, by the United Stat es. How much escalation, how much bombing, Sir,
and to what end?
P. M. . Well, I do not know that I talked about intensified bombing. I did talk
about the bombing continuing, and it has been intensive bombing, particularly
over the last several weeks when the weather has been good enough to enable it
to be carried out the more effectively. But it does not seem to make sense to
me that when you are resisting armed forces on the ground, and those armed
forces are being supplied from North Vietnam, that you would leave the sources
of supply immune from attack. We have supported the line which the Americfins,
I believe realistically, have adopted in this matter. I know there have been
suggestions that if the bombing were to cease, Hanoi, the Viet Gong, would be
disposed to enter into negotiations. I do not find any substantial evidence, any
convincing evidence, of this at all, and I get as much information on it as most
other heads of government, who are in the closest consultation with the United
States on these matters, and with the Government of South Vietnam. I would take
a lot of persuading that if Hanoi wished to negotiate had a will to negotiate
that it would not find some way, through the various diplomatic channels that
are readily available, and through all the well-intentioned efforts made by
representatives of other countries, to indicate a formula which without any loss
of face to them could get negotiations moving. But on the contrary, every time
there has been a lull either in the fighting or the bombing, full advantage has been
taken of that by the forces in North Vietnam and the authorities there to build up
their supplies, rush supplies which had clearly been inhibited from movement as
a consequence of the bombing earlier, and in that way endanger South Vietnamese
and American lives and the lives of our own people fighting there.
So I have been quite emphatic on this and this is the view of our Government,
and I believe it is the view of the United States. And while the fighting continues
and infiltration of men and material from the north persists, so I believe the
bombing should persist.
Q. Sir, what sort of form do you have specifically in mind when you speak of
Canada taking a greater interest in Asian affairs, and whether or not Canada
should do that? What was Australia's interest in Canada taking a greater
interest there?
P. M. V~ ell, I thought I had indicated that a growing strength economically and in
world influence of the two countries together was in the mutual interest of the
two countries and could make an increasingly positive contribution to policy
making in the world. In one sense, I might be arguing against the economic
competitive position of my own country. I would be prepared to take that risk in the inerest
of the larger considerions that I have mentioned. I am not implying that
Canada is not shoving some interest in the affairs of the reg.. ion; you were
contributors to the Asian Development Bank and you give more liberally than
most countries per head of population to aid programmes. But this is a matter
of degree and I think your own ministerial representatives and the Prime Mini ster
would acknowledge that traditionally and historically the emphasis has been on
Canadian activity in Europe and in its relations with the United States. I am no~ t
arguing that there should be some dramatic reversal of the process. 11hhat I arn
urging is that there be an increasing interest and participation in the affairs of
the region. just what form this would take and in what institutions is a matter for
discussion but it is important that there should be the will to do this and, as I have-
6/ 
6.
indicated, the reactions I have had from the Prime Minister and his colleagues
reveal that they appreciate the importance of doing this.
Q. Sir, do I take it that Australia is still satisfied with the conduct of the war
in Vietnam and that your Government still intends as you stated in Washington
last year to go " all the way with LBJ"?
P. M. XWell, if you do not mind applying that phrase to the Vietnam situation, I
stick by it. We have given support to the United States in Vietnam. May I remind
you that'Australia was the first country to declare itself alongside the United
States when communist aggression moved into North Korea, and I have just come
back from a visit to South Korea and have found the Australian contribution made
at that time greatly appreciated there. Vie were one of the first countries to
declare ourselves in support of the United States in South Vietnam for very much
the same reasons that brought us into the conflict in South Korea: the determination
to resist communist aggression which threatened the integrity of a particular
country but also threatened peace and stability throughout the area as a whole.
It is our conviction that unless communist aggression can be checked in South
Vietnam, then there is no country in the region which could regard itself as being
secure. I read an interesting article by Mr. Drew Middleton, published in the
New York Times a couple of days ago. He has been in all the countries of the
region and with the exception of Pakistan, Cambodia and Burma, he found a
ready acknowledgment and appreciation of the American presence and what it
meant to the security of those countries. And I have seen with my own eyes
what these countries have been able to do in building their economies, in
strengthening their social and political position once the communist threat
has been either resisted or brought under check.
Qf Mr. Prime Minister, you mention the need to bring communism under
check in your area. Do you think it can be done without an eventual clash with
Red China?
P. M. Yes, I think it can. First of all, I do not think that with the resources
available to those who would be resisting China that China could secure a military
victory, and at that point of time I think it would be difficult for it to secure a
political victory. The Chinese are pretty realist-minded people the fact that
they have limited their involvement in North Vietnam, despite the very obvious
interests they have in that matter, I think is some confirmation of this. They
are also a very patient people and they may think that they can secure their ends
over a period of time without getting involved in serious military loss. But I have
seen the strength that has developed in South Korea, in Taiwan, in both of which
countries there are very substantial and well-trai ned, well-equipped military
forces; and the growin ir strength of Thailand economically and Malaysia
economically Malaysia and Thailand also both building up their domestic
security forces. An d I have seen the progress being, made in my own country.
Indonesia I very much doubt whether we would have had the favourable turn
of events in Indonesia had it not been for the clear evidence that the communists
were not going to win in South Vietnam. 



2 4 JUL 1967
VISIT TO US, Cl: W. U. K. WIBRAW
MOTrW. L, C ' DA
*' RESS COFFERECE JIVEI jy THE RIME IISTER, MI.
IH{ iOLD HOLT Ii MONTT;. L 6TH JUND, 1967.
May I je seated? I think this will work better if I
do, Ladies and gentlemen, I first thank Sir V: lston Hancock for
introducing me to the press of Zxno. I do-; int to sn-y ho,. re tly
my own country has annreciated the opportunity of Jeing represented
at Expo, and ho.; proud I am, as the head of the Government, having
had an opportunity of seeing . ustr lin's Pavilion and having hid.
in opportunity of seoin. tho various exhibits, the lay-out and the
eneral construction, that we should have a Pavilion which I believe
ittingly expresses our national sentiment and some of the more
prominent features of our national life. Perha-s, before saying
a little more in detail about that I should acknowledge the
tremendous satisfaction I have felt in what I have seen of Expo
67 generally. It is fitting at a time when man is demonstrating again
only too tragically thAt he can destroy the things that he has
built to find here in this Exposition a demonstration that man
can also innovate and construct and take vision for the future.
It has been something of an inspiration, certainly a tonic in these
sombre days, to have had the opportunity to see Exno 67 in being,
to have gone over some of the Iavilions that of Canada of Cuebec
of Great Iritain in addition to that of my own country Australia
and I am sure that the inspiration and stimulus that has come to
me from the visits to the other Pavilions would be repeated if
only one could have wandered and studied more intensively throughout
this Exposition. My wife said it has almost a spiritual quality
about it. ell, I don't know whether it is spiritual or whether
it has its own mystic, out certainly there is a snirit about Expo
67 which is encouraging, stimulating and even inspiring. One thing
which has imnressed us is that it does not seek to be, so far as we
can gather, a sort of money-making enterprise.
I have an impression of our own Pavilion with me of a
well-constructed, even imainatively conceived Pavilion, with a
quiet restful dignity about it which answers the various phases
of Australian life which are reproduced I think, so arrestingly
in the Pavilion. I would like to take this puolic opportunity of
con ratulating any of the architects and tiose who were concerned
with the interior decor and Sir Valston Hancock and his staff for
helping to make the Australian Pavilion the success which I believe,
the figures of attendance demonstrate it to be. You may have already
been told that the anticipated attendance has been multiplied about
fourfold over the period of the Exposition, and this is at the one
time not only a mark of the success of Expo 67 itself but a mark
also of the attraction which the Australian " avilion hAs held for
those who have visited the Exposition.
So my congratulations on oehalf of my Government and people
to all who had a hand in the Australian contribution. Just as
fittingly one's congratulations must : o to Mrr. Duuy and all
associated with him, and to the city o Montreal for having had the
courage and the enterprise to take those amoitious projects, and
to make such a successful achievement of it. tell, that is all.
I wish to say thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen. If there is any
query which I can conveniently cope with, I shall do my best. / 2 
-2-
Mr. Prime Minister you said in Ottawa, yesterday, that
you envisage a reater role for Canada in Asia, in the po icy
making in Asia. I wonder just what you mean by this? And why
you would see Canada in such a role?
P. M. i', ell, I will de. tl first with the situation as I see it,
and I am projecting my mind not into the short term but into a
much longer period ahead. Jy the end of this century the nopulation
of both Canada and A'ustra. lia should have doubled. already ve have
a significance in international trade and, I believe, in international
affairs out of all proportion to our numbers.
I can't say what the gross national nroduct is of Canada.
I know it is a go d deal higher than that of my own country. Dut,
just to illustrate what I me-in from the situation as I know it.
India has 42 times our population but only double the value of
our gross national nroduct. Indonesia, our nearest neighbour
to the Iorth of Australia, has nine times our ponulation but
only one third of the value of our . ros national nroduct.
ith two countries such as . ustralia and Canada which already have
had a long association through the Commonwealth of Nations and,
with less frequent meetings, inside the Cononwealth and with
a community of interest in other directions in international trade,
in a progressing world of peace I believe that it is important we
should be closer together and get to know each other more closely
than we have been accustomed to do through our occasional meetings
in London. ; e should be encouraging more of our people to visit
each other's country now. '. hat has this to do Twith the Pacific?
You ha-pen to have not only a burgeonin economy but a Pacific
border and an outlook ; estward from 3ritish Columbia and indeed
from the whole nation.
I am sure, your own leader indeed the Prime Minister has
publicly recognized, that where in the past most of the orientation
from Canada has been towards the iorth Atlantic or Korth America,
in the years ahead they have to an increasing degree ( not supplanting
of course the interest you have in these areas I have mentioned), but
to an increasing degree growing trade interest, perhaps a growing
political interest in the affairs of the Pacific. ' ie have a vision
in Australia of a growing Asia, growing in economic, social and
political strength uhere communism can ; e urought in check as it
has in so many of the countries of Asia.
trade with. ei shiaav e osr eethne recmoaurnktaroielse Eeacsotn omoif c Sgurezo wthhas. mo! vMye do wnf rocmo untry's
in 1950 to 40% at this time. Japan just to name one country
trading with us, has surnamsed the inited Kingdom as the biggest
purchaser of Australian goods, and I think Canadians are sufficiently
keen traders. Once they find that this has been going on in an
area to which they look from their ;. estern borders, they will not
be slow to ta. ke up the opportunity which will come their way out there
in a growing Asian economy.
Q. 1Mr. Prime Minister, is Austrtlia and Canada to have a
continuing policy of immigr'ation?
P. M. '. ell, when you say continuing, it has never really had an
all-white policy of immigration. There has always been room inside
the Australian lmmigration policy for the admi. sion of people of
known European races for specified purposes. I find a good deal
of misunderstanding, particularly in this part of the world, far
more misunderstanding than one finds in the countries of Asia
themselves. In fact it might interest you to know that in all my
/ 3 
-3-
visits to the countries of Asia I have never Jeen asked a question
on that immigration policy by the representative of any asian
jovernment because I know in their own visits to Australia no
discrimination is shown against them.
There are at the present time 12,000 students from Asia
in our colleges and in our universities. Since the Second orld
ar more than 50, v000 neole from thee countries have come to Australia,
who had not oeen eligi4bl to enter Australia under the regulation
or rule of immigration which previously applied. . any thousands
of them have taken out full naturalizatiohas australian citizens;
many Asian men and women ma: rry in Australia and immediately take
ustralian citizenship a5 a matter virtually of right. The children,
of course, are australian citizens, out the peoDle of Asia would not
want us to * ive encouragement to those who .0 through the universities
and the colleges, to stay in rermanent residence in Australia. They
want them to ; o back and help them in the development of their own
country. Youfind slokesmen-for tynical Asian countries such as
Tunku bdul . aman of Malaysis, puulicly amending policy, recognizing
the value of a secure sta'ble and r l:. vely homogeneous . ustralia
for the other countries of the region.
C. Mr. Prime iinister, how does your . overnment view the
events of the past 48 hours in the Middle East?
P. M. ' ell we have made official statements on this matter. My
colleague the Denuty Prime Minister, Mr. J. McEwen, with whom I
was in contact, nut out an official statement from the Government
yesterday. * e of course, in company with most of the other people
around the world, deplore those tragic events, and hope that an
effective action can . je speedily taken which will bring an end to
the fighting. , e would hope that this could ue achieved under the auspices
of the United Nations, and I myself would feel that all the major
powers as far as I can discover, are anxious to see the fighting
brou hi to an end, This could be a test of the effectiveness of
the Security Council, : articularlv the permanent members of the
Security Council, and of the United Nations in dealing with a
situa tion in which all the senior members of the Security Council
wish to see the fighting brought to an end.
My own country, of course, has only a relatively insignificant
Dart to play in these events, but we have a reat interest, first in
the cause of peace because peace to us enables us to go on with the
task of development of a great continent, and because peace is
precious in itself. But we also have, as one of the twelve top
trading nations of the world an interest in seeing that the
international waterways are kept free for trade sr. the traffic
of the peaceful and free world. So we are concerned on these
counts to see an early restoration of peaceful conditions in the
area. Q. Sir, if the U. U. force should have to be recruited to
keep the peace there, would Australia particiTate?
P. M. ; ell, you have raised an hypothetical question, and it
is not customary to state Government' policies on hvnothetic. l issues.
But Australia is a rood member of the-United Natiohs. , e have
constantly supported it. ' e supported the action which was taken
in Korea as United Nations action. e have financially supported / 4 
-4-
peace keeping efforts in various directions. ' 7e have policemen in
Cyprus at this moment as part of the United Nations grip there.
ut I mention that as evidence of our record of loyalty to the
United Nations support of foreign decisicns. But I am not committing
my country in : dvance in any course of action until I know what is
proposed to it.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, especially in view of your reference
to Australia's importance as a trading power, and in view of what
happened in the Suez Canal namely tuat the Canal has been closed so
we Rear at least would ou agree with Foreign Secretary Jrown
of the United Kingdom that that is an illegal act, or would you say
in any case it's an act which will seriously jeopardize Australia's
interests? P. M. ell, what I would like to know first before I make any
definite comments would be the facts of the situation As I ha
the news item this morning, the claim has been made th-t the Canal
was closed in order to keen it secure and to protect it against bombing
which could ue dama. in both to the shipping and to the Canal as a
waterway. Now if that were so one might take a different view of
events th. n if it i,: ere simply closed in order to prevent free movement
of shipping, so I would not wish to indicate an attitude of mind
without being fully in possession of the facts that I haven't at the
present time. Thank you. -A 



il ~ 1E 0OtPS
-9 JUN 1967
FOR PRESS: F. M. No. 58/ 1967
MIDDLE EAST HOSTILITIES
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwen
The outbreak of fighting in the Middle East is a tragic development.
All Australians are dismayed at the suffering and destruction that is being
brought to the people of the countries which are now in conflict. In addition
any large scale fighting in that region which upsets the precarious balance
there holds dangers of involving outside powers and endangering peace elsewhere.
The failure of the Security Council to act before hostilities began
is to be deplored. The Australian Government still hopes that the United Nations
can discharge its responsibilities and take decisions for which the Australian
and other governments can offer their full support. The Australian Permanent
Representative to the United Nations has been instructed to give all support to
this end. On 25th May, the Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Hasluck,
said: " I hope that all the Great Powers, whatever their differences on some
aspects of the present situation, will nevertheless work together to prevent
hostilities. Now that hostilities have broken out, this appeal to the Great
Powers is no less valid. In fact, the urgency is even greater.
Australia has a great concern that peace should be maintained in
the Middle East. Where our own good offices can be of use, we are ready to
be helpful. Australia looks to the Security Council to act to prevent a widening
of hostilities and to bring about an end to the present fighting.
CANBERRA, 6th June, 1967. 


Mr. Commissioner General your Excellencies, distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Mesdames et Messieurs :It is a great honour and privilege for the head of an Australian Government to respond to the words of welcome in which you have referred to Australia as a member of the family, that family of nations of which Canada and Australia have long been members in the Commonwealth of Nations,  and a larger family represented at the United Nations itself.
Today as most of the world finds itself dismayed and disturbed by the sombre events in the Middle East,  as I stand here and see before me fluttering in all their colourful splendour the flags of more than sixty nations, I take this as a  reminder as indeed Expo itself is a glittering symbol that man can demonstrate his capacity to collaborate for peaceful and constructive purposes, and perhaps this is the lesson which we can derive with most advantage from what we see around us in this spectacular Expo 67.
Australia has been proud to join with others in projecting its on national image through this great  exposition and on this, the day which you have kindly set aside for our special national identification. We hope to demonstrate to you some features of Australian life as in the Australian Pavilion we illustrate to you some of the things which we feel mark ourselves for special recognition around the world, some of the features of Australian life and scenery which are unique to us or which have marked us out for note by other countries. You will see our corals, our apples, our gum trees and our kangaroos. You have referred to our sportsmen and in tennis where we have managed to demonstrate an international supremacy for many years now, it is fitting that there should be today an exhibition of our tennis capacity by some of our leading players. but from all of this, we take satisfaction that we are but one country joining with many others helping to mark this historic centennial of the story of Canada; a country which, with limited population contending with difficult climate has yet managed to build a national identity respected by all and regarded with affection by most countries around the world and we in Australia look hopefully to a future in which our two democracies growing in economic and national strength together, and with an international influence growing as we grow in that strength, the truth of our friendship, we should be able to make an increasing contribution to the eace, the progress and the prosperity of mankind. In that spirit, Mr. Commissioner General I thank you again for the warm thin ss you have said of my country and its people, I thank you particularly for our well—merited tribute to Sir Valston Hancock and those of the Australian staff who have contributed toward. making our participation here such a success.
It is gratifying indeed to know that we have already  exceeded nearly fourfold the anticipated percentaje of attendance at the Australian Pavilion and all of this is a mark of the success of the Exposition as a whole, but it also I believe, indicates that the Australian Pavilion has developed its own attraction for those who visit Expo 67. May the success which is already brought you, I understand, just on tin million visitors to Expto, continue throughout the eriod of its existence and may an Australian success, through our own Pavilion,  go hand in hand with that of the successful Exposition as a whole.
Our congratulations finally to the enterprising people of Montreal who have the courage and the vision to stage in this magnificent highly imaginative and decoratively satisfying fashion an Exposition which will express the hopes of mankind, the achievements of mankind, and the scope that remains in this world, and we hope will longer bide for the peaceful collaooration of the nations of the world. Our final felicitations to your Commissioner General for all that you have contributed to the success of your Exposition and may this be for you an enduring testimony to your own dedication and the skills and capacities of the people you so agreeably represent.
 
 
 
 
 



* 1
1 3 JUN 1967
FOR PRESS BRAR
P. M. No. 59/ 1967
MIDDLE EAST
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwen
Australia, in common with practically the whole world,
welcomes the action which the Security Council has now unanimously
taken in calling for a cessation of all warlike activities in the Middle
East. We earnestly hope that it will now become possible for
the United Nations to take an active and effective part in bringing about
an enduring settlement of the problems of the region and ensure the
freedom and security of the member states of the United Nations, which
have been involved.
CANBERRA, 7th June, 1967. 



15 JUN 167
VISITL O U1., CANADA AND UK
N3 YORK, U1SA
ADDRESZS TO THE AMEIRICAN/ AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATION
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT AT THES
RIV*" ER CLUB " TH JUN-i, 1 W7
I want to speak about matters which are of domestic concern to us but
which I believe are also of importance in the relations of your country with
my own. The mou we can devel6p our own economic capacity in the international
field the more we can help strengthen the American position in our area of the
world. I believe it to be an abiding interest of the United States of America, at
the highest policy level, to assist Where it can to strengthen the economy and the
international significance of a staupch ally and friend who can mean so much to
America in our area of the world.
Growth has been our major objective in the field of economic development
and this has been spelled out in terms of people and capital of vision and
enterprise. These things have been our watchwords since the end of Wlorld
W ar 11. Our objective has been to make the nation secure, prosperous, able to
help our less fortunate neighbours and play a proper part in the defense systems
of the free world. Our needs have been people and capital. Our vision has been
reflected in our long-standing relationships with Britain and America and a
recognition of our special regional position in Asia. I have, as many of you
will be aware, just come back from another visit to four countries of Asia wlich
I think it would have been difficult for many heads of government to have taken
as a general peregrination.
Some might have got to one, or to two or to three of them, but it is a
mark of the special position we occupy in that region that I was able to go in all
friendliness and to be warmly received in such diverse countries with such
diverse policies as Cambodia, Laos, Taiwan and Korea. And what I saw there
heartened me tremendously in the vision I have of the kind of Asia which can
develop in the future a vision which I am glad to say your President shares
and in which I believe the other leading members of your administration fully
endorse. The people and capital we. need have been coming but the pressures of the
day are casting some shadows ahead to us. The United Kingdom, for example,
is facing fundamental decisions, both in her economic relationship with Europe
and in her military and strategic dispositions E~ ast of Suez. These are matters
I have already discussed to some degree with Mr. Wilson and with President
Johnson. I will be discussi ng them further with Mr. W., ilson in London next
week. The Australian economy continues to thrive. The grQwth in gross national
product last quarter compared with the corresponding quarter 12 months previoutly
was 13% F. ' ihere had been a rise of about 2-1 per cent in price level over the
period, partly as a result of government decisions increasing charges in various
directions to help finance a growing defence bill. But the net growth, even
taking that into account, remained considerable. The earlier period, however,
to give a balanced picture, had been affected by drought conditions in some parts
of Australia and an increase in farm income between the two periods was from
266 million to 436 million US dollars, an important factor in the rise. But the
increase in non-farm GNP was, nonetheless, very high at 10 per cent. .92/ 
Vie shall take increasing strength in future years, thanks to the efforts
which many represented heie today are making, from our growing export
returns from quite dramatic mineral discoveries and a lessened requirement
for oil imports if we continue to make useful discoveries of oil and natural gas.
In the week before I left Australia there were five promising new discoveries
three of oil, one was at Roma in Queensland which was estimated to be the
best since the Moonie discovery. More than a thousand miles away, off the
coast of Victoria, the ESSO-BHP people had a strike which, while it has not
yet been fully assessed, is certainly mor promising. And over on the coast
of WTestern Australia, just by Barrow Island, where a well had been sunk on
another island, Pasco Island, there was, again, another very promising
discovery. The other two discoveries were a natural gas strike just a few miles
from the Coast of Victoria closer, indeed, to the shore than the earlier
ESSO-BHP discoveries of natural gas and an important nickel discovery over
in Wlestern Australia by a company in which Anaconda has a substantial
interest. And I mention this as the experience of one particular week. I
don't say we can do that every week, but we have been doing it in enough weeks
over recent years to raise great expectations for us of the strength this will
brin; to our external position.
While the current state of the economy and I speak subject to dry
conditions in some areas which raise a little concern for the season ahead and
the wheat crop represents a generally favourable picture, our national
requirements for defence and for development continue to place heavy
requirements and pressures on domestic resources. Our manpower is fully
employed. The migration inflow continues to be steady with a gross intake
this year of about 140, 000. V; e have had one of our best trading years, with
imports and exports likely to be close to balance.
On the other hand overseas reserves, while still at a comfortable level,
have been falling to some degree as a consequence of a combination of
factors. We have had reduction in the level of capital inflow following the
policies of restraint exercised by the governments of the United Kingdom and
the United States of America and these are our two principal sources of
capital. There is a reduced availability of overseas loan money. What is
available calls for higher rates than we have been accustomed to pay.
The Interest Equalisation Tax continues to irk us and operate against
us quite unreasonably. Wrhile borrowings have been reduced, we have been
repaying loans of the past. Our total government indebtedness to the United
Kingdom for example, is now more than œ stg 100 million less than it was
years ago. And there are overseas guided missile destroyers, submarines and
the F-1ll aircraft.
There are also our overseas disbursements for military aid in respect,
for example, of operations in Vietnam and the contribution we are maling in
Malaysia. We cannot afford a blockage in our growth systems without direcy
affecting our defence capacity and our capacity to give useful aid to others.
Britain and America have provided Australia with most of its capital
since the war and, despite an increased amount generated internally, we
remain a capital importer and are certain to continue that way. Actually
per cent to 90 per cent of our fixed capital investment is generated within
Australia. But it is the remaining 13 per cent which is of great value to us in
opening up new industry and giving us new techniques. 3/ 
7e understand the reasons why Britain and America have placed restraints
on the outflow of capital. But we do not feel we are asking for special favours
when we ask that you here in America consider some early relaxation of those
restraints. cannot afford to have our defence and aid programme slip out of
gear. And, remember, we have doubled our defence effort in the last four years.
ie are also the third largest aid diver in net termsn per head of population. It is
all given in the form of grants without conditions. There are mutual advantages
for both our countries if our development in these fields continues.
Defence expenditure has more than doubled since 1962-63. It is now running
close to five per cent of gross national product and this percentage is I am
informed only surpassed by the Unite: i 2tates and the United Kingdom, which do
not have our higher rate of population growth and the degree of provision for
housing and other capital works which accompany . that higher rate of population
growth. withhold from consumption a higher percentage of our gross national
product 27 per cent than any other country in the world except Japan.
The impact of your Interest . iqualisation Tax is one exa. mple of a difficulty
which persists for us on the capital market. You have granted exemptions to
Canada and Japan, and we find it difficult to understand why Australia cannot
receive the same benefit. 7. e are actually losing reserves to the United States on
government capital account unless this borrowing is facilitated. Ou r existing
government debt in New York is requiring repayment and interest charges at the
rate of $ UC35 mcillion annually. Australian Government guaranteed corporations
like the airlines and other instrumentalities also owe money in the United States
and their repayment and interec: charges amount to up to an additional $ UG33 m.
a year. These are continuing burdens, and we hope they will be understood
sympathetically. And to get the full picture of our payments out to you, there is
the growing dividend payment from increased United States investments in
Australia and a degree of borrowing inside Australia over recent years by Unite d
Statec corporations which in earlier times were able to turn to their own
borrowing sources in the United States. Co we want these things to be understood
csypathetically and, we hope, acted on appropriately.
Our efforts to strengthen our position externally are frustrated to some
degree not solely by your country by various policies which continue to
operate against us. I've mentioned the interest equalisation tax, on which I
believe vie have strong case. Our country has been a good ally of the United
States none stauncher over recent years. 7e have not looked for a dollar of aid,
but we have looked for a sympathetic and realistic understanding of some of these
problems. In the last 17 years our exports to America have increased by only about
half the increase of our imports from-the United States. To put it another way,
today Australia imports $ US6C. 3-a Iead from America but exports only $ UC31.
a head. In another form and I think this makes the point a little. mrre
3raphically some 12, 03, 33. Australians import 6C. 33 dollars value per head
from you, and some 23, 330, ; 3 Americans import less than 2. 2 dollars per
head from us. And I have not taken into this account the difference in per-capita
income in our two countries which, in 1965 amounted to 3, 502 dollars an
American citizen and 1, S3dollars an Australian citizen. ! hen you take per
capita consumption measured in terms of consumption capacity again the
disparity beco--es all that much wider.
Australia is, in fact, the fastest growing market, I understand, for
American exports. As we grow and develop vie are going to buy more American
goods, and in the defence field as we grow and strecgthen nationally we will be
playing a larger part in the joint policies that we have in our area of the world,
and, indeed, in the international situation generally. 2o you have special
reasons, including self-interest, in supporting our growth. 
The United States purchases from us less than half the value ($ US375 m.)
of goods that we purchase from the United States ($ US80C And this
unfavourable balance has been a chronic feature of the trade between our two
countries for many years. VWe feel that on raw wool we have been given a raw
deal. One of the major disappointments of the Kennedy round was that no
American offer to negotiate a 50 per cent reduction in the wool duty emerged,
although we had a very confident expectation from our earlier discussions that
this would be so. Furthermore, the benefit of the reduction in the wool duty from
34 cents a pound to 25-cents which was made in 1947 was quickly impaired two
years later when the United States we having paid our quid pro quo for this
arrangement introduced subsidy arrangements to encourage local production.
America is, in fact, the only industrial country in the world to impose a
duty on this raw wool, and it puzzles me that Australia should have only .1 of
one per cent of its wool enter without this duty when more than 67 per cent of New
Zealand wool enters the United States duty free. And I remind you that I speak
for a staunch United States ally, not an unfriendly power. I might also note
here our position on sugar, dairy products, meat, lead and zinc. These items
comprise 70 per cent of the value of our exports to the United States of America,
but eachof them is currently under threat of some restrictive action or
legislation in America.
These are anxieties in Australia about what the future holds in our trading
relationships in all these commodities. We are watching with keen interest for
the results of the Tariff Commission inquiry into the effects of imports on the
American dairy industry, and into the need for restrictions on dairy products
not at present subject to import quotas. These may be problems lying ahead for
Australia. There are others imminent. The bills before your Congress
proposing restrictive quotas on imports of meat and lead and zinc, and tighter
restrictions on dairy products, would cut us back perhaps by $ UCS0m. in our
present trade if they become law. You will understand the unease in our
industries at this possibility.
A cut-back in meat exports would be a matter of difficulty for us. The
chances of alternative markets for meat exporters if they are restricted further
in the United States are not good, because the only other major world markets
are Britain and the European Economic Community.
There is quite a long history to our meat transactions. It began as a story
of growth by us to meet your need and we were supplying a type of meat which
was not being supplied by the market here, the inferior quality meat for hamburgers
and that sort of thing. Then at your request, we voluntarily limited our meat
exports, but this was soon followed by more A, er ican restrictions. At present
the latest American estimate of 1967 imports is 402, 000 tons being ab out 2, 000
tons below the quota. So no quota applies. However since quotas are imposed
if imports are estimated to exceed a " trigger" point the legislation sets an
effective upper limit on imports. For 1967 this " trigger" point is 444, COO tons,
or 24, 000 tons less than actual imports in 1963 when Australia agreed to restrict
exports voluntarily. This suggests that we are losing ground, and the
uncertainty is disturbing to our industry.
The other field I mentioned lead and zinc also has shadows falling. The
United States is the world's biggest market for lead and zinc and, as such,
directly and indirectly affects all world exporters when restrictions are imposed.
The recent slackening in demand has led to new proposals for the reimposition
of quotas. No-one liked the old quotas, though we accepted them without too
much protest, but if present intentions are carried out the new quotas would be
more permanent and, under the proposed formula as we see it, they could lead
to a progressive reduction in the rate of imports. Our industry considered the
situation so serious that it arranged, for the first time, to submit evidence at
the recent Senate Committee hearing. Spokesmen for the administration
opposed the proposals and for this we are grateful. Rut the Commnittee reported
favourably on the bill and the risk remains. 
Another problem I shall mention is sugar. Y.' e would like o feel
that as the world's largest sugar exportr after Cuba ( which, of course, has
been denied access to American markets) we would be in line for more
generous allocations when there were needs arising from short-falls in
supplies against quotas. It is true we gained access to a lucrative
American market when the break with Cuba took place But we did not
take advantage of the 1963-64 world shortage to divert to more lucrative
markets. 7. maintain . d exports to Am rica in excess of '? CO, C00 tons,
thereby foregoing profits elsevihere.
On wheat, I acknowledge with appreciation that th United States
accepted an Australian request regarding the question of ' basing points'
in the recently concluded international VWheat Agreement.
But the overall result, even there, fell disappointingly short of our
earlier stated objectives, and to secure any agreement at all we accepted
the obligation of increasing what had been a voluntary provision of wheat
aid to the extent of 130, ? C tons per annum to a commitment of 225, 00C tons
per annum. Some of the anxieties I have rmentioned may not develop into
hurtful events, but the possibility is there, and in a spirit of frankness and
of friendship, I wanted to tell you how we feel about them. 7 e need
stability in our trading relationships, just as you do. As a good friend, we
prefer to speak about these things while there is still time for consideration,
rather than grumble too much after the event.
THE MIDDLE EAST
Now if I could turn for a fevw minutes to two matters in the
international field.
have never been able to ignore the incessant condition of
tension that has prevailed betvween Israel and the Arab States ever since
Israel came into dxistence as an independent State. But I am sure all of us
hoped it was not going to bring a major resumption of hostilities among those
countries in the immediate area, or bring us a. d others so close to the brink
of involvement as we may have come in the last few days.
7 e have had at least ten years in which these tensions had been kept
under some sort of control, ten years in which many of us had begun to hope
that realism and tolerance, with the help of the United Nations, would
ultimately bring a political settlement of th! s unhappy conflict.
It is all the more depressing, therefore, that a conflagration has
flared again, and in so doing has threatened to spread to the point of
embroiling the great powers, and possibly a great part of the world, either
directly or indirectly.
At this point in time, there is nothing helpful in accusing either side
of having started the trouble. e can only be thankful that the Security Council
has at least managed to agree on a resolution calling for a cease fire. This
was clearly the first thing that had to be done if we , vwre to avoid the prospect
of another " World ar. 
6.
There is no disagreement among us all that the first thing to be
done is to stop the fighting. Then we can look again all of us to see
if, together with our friends, and through the United Nations, we can find
ways of making it possible for both sides in this unhappy and long-lasting
confrontation to live together in peace.
Meanwhile, we in Australia are grateful for the unsparing efforts
that the President and the Administration of the United States, and the
Prime Minister and Government of the United Kingdom, together with other
Governments, have made to brin3 the Security Council to a point of
decision. VI ETNAM Cn Vietnam, I do not need to explain at length to this gathering
why we are involved there. The short answer is because the Republic of
Vietnam asked for our help in combating the attacks directed against it
from the Communist regime in the North, and because we saw this
Communist-inspired and direct -d agression as a threat to free people and
small nations small nations in particular everywhere.
V: gave our help because we believe the Republic of Vietnam has
a right to secure the separate, independent status that was granted to it
under the Geneva Agreements of 1934: that is people have a right to choose
their own way of life and be free to pursue with confidence the social and
economic development for which they yearn.
The Communists in the North do not want this: they want to
impose their own communist way of life on South Vietnam. In Australia,
we believe that if the Communists were to succeed in this, then all Nations
in South East Asia would come under the same kind of pressure.
This is the Communists' proclaimed programme of ' National
Liberation". But properly understood, this programme is not national
it is the programme of the Peking brand of international communism. It
does not liberate to produce a free society it operates to produce anoth
satellite in the Communist orbit.
Our aim, therefore, is both defensive and constructive. Wa ew ant to
see the ambitions of people in the new countries of Asia develop their own
new societies, offering the material and social benefits that other modern
societies now enjoy, but preserving their own national and cultural identities.
Neither we nor you are bent on overthrowing the present regime in
North Vietnam. Strongly as we reject the Communist philosophy an society,
we have no aggressive aims against North Vietnam, nor against its neighbour and
supporter, Communist China. Let them work out their destinies free from
our interference. 3ut they must not interfere with others.
No aggressor can expect his bases and communications and his
war-making capacity to remain immune from attack. This would grant him an
unacceptable military advantage, and j eopardise more lives in the villages
and battlefields of the South. It is for these reasons that we in Australia
continue to support strongly limited, controlled and discriminatory military
bombing of selected targets in the North. 
7.
The struggle may be long and bitter. 3ut there is progress. The
Military campaign has not been won, but it is now certain that it cannot
be lost. Despite the ravage and destruction of the war there is heartening
evidence of consolidation in South Vietnam of military, political, social
and economic progress.
Air Vice Marshal Ky and his Administration have lasted longer than
most people predicted, and in doing so have made significant gains not only
in the estimation of their people but in the establishment of order and
security. This is further encouragement to us to see out the issue in Vietnam.
hope the end will come soon, but we cannot look forward to
this with any confidence at the present time. The cost of the war in men and
resources falls heavily on South Vietnam and the United Ctatec in particular.
It is costly to my own country. V.' e are as eager as anyone else to end it.
V: e are anxious to see any avenue to a settlement thoroughly explored, to
seize any opportunity that right offer a credible advance to a settlement.
The hard fact, however, is that not only is no settlement in sight,
but the regime in the North shows no inclination at all despite the flurries
of expectation that occur from time to time to be ready to talk of peace.
All efforts, and there have been a number, to open any sort of negotiation
with the North Vietnamese r1eime have completely failed.
I know of nothing new in the diplomatic field that allows us to hope
this situation might soon change. Until it does, we and you have no
alternative but to continue to combat the aggression. V'' e must hope that a
more realistic view of his prospect will lead the a-grssor finally and
we hope in the not too distant future to the negotieting table. 



S16 JUN1967
LIBRAN
VISIT TO CANADA A. D U. K.
YORK, U. S. A.
; DDRES iY HE RME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HIOLT
TO THE F~ r-,. ST iL. ETR IC COUICIL AT THE ALDORF HOTEL
9TH JUIE, 1967.
" 7e are, in Australia, a community with a
strone European tradition and history but we find
ourselves increasingly involved in Asia, and whether we are
classed by the geographer as part of asia or not we
increasingly think of ourselves as involved in its
problems and concerned with its potentialities. And so
I want to speak particularly about the region of Asia
in general. It is misleading, in a sense, to sreak of the
problems of Asia as if Asians are oneset of people. There
are wider differences of anpearance, hauits of life,
historical uacksroun. and culture to be found in Asia than
is to be found in a-iv other area of the world. I have
just come oack from i tour not the first by any means
but my first to the four countries, Cambodia, Laos,
Taiwan and Korea.
I was particularly struck with these differences
which existed in countries with adjoining boundaries or
which w'ere located close to each other. The dissimilarities
were more obvious than the similarities. Yet, I suppose
it is not so surprising when one thinks of the history of
the British Isles and The marked differences in language,
in approach in temperament, in physique, hajit of life
of the people of E. land, Scotland, Ireland and . ales.
The differences are even more manifest in the
countries of Asia. do well to bear this in mind, because
so many of those who speak about the region adopt broad
descriptions which i thLnk could be quite misleading and
dangerous if they are to form the basis for policy-making.
Even the people of the area, themselves, talk about settling
things the Asian way, repudiating, at times the efforts
being made by others outside the region to deal with their
problems as thouh settling thin s the Asian way meant
that all Asians tried to settle things in the same way.
I would be very surprised to learn that the
people of South Korea settle things the same way as the
people in India, or the Indonesians the same way as the
Burmese, or the Chinese even the same way as the Vietnamese,
and so on. Therefore we do well to remember that we are
speaking of a very diverse range of peoples with different
problems and often different aspirations, and certainly
different attitudes to the problems of life.
Then, we get the other sort of cliche which is
popularised in some of the left wing and more doctrinaire
ournals such as the Iew Statesman, which occasionally
is taken up by thi politicians who hold that it is wrong
something immoral to have white faces either in uniform
or in industry on the mainland of Asia.
Many of you represented here today are on the / 2 
-2-
mainland of Asia in industry, and you will find to varying
degrees that your presence is welcome there that you can
do a great deal to assist in the prosperous growth of the
people of this region.
But more particularly I speak today about the
question of havi n white faces in uniform on the mainland
of Asia, and to challenge the proposition that this is
either in some way immoral or unwelcome to the people of the
region. I would go so far as to say that the contemporary
trend is entirely in the opposite direction. Nowhere is
this better exemplified than in the recent experience of the
United States of America. Even some Americans, I think
would ue surprised to learn how many security cormitments your
country has gladly accepted in the countries of Asia and
around the periphery of Asia. Those commitments cover
South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Thailand, the Philippines and
now actively in South Vietnam.
In Australia and New Zealand we have our
associations with you of a security kind in the AlZUS Pact
and the South-East Asia Treaty Organisation, where again
we co-operate on a multilateral basis to combating communist
infiltration and aggression in the region.
But that is not the end of the story. Your military
participation has not only been welcomed by these countries,
in some instances it has nreserved them from being overrun
by the forces of communism. This is particularly true of
course, in South Korea. I am proud to say, were the
first country to declare ourselves alongside you when you
made that historic decision to intervene and help in checking
communist aggression there.
I think of this as one of the two critical and
historic policy decisions made by the people of the United
States in contemporary times. The other was the Marshall
Plan, which for the first time that I can recall in human
history, set out in a disinterested way to assist other
nations to build up their economic strength, reconstruct
after the devastation of war and build again a secure place
in the expanding world.
The jesson of the Marshall " lan should have been
taken up by ticse countries who were assisted as a result
of it to establish themselves again in economic strength.
I find myself dissatisfied with the extent to which they
have taken up their share of the burden of helping to improve
the lot of the rest of mankind, less fortunately placed. The
United States continues to set a fine example in this particular
direction. The other historic decision which I believe opens
up a new watershed of human history, a new phase in the
history of man, was the decision and all that has since
flowed from it, to intervene in the crisis which developed
in South Korea. Had you not decided that way at that time,
South Korea would, of course have been overrun and been
part of the Chinese Communist dominion. There would have
been no South Vietnam conflict because not having chosen
to intervene at one point, it would not have seemed worth
the cost an the struggle to intervene at the other.
I question whether Taiwan could have been held
from communist incursion. Down through that whole region
of South-East Asia there would have been no effective / 3 
check on communist penetration. I know there is a school
of thought which believes that because these people have
strong national sentiments they would not have welcomed the
Chinese. That may be so. But they would have proved
incapable of resisting the incursion of the communist
philosophy and the so-called wars of national liberation,
which are not national in sentiment and certainly do not liberate.
As far as the national aspect was concerned that
would have been submerged by the general Peking-oriented
nhilosophy of communism. So far as lioeration was concerned,
they would not have been free.
I; e would have been faced with a very different
kind of world from that which, with reasonable fortune,
and by our own endeavours, we can sustain in the future.
It is my conviction that we would not have had
the favourable turn of events in Indonesia had the United
States not been present in strength in South Vietnam. There
in Indonesia, you not only had a very strong communist
party but the administration was leaning increasingly
towards it, and I question whether there would have been
the encouragement for resistance to these forces in
Indonesia had they not seen that America was in strength in
South Vietnam, determined to resist communist penetration
and further communist expansion through the area of South-East
Asia. That gave them heart to take un the struggle
themselves, and you have now a reasonable prospect that
Indonesia a potentially rich country of more than 100,000,000
people will be, if not part of the free world camp at least
a co-operating member of the international community
developing its resources for its own uenefit and that of
international trade generally in the years ahead.
As you turn around the neriphery of Asia you
find a receptiveness to people from beyond the mainland.
I could instance country after country. In Thailand there
are protective forces of the United States and even a
small representation from my own country. In Malaysia we
are more strongly represented with the British and other
Commonwealth forces. In Korea, Vietnam and Taiwan there
has been substantial assistance, military and economic,
by the United States.
There is an increasing tendency to co-operate in
such institutions as the Asian and Pacific Council in the
Asian Development bank, in ECaFE, in SEATO and in the Colombo
Plan. I feel that, in view of the conjecture going on
about the British position East of Suez in future years
acknowledgement should be made of the contribution of the
United Kingdom, first in combating the communist inspired
guerillas for many years in what was Malaya, and then in
more recent times, with considerably expanded forces helping
to resist, and successfully doing so over a period of three
years the confrontation of Malaysia by Indonesia, This
underlines, I believe, the importance of a continuing British
presence in the area. Around the whole arc of South-East
Asia, the only area in which the United States has not taken
up a defensive obligation has been in relation to Malaysia
and Singapore. This area they have regarded not
unreasonably as a Commonwealth and primarily a British / 4 
-4-
responsibility. 3ut on that matter there will be further
discussions before the final British decisions are taken.
-e can all sympathise with the United Kingdom's
view at a time when the country is under very heavy economic
pressure. But over recent weeks, there have been in two
areas East of Suez in Hong Kon and in the Gulf of Aqaba
dramatic illustrations to the British Government of its
involvement, in a world role whether it wishes it or not.
The rioting in H ong Kong and the short war in the Middle
East have shown thit Britain is directly concerned in a
significant way.
There are, I know some in this great and
powerful country who would like to leave the problems of
the world where they are. Just as in the long, long ago
there were many who felt you should stay out of Europe.
But you didn't stay out of Europe, because you responded
to the call of free men for help in desperate days, and
now as the new area of crisis has moved to Asia you are
committed again in strength and to a different type of war.
The undeclared war. But war nevertheless.
I was in South Korea very recently, and was
heartened by what I found there. There is a tendency
to think of these countries as small countries, weak
countries not very much worth bothering about. But
most of the world is made up of relatively small countries.
There are great powers, of course and their
aggregate populations are a very substantial portion of
the world as a whole. But if you examine the membership
of the United Nations there are many countries which are
not all that large but which do have a significance in the
scheme of thin. s. South Korea has 30,000,000 fine,
vigorous, to uh, industrious people and it was heartening
to me to see how they had taken on the problems of
industrial development.
Whether you look there, whether you look at
Taiwan whether you look at Malaysia, Thailand or even at
neutral Cambodia, where Prince Sihanouk has personally
directed himself to the task of economic development you
will see progress being made. I was shown with some pride
the new port of Sihanoukville. There the Cimbodians are
trying to secure, for the first time, an outlet to the
sea instead of having all their goods come through what
has in the past proved dangerous territory along the Mekong
River. In each of these countries there is something to
see of growth and progress. In Malaysia Tun Razak, the
Deputy Prime Minister, outlined to me the developmental
objectives of his country. In Thailand you can hear the
same story. In Taiwan which like Korea can noint to one
of the highest rates of increase in gross national product
to be found anywhere in the world, there is much to see
which most of the western world knows little about.
Unfortunately most of the countries of Western
Europe know very little about the developments which are
occurring in this area. I cannot recall, for example, any
senior member of the British Cabinet going through this area
over recent years. Some may have touched in Singapore or
Kuala Lumpur. But none has made a run of an instructive 
kind. If you were to speak of most of the countries of
iiestern Europe, you would get the same kind of result.
Yet, east of Suez, there are currently nearly
three fifths of humankind, and they are stirring as they
shake off the shackles of the past, as they find
themselves capaule of resisting the aggression of the
past. These are the things that have held them back,
not lack of auilities, not lack of skills, not lack of
culture. Most of them have cultures and skills older
than those of your country and mine. But, for the first time
in centuries they are getting a chance to exoress themselves
in a constructive and positive way.
This holds tremendous promise for us all. I
was canvassing this with the Prime Minister of Canada, Mr.
Pearson. Canada has a Pacific border but that nation
has been oriented for most of its history to the North
Atlantic and North America. The Canadians are pretty
capable international traders, and when they see the
potentialities in Asia I do not think they will long
persist in that kind of orientation. At least they will
devote some of their view to what can happen across the
Pacific. I give full credit to your own administration
for their recognition of Asia. The first senior America
representatives I can recall passing through my country,
who had made their own personal assessment of what was
happening in this area of the world, were Governor Dewey
and John Foster Dulles. These men paved the way.
Your own President made the first historic visit
of a United States President to the region and to Australia,
and his recognition of the area's potentialities has been
shared by the administration.
There is hope in this for mankind as a whole.
My own country since the 1950' s has built up its export
trade east of Suez from 15 percent Pf our exports to more
than 40 percent of our exports. Japan, with whom we had
virtually no trade right into the 1ite 1940' s now ranks
as the largest purchaser of Australian goods in value in
the world and it is rapidly rising.
The potentialities may Je better understood by
some comparisons. India, with forty-two times our
population, only possessed twice our gross national product
in value. Indonesia, with nine times our population, only
rates one third the value of our gross national product.
As these countries build their economies, with assistance
from the stronger countries of the world, they will in the
years ahead show tremendous growth.
My country is committed to growth. believe
we are favourably placed with those of you who have
already come to help and share to serve as a springboard
to the burgeoning economies of Asia. W. e hope more of you
will come. Those of you who do will, I am sure, stay
happily with us and build the greater Australia of the
future. But this prospect, can only be secured if we
are firm in our resolution to resist aggression where we
find it in that area of the world and elp the Asian
people to be free. These people aspire to a better order
of life and are prepared to work for it and give their
skills to it. / 6 
-6-
The United 3tates, with its ima-inative realistic
anpreciation of the problems and potentialities ol the
region, is contributing to the hopes expressed by us in
our declarations for freedom at Manila.
CANLE . IA. ~ i 



166J UN1967
VISIT TO US, CANADA AND UK LBRAk
NEW YORK, USA
INTERVIS',! GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
IN NATIONAL BROADCASTING CORPORATION ' S " MEET THE PRESS"
NATION-.' IDE PUBLIC AFFAIRS SESSION TELECAST IN NE2' YORK
1-1.33 PM AND BROADCAST NATIONALLY OVER NBC RADIO NETVORK
6.33-7 PM 11TH JUNE, 1967
Panel Moderator: Lawrence 3. Spivak
Panel Members: James Robinson NBC News
Bill D. Moyers Newsday
William R. Frye World and Focus Syndicate
James R. Shipley Time Magazine
Spivak: This is Lawrence Spivak inviting you to Meet the Press. Our guest today
on Meet the Press is the Prime Minister of Australia, Harold E. Holt. The
Prime Minister recently completed a state tour through Singapore, Thailand,
Cambodia and Taiwan. He came to the United States to confer with President
Johnson. ' le will have the first questions now from James Robinson of NBC News.
Robinson: Mr. Prime Minister, Australia has frequently voiced concern about a
power vacuum being created east of the Suez, but more specifically Southeast
Asia, by the coming withdrawal of British military in that area. While here in
the United States have you sought or received assurances from this Government
that the US would move into that void?
PM: You mentioned the coming withdrawal. I think we need to correct that
premise. The United Kingdom Government has taken no firm decision on this.
Indeed, I have been assured by Prime Minister V,' ilson that no final decision
will be taken at least until we have had a chance of talking this over together.
But the United States has, as you know, commitments all aound the arc of Asia
and the Pacific running from Korea, Japan, Taiwan, South Vietnam, Thailand, and
there is this one area of Malaysia in Singapore which it has regarded, quite
properly, as a Commonwealth and primarily a British interest. And British
intentions east of Suez therefore are of concern to the United States as indeed
they are to my country.
Robinson: Do they view the same concern that your country does, specifically, if the
British, which they have indicated time and time again because of monetary
commitments, they would have to perhaps withdraw their forces from Malaysia
and cut down the forces, which they have already done in Hong Kong?
PM: what is certain is that the United Kingdom intends to reduce
substantially its forces in that region. It has taken no final decisions as to
complete withdrawal. And we do take the view, in your country and mine, that
a British presence in the area is desirable not merely for military reasons,
it is a moderating, stabilizing influence in the area. The countries there want
them to stay, and we hope that they will continue to stay.
Robinson: Does your Government have the military wherewithal now to bolster
its forces further in the Southeast Asian area?
PM: Well, we are a small country, as you know, in terms of population about
one-seventeenth the size of yours. v: e are currently devoting 5 per cent of our
gross national product to defense expenditures, and we have a force in this
2/ 
area with the British forces; and we have some thousands of troops with yours
in Vietnamn. -t e are currently building up the strength of our forces, and we
do review from time to time what we are capable of doing in this area.
Robinson: Mr. Prime Minister, you have already increased your forces, or
recently increased your forces up to 6, 000 in Vietnam. If that war steps up
in intensity would you also share a greater proportion of the burden of fighting?
P. M: ' V,-ell, I repeat, we do review from time to time, usually at the time when
we are framngo the budget, when we decide just what wie can afford to spend on
defence in a year, the extent of our contribution in these various areas. V. e:
have other commitments, of course. We have the defence of Papua and New
Guinea to concern ourselves with, and we are making, I repeat, this
contribution in Malaysia and the 65ingapore area. But we have representatives
from the three Services engaged in Vietnam. The only country other than the
United States to do so. And we pay our way with our own troops, unlike some
of the other friendly forces participating there.
Spivak: Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister. We will be back with Meet the Press
and more questions for our guest, the Prime Minister of Australia, but first
this message.
Announcer: Now back to Meet the Press. Please remember questions of the panel
members do not necessarily reflect their own point of view. Here is our
moderator, Lawrence Spivak.
Spivak: Resuming our interview, our guest today on Meet the Press is the Prime
Minister of Australia, Harold E. Holt. We will continue the questions now
with Mr. Shipley.
Shipley: Mr. Prime Minister, with your troops fighting in South Vietnam you are
rather identified with American policy in that area. How has this affected your
relations with your other Asian neighbors with whom you have just visited?
PIM: I found a warm friendliness for Australia wherever we went, and this
applied both in Cambodia and Laos which officially are neutral countries, and
indeed, Cambodia tends to look in the direction of the Socialist camp, as you
know. Of course in Taiwan and Korea, Australia was welcomed no less
warmly, indeed possibly even more so because we were the first to join you
in resisting aggression in Korea with the Koreans themselves, and we have
had good relations with Taiwan, with whom we recently established an Embassy.
Shipley: You iniust have had a few scratchy moments with Prince Sihanouk. 1Viould
you mind telling us about your exchange of views with him?
PM'. 1 W! ell, I have a very good exchange of views with Prince Sihanouk, and I
feel that I have learned to understand more deeply and clearly the motives
which direct his country's policy. He has taken over as leader a country
wihich over the centuries has been subject to harassment by its neighbours;
he is trying to preserve a culture and tradition; and he does not believe in
foreign intervention in any country, least of all his own.
Shipley: You must have asked him then about the use of his country, and
particularly Prince Sihanouk trail, to bringing forces down from North
Vietnam into South Vietnam. ' W. hat did he have to say about that?
PIM: Yes, we discussed that. He acknowledged that people were driven across
the border occasionally. He did not wiant them there: he did not encourage
them to stay there. He tended to discount the use of the Sihanouk trail. I
think from my subsequent inquiries rather more so than the facts as we know
3/ 
them were justified. But everybody that I have talked to about this admits that
it is a very difficult trail for his limited forces to police, and perhaps he
feels why should he have his own people come under attack when it is not his
problem, as he sees it.
Moyers: Mr. Prime Minister, a top general in Hanoi recently indicated that if
we reached the state of negotiations the fighting is likely to be continued
simultaneously with the negotiations themselves. Do you see this as a real
possibility and what do we do if that happens?
PM: I think it is very difficult to predict what we do in the circumstances
which cannot be clearly foreseen at this point of time. I have always believed
myself that a military victory would be incomplete: we would have to have a
political settlement.
Moyers: VWhat do you think the terms of such a political settlement might be?
PIM: V/ 7eli, terms that would be acceptable to the powers which met at Manila
would include the right of South Vietnam to resolve its own affairs,, decide on
the form of Government it wanted, and to be free from aggression, terrorism
and infiltration from the North.
Moyers: Do you see the eventual reconciliation of North and South Vietnam
through elections?
PM:-I think that is something which would be very far ahead for both of them:
But the South Vietnamese themselves acknowledge that at some point of time
an opportunity should exist for the people of the two areas to decide whether
they did want a unification.
Fry e: Mr. Prime Minister, how much do you think the Soviet Union has gained
by its backing of the Arabs in the Middle Eiast?
PM I do not know that anybody has gained very much out of this very tragic
situation. And I think we can take some encouragement from the way in which
the Soviet Union has really, as I have interpreted events, tried to avoid
enlarging the dangers, and indeed, has been prepared to work with other great
powers in limiting their consequences.
Frye: How extensively is it willing to work for a genuine peace? Do you see
anything of the nature of a mideast Tashkent emerging?
PM: I am not clear about that. But I do think the recent history of the Soviet
has shown a disposition to live more cooperatively with the free world as we
would describe it with trade and other matters of international conse* quence.
Frye: Well, let me turn just for auiinute then to the UN role in that area. The
UN, the removal of the UN's Peace Army has been criticized on the ground
that it is like taking down an umbrella the moment it starts to rain. On the
other hand, of course, to have kept it there would have been to override
Egypt's sovereignty. Do you think it is desirable or possible for the US to
develop in practice the power to impose the will of the world community on
a nation state?
P. M: If the major powers are prepared to give full backing to the United Nations,
and this has been the great disadvantage in these matters over recent years,
it has been hard to get unanimity amongst the major powers, then there is
a real prospect, I believe. And it would also depend to some degree on how
far the great powers are prepared to assist economically and from the defence
point of view in sustaining such a settlement. e 4/ 
Spivak: Mr. Prime Minister, a great many Americans believe that the war in
Vietnam is going to be a long one. From your vantage point closer to the
area will you give us your estimate of how long you think the war will last?
PM: VJell, in Malaysia, where we had a somewhat similar consideration, but
a very much less complex situation, and fewer people involved, it took us the
better part of fifteen years. By us, the British and other Commonwealth
forces. I do not foresee anything of that length of time in South Vietnam. But
until the North Vietnamese are convinced themselves that there is not that
much to be gained from persisting, then the fighting will continue. I, being an
optimist by temperament, think there is a possibility, just as there has been
in other postwar situations of the Communists moving quickly once they
decide the game is not worth the candle.
Spivak: Well, do you think the war can be shortened if we continue the bombing,
or that it is more likely tobe shortened if we stop the bombing?
PM: I am strongly in support of the continuance of the bombing. I refuse to
believe that the bombing is not having an important effect. I do not feel that
a country which is mounting aggression, which is supplying its own forces from
its national territory, should be immune from attack. I regard as unrealistic
the argument that there would be negotiation if the bombing would only cease.
were told earlier there would be a negotiation if the Americans withdrew
their troops from the area. And a country that is looking for negotiations, it
can find through the various diplomatic channels ways of achieving this. I do
not myself believe that the North Vietnamese are yet in a mood for negotiation.
Robinson: Mr. Prime Minister, moving from Vietnam back to the more peaceful
land of Australia, your country by geography is Asian. By race it is white.
And you continue a pure white immigration policy, excluding Asians, your
neighbours, from immigrating into Australia. VWill that not boomerang
against your country?
PM: Again your premise needs qualification. You would probably be surprised
to know that there are 12, 000 Asian students in our schools and universities;
That some 30, 000 people have been admitted since the war who would not have
been eligible under the regulations which applied before the war; that some
thousands of people of Asian origin have taken out full naturalization in
Australia. No, we have liberalized the arrangements quite a good deal. And
the governments of the area recognize the value for them or secure, stable
and relatively homogeneous Australia.
Robinson: Well, I have met many Southeast Asians in my long tenure in Southeast
Asia who had a lot of antagonisms against your country, and more specifically
against your government, and even more specifically against that on your
racial immigration laws. Are you sayin4 that you are going to moderate those
even more and more as time goes on?
PM: I have said we have moderated them, and time and circumstance our
circumstances include a rapidly growing trade with Asia compared with the
1950' s when 15 per cent of our export trade was east of Suez, it is 43 per cent
today. Japan has become the biggest customer in the world for Australian
goods. These things have a bearing on all this. But: might I emphasise that
not one representative of an Asian government has ever raised with me in my
many travels around the area the question of our immigration policy.
Shipley: Mr. Prime Minister, when our President was recently a visitor in your
country there was a certain amount of paint splashing and running about the
streets. 1What has been the political effect in Australia of your support of the
American policy in Vietnam? 
Pi%: 7 ! ell, you know your paint splashing reference, it was a very isolated
reference. The President had the most marvellous reception in my country
that any visiting dignitary has ever received. And I know he was greatly
heartened by it. V-.-ie fought the last election on the issue of Vietnam and the
participation there for the first time in our history of draftees called into the
Services. And wie had a record majority victory, despite this as a central
issue. Most Australians have accepted this verdict, and I would say there has
been a considerable abatement of any active public demronstration or protest
against the policy.
' Nhpley: W1". ould you say that Australia goes all the way with LBJ then?
PM!, In relation to Vietnam I have said I go all the way with LBJ, and most
Australians are going all the way with me on these issues.
Moyers: You have been to Southeast Asia three times, Mr. Prime Minister, in the
last 14 months. Have you noticed any changes, particularly in regard to
economic and political development between trips?
PMA: When I was here the last time you may remember I said that one of th-e
great dividends which had already been secured from American participation
in Vietnam was the growing economic, social and political strength of the
countries sheltered by the American shield. My recent visit confirmed this
more strongly for me, particularly in Taiwan and in Korea, where both countries
have. the greater growth for their national product which ranks among the
highest wie found anywhere in the vworld.
Moyers: What is Australia's specific stake in South Vietnam, Mr. Prime Minister?
Do you feel threatened by the North Vietnamese, or behind them, the Chinese7i
PIM: 747ell, what was Australia's stake in its participation in ' W-orld W~ ar I and
' ivo rld War 11? Australians believe that countries should be able to live free from
aggression. ie were first by you, I repeat, in Korea; we were early with you
in Vietnam, helping to resist the aggressor and preserve the independence of
a small country. Now that is the kind of world in which we want to live. But
apart from that, we believe that if this threat of aggression can be removed from~
the countries of the area that they will progress, they will throw off these
historic shackles of the past the evidence in Japan, in Korea and Taiwan and
Thailand, and others in the area, Malaysia, these countries are all showing what
can be done once this threat has been removed from them.
Frye; There is a theory that if the United States had failed to stand firm in
Vietnam, the attempt at a coup in Indonesia might have succeeded. Do you know
of any intelligence information to support this theory?
PMk: No, but I support the viewi myself. I have little doubt in my mind that had
Amnerica not intervened in South Vietnam, just had it not intervened in Korea, we
t would not have even had a struggle in South Vietnam. That we would not have
produced in Indonesia the strength of'the support for the generals against those
who instituted the coup, and against the Communist Party whicci led to the
overthrow of the Communist Party.
Frye: The policies of Sihanouk and Sukarno have some considerable similarity.
Sihanouk, too, has tried to appease the Communists. Has hLe had rude awakening
as a result of this most recent Communist guerilla activity in his owin country?
PM: -) ell, I think there is a similarity in that both of them have tried to revive
a sense of national identity, a lively consciousness of belonging to a particular
country. But Sukcarno is a revolutionary of a rather turbulent and dramatic order.
9 6/ 
I would not put Sihanouk in that category. He is a man who has far more
concern for economic development and the progress of his country than
Sukarno ever had. He is troubled currently by some Communist activity
there, but I think this is significant because he had tried to live in friendship
with them.
Frye: Is it an incipient Vietnam?
PM: No, I would not say that. It is on a much smaller scale, and he has
got it very much under control.
Spivak: Mr. Prime Minister, our allies in E~ urope have given us virtually no
support, certainly very liene support in Vietnam. From what you said a
minute ago in answer to another question, do you believe that Vietnam should
be considered or must be considered a European as well as an Asian problem?
PM: I think it is an important interest for E~ urope, and the fact that the
Secretary General of the United Nations felt moved recently to say that this
could lead to a third world war surely makes of vital interest for the western
countries. I think it a great misfortune that so few leading figures from the
west and this goes for the United Kin rdom as well have not been in the area.
They have not sensed, as your President has, or many of your senior American
citizens who visited the place, what the potentialities are, what the movement
is, the excitement of growth and development occurring there. If they did I
think they would be more sympathetically disposed.
Robinson: Mr. Prime Minister, as you said, you have just recently set up an
Embassy in Taiwan. Could you explain to us that Australia has been one of
the leading countries shipping grains to Communist China, which has sustained
that regime in many instances in power?
PM: Oh, I would not put it as high as that. China can get wheat from many
wheat-exporting countries. We think that the sales of our wheat to China mean
more to our economy and the contribution we can make than, relatively speaking,
it does to China. But that is putting the more materialistic view of things. I
have said publicly in this country quite strongly that there must be eventually
an accommodation with China: it is unrealistic to view the future otherwise.
And if we are to establish some point of contact, some bridges of cooperation,
some friendship, nothing is more effective than trade. You can have cultural
exchanges, sporting exchanges, visits by journalists and others, but trade
provides better than anything else a mutuality of interests. And I think it
would be encouraged.
Spivak: Gentlemen, we have less than three minutes.
Shipley: Mr. Prime Minister, you said in response to Mr. Spivak's question that
you thought the war in Vietnam might begin to come to an end when Mr.
Ho Chi Minh thought the candle was not worth the game. What sort of
influences are likely to persuade him to that conclusion?
PM: Wiell, I myself attach a good deal of importance to the sustained bombing
which has been particularly effective over the last couple of months. The
military pressures, also I think are having a cumulative effect: the number of
defectors is increasing. The very degree of the terrorist campaign against
the cadres in the villages, the revolutionary development cadres which the
South Vietnamese people have set going there, this shows that the Communists
are feeling the pressures from this. Amd these things tend to be cumulative.
If there are shortages of food and necessities of life, I cannot be told that
morale is not eventually affected by these things. 6/ 
Moyers: On the subject of Mainland China, Mr. Prime inister, do. you believe
the time has come to admit the Communist Chinese into the United Nations?
P. M: No, we do not, until Communist China has given evidence of a
willingness to adopt the rules of the game in the United Nations, and until
we have worked out a satisfactory arrangement in respect of Taiwan, no
settlement with mainland China would be acceptable to us which did not also
take care of the people of Taiwan. Wie supported the United States and Other
countries which concluded at the most recent discussion of this that the time
was certainly not right for their admission.
Frye: -V* hat do you think are China's intentions in Hong Kong?
PM: I do not believe that they want to press this to a point which threatens
the security and stability of Hong Kong. Hong Kong is too valuable an outlet
for Chinese trade, Chinese commerce. It means a great deal in foreign
exchange to the Chinese, who are short of this. No, they might cause some
mischief, but I do not think theywill press it to real trouble.
Spivak: We have thirty seconds for an answer and a question.
Robinson: Mr. Prime Minister, do you see any reason for continuing the Southeast
Asia Treaty Organization?
PIM: Yes, I do, even if some members have not been as wholehearted in
their support: there are others who are very much concerned with cooperating
together in the area to resist Communist expansion and they should be
encouraged to continue this.
Spivak: I am sorry to interrupt, but our time is up.
Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for being with us today on Meet
the Press. 



ONS'ER'S OIP4
16 JUN1967
L I BR
VISIT TO C ANADA U. K.
LONDO, U. K.
PRESS CONFEAENCE TIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. H. iROLD HOLT AT LOIDON AIRPORT 12TH JUIE 1967.
Q. Mr. Holt, why have you been pressing the
British Government so hard to maintain its presence east
of Suez.
MR. HOLT: ', ell, because I think it is in the interests
of the United Kingdom I think it is in the interests of
the Commonwealth, I tAink it is in the interests of
security and progress in the whole area.
Q. ', ould you be happy and content to have
British troops in Australisabases if it came to that?
P. M. Y. e discussed this some time ago and the basis
then was that if the United Kingdom was not able to maintain
its presence because of the attitude of the countries concerned
in Singapore and Ialaysia then either the would have to
retire to the United Kingom or else come lo bases in
Australia and talks have been proceeding at the Service
level on this contingency. But, in point of fact, of course
the Governments both of alaysia and Singapore warmly
welcome the retention of British forces in the area.
Q. You criticised western European countries
for taking too little interest in the Far East, particularly
Vietnam, and yet you have limited your own commitment to
Vietnam very severely, would you comment on that?
P. M. . ell, when you say " we have limited", I don't
know what you mean quite by that. ® e have doubled our
defence expenditure over the past four years. are now
running on defence expenditure close to five per cent of
the gross national product, that is higher than any
country with the exception of the United States and the
United Kin dom, any western country anyhow. For us it is
not a small thing when we have to develop a vast continent,
cope with a much more rapid population growth rate than
either the United Kingdom or the United States, and we have
to deal with the problems of placing these people in
occupations, in homes with all the facilities which go
with a growing population. It may interest you to know
that Australia withholds a bi-ger percentage of its gross
national nroduct from consumption than any country except
Japan, far higher than the United Kingdom or the United
States, so we don't rely on others to do the job for us.
Q. Do you think a visit to the Far East would open
Mr. : ilson's eyes?
P. M. Vell I would like to see many United
Kingdom and 7estern European leaders go to that area of the
world because I think they would be tremendously impressed
by the potentialities that are developing there. / 2 
-2-
It was an eye opener for me to go to Korea for
example and see what 30 million South Koreans were aoing with
one of the highest rates of gross national product in the
world to go to Taiwan where 15 million industrious people
there were also generating one of the highest rates of
gross national product.
But I haven't come here to twist anybody's arm
you know. I'm here to discuss in a sensible way with a
sensible man and his colleagues what is in the oest
interests not only of our respective countries, but of the
Commonwealth as a whole.
Some peoole have said that what they call your
Government's'obsession' with China is rather overdone,
especially the need to keep american troops on the mainland.
Would you comment on that?
Well, what do you mean by our ' obsession with
China'? . e trade cuite vigorously with China. It has
become a very big customer for Australian wheat, wool tons
and matters of that sort.
I myself envisa e that there must be an accommodation
with China and we must, if we can, build bridges of co-operation
with China. I have no obsession with China. i. e're not
troubled about the possioility as it existed strongly of
communist expansion right down through South East Asia,
affecting Indonesia and in effect providing a communist
camp right through that whole area of Asia. Well, this
has been avoided and the issue is currently being fought
out in Vietnam.
C. To leave the Far East, would you comment on the
Middle East situation. You described it earlier as ' a
great deal of huffing and puffing', I believe.
P. M. No, where did you read that or who attributed
that statement to me? I've read a lot about this but I
have not made a puolic statement to that effect.
I'm just wondering where it
I picked it up from the press, from the press
clippings. P. M. Yes, but where was I alleged to have said it?
eQ. I can't remember now.
P. M. No, well nobody seems to know ecause I don't know
of any place where I have said it. But I did myself earlier
take the view that knowing the major powers, or at least in
my own judgment believing hat the major powers on the
information that I had, were not wishing to involve
themselves in that situation, coming to the conclusion that
it would be a relatively limited operation there.
You see, I was contrasting what was happening out
there with what to me are much more fundamental, deener issues
really involving an historic phase in mankind's development
in the Asian area.
Q. If we-tern countries can play a useful part in the
Far East, can Australia play a useful part in the Middle East?
P. M. I don't think we can play a large part in the / 3 
Middle Last, but Australia has always been a good supporter
of the United Nations and helpful. in what has been proposed
by the United Nations.
One of the big problems which remains ahead of
us I think is the settlement of the Palestinian Arabs
and if the United Nations in their wisdom decided that there
should be opportunity for resettlement elsewhere for these
refugees, or else adequate compensation to enable them to
settle somewhere of their choosing, then Australia would,
proportionately to its population, as a member of the
United Nations, play a part in this either in settlement
or in the degree of compensation that had to be provided.
C. Could I put a supplementary question to that?
Do you mean that Australia would accept some Palestine Arabs?
P. M. Well Australia, after the last ', orld ar, accepted
quite a number of Chinese refugees who have become integrated
in the community, I don't imagine myself there would be many
Araos who would want to settle in Australia, and what I
have said relates to this being dealt with as an international
problem with the member nations of the United Nations each
being prepared to play their part. If that were done,
Australia would play a proportionate part, either acceptance
of some for settlement or where others wished to settle
elsewhere, making our contribution to whatever compensation
arrangements were desired.
I might add this is not a matter which has been
canvassed in my Cabinet, but I know how we reacted to the
situation we found after the Second ' Iorld ' ar. Australia
has become a permanent home for many people of many countries
there are more than 40 nationalities substantially
represented in Australia at the present time anA we will
play our part, but this would be a part of an international
settlement involving member countries of the United Nations.
Q. Just after the SEATO Conference in " iashirngton
it was reported that there was an emergency meeting of the
Australian Cabinet. WVould you confirm that there was an
emergency meeting of the Australian Cabinet?
P. M. After
Q. At the time of the SATO Conference in i. ashington
in May. That is what was reported here.
P. M. I don't recall any emergency meeting of the
Australian Cabinet.
Q. A special meeting? This is what was reported here
and what I was going on the say
P. M. Every meeting of the Australian Cabinet is a special
meeting in my opinion.
Q. Well, it was reported as an emergency meeting.
This might have been misreporting.
P. M. Well, I think the House was in session at that
time and we found it necessary because of the pressure of
Cabinet business to meet even while the House was sitting
which is not comfortable but is inevitaole in a country which
has as many things to deal with as we find we have to deal
with. / 4 
-4-
Can I put it in another way, sir? Would
you confirm or deny that at that time you heard reports
that Britain in advance of any consultations between
Australia and Britain had indicated that she had plans
to withdraw from east of Suez by the beginning of the
1970' s.
P. M. I'm not troubled too much by plans that
people have because we all have plans to meet a variety of
possibilities. W hat is important is decisions not plans,
because plans can project all sorts of answers to various
problems. I've come here to discuss with the Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom the kind of decision that
might come and he has assured me that no final decision
will e taken until we have hbid those talks.
I had a very curly question bowled up to
me in the United States on their Meet the Press' session.
My interrogator opened up by saying " Now that the
United Kingdom has decided to withdraw completely east of
Suez do you expect the United States to fill that vacuum?"
I haA to sa " I must challenge your premises. I've yet
to be told hat the United Kingdom has finally decided on
a withdrawal east of Suez."
In fact, I've been assured that no final
decisions on these matters are -oing to be taken until at
least I and other Commonwealth leaders have had a chance
of discussing these matters with the Prime Minister.
cQ. And you are satisfied with those assurances?
P. M. Well, are you asking me to say that I don't
accept assurances from the 3ritish Prime Minister and his
colleagues.......... Q. Jell, do you have any doubt?
P. M. I accept the assurances.
( Press Secret. ry interjecting " Perhaps
just one last question." Laughter when the Prime Minister
said: " No, I'm enjoying this.")
Q. Could I just ask you on the Common Market
issue what particular points you intend raising with Prime
Minister Wilson?
P. M. yell, we have welcomed the assurance, of
course, that essential Commonwealth interests will be
safeguarded, but the problem we have in my country is that
what might annear to be a comparatively small interest in
the eyes of the United Kingdom or of other Governments can
be an important interest inside Australia itself because
we are a lar-e country, sparsely populated, and there are
some communities which depend for their existence on a
particular production and, as John IcEwen, my Deputy Prime
Minister, said it doesn't help the man who produces dried
fruit very much to be told that Australia is going to he
very well off because it is selling a lot of iron ore.
I think of a settlement like Mildura which
has been irrigated there are a lot of former soldiers
settled there and they produce dried fruit. To us it 
is a community with a lot of real people and it's no
good telling us that our essential interests are being
safeguarded if in noint of fact, whole communities of this
sort are to find themselves withuut a reason for existence,
economically and socially and otherwise.
Q. Do you accept that we are now better off as
a result of the Kennedy Round and that we can now absorb the
blow of British entry into the Common Market more easily?
P. M. All I know that came out of the Kennedy
Round, as far as Australia was concerned, was a deal on
wheat which fell far short of Australian objectives and
which required us to convert what had been a voluntary
wheat aid provision of 150,000 tons a year to a commitment
even in bad wheat years of 225,000 tons a years Noone's
throwing their hats up in the air auout this in Australia
anyhow, but there it was.
C. Sir, will you be discussing with Mr. wilson
the subject of the chain of Indian Ocean Island bases?
P. M. No, I wouldn't expect to. I don't want to
be involved in technical defence discussions. I am here
to canvass with him some of the larger policy issues which
concern us both.
Q. But in so far as those island bases represent
a peripheral commitment, would you be satisfied with that
if the British don't w'ant to be committed to the mainland
of Asia?
P. M. No I don't want to comment on that. I'm
not even sufficiently well informed to know how far they
represent effective operational bases.
Q. Mr. Holt, in the last defence White Paper
it does say the eventual aim of British policy is that'
it will remain in South East Asia as long as it is
unstable, but the eventual aim is that these people should
live at peace without the presence of external forces. Now
do you accept that eventually it will be possible to do
without British forces in the area or are you trying to
change the Government's mind even about this?
Oh no, I would myself look to the time when
the countries of the region, having strengthened their
economies and made their own community position secure
would be making not only an increasing contribution to
security in the area but would be able largely to stand
on their own feet though as far ahead as I can see I
think there will be a need for some co-operative defence
effort and, indeed, that makes sense rather than have any
individual country commit so much of its resources to its
own defence. There ought to be security arran ements
among like-minded people which apply to the area as a whole.
Q. Then the debate between Britain and Australia
is over the timing of the eventual withdrawal and you
perhaps are scared that jritain will do it far sooner
than Australia would like.
P. M. , ell you have used the word ' debate'.
One doesn't usually debate things with one's friends unless
one is in the mood to have that kind of dialogue. I would
say that I am looking forward to a discussion and a
mutually helpful discussion on matters in which we are
mutually interested. / 6 
-6-
C. But is that the point, that you do accept
that eventually British forces will withdraw and Australia
will not have any objection, out you are anxious to see
that they don't withdraw too soon;
P. M. No, I think it is a matter for the United
Kingdom Government to decide what serves its own interests
best. After all, three-fifths of humankind are located
east of Suez, you know, and the trade potential, the
growth of commerce and industry in that area over the
next 50 years will, I think, astonish the world. I've
been in some of these countries recently and I was
astonished to find how rapid the progress had been in
countries such as Korea and Taiwan. Australia's own trade
has gro7n east of Suez from 15 per cent to 40 per cent
since the 1950' s. Janan has become the largest purchaser
of Australian goods over this neriod and we see tremendous
economic growth in this area.
' ell, I can't imagine that the United
Kingdom which has always had an eye to its own
international trading position, being oblivious to these
thins. Even Hong Kong is a very valuable outlet for China.
It's one of the great enerators of foreign exchange for
China and eventually China will form part of the
international community of nations and 700 million people
will be wanting a lot of things that others can supply.
Q. To sum it up. Sir, you are not pessimistic
that the vital interests of Australia and Britain can ue
reconciled? You don't think there is a natural dichotomy
there that can't be reconciled?
P. M. ' ell I've always ever since I came into
public life believea that Australian interests and the
interests of the United Kingdom were closely linked both in
defence and in trade. After all, you've been until this
year, the largest purchaser of Australian goods. ' e
happen to oe the largest holder of sterling reserves and
as we grow stronger economically I would hope we would be
able to assist you in that direction also.
CANBERRA. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 60/ 1967
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwen
Arrangements have now been completed with the State
Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and the Australian
Loan Council to be held in Canberra on Wednesday, 28th June and
continuing, if necessary, on Thursday, 29th June.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, will preside at the Premiers'
Conference and Mr. McMahon, as Treasurer, will be Chairman of the
Loan Council.
CANBERRA, 14th June, 1967. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE UNTIL MIDNIGHT
SUNDAY, 18TH JUNE, 1967
22 6JUN 1967
FOR PRESS: LIBR 9 P. M. No. 61/ 1967
SUGAR PRICE INCREASE
Statement by the Acting Prime. Minister and Minister for Trade
agr rlidustry, Mr. John McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Industry, Mr. John McEwen, commented today on the announcement by
the Premier of Queensland, Mr. Nickltn, that the domestic price of sugar
would be increased as from 19th June.
Mr. McEwen said that the decision to increase the price
of sugar under the Commonwealth -Queensland Sugar Agreement had been
taken only after a very close examination of a fully-detailed case submitted
bpyo inthteed s uoguta rt hiant dtuhset rpyr itchero uogf hs utghaer Qhuaede nnsolta npdre vGioouvselryn mbeenent. inMcrre. a sMedc Eiwne tnh* e
past seven years. The increase was considered appropriate in all the
circumstances. Mr. McEwen said the Sugar Agreement would be extended
for a further twelve months, pending a comprehensive re-negotiation of
the terms of the Agreement.
CANBERRA 18th June, 1967 



FOR PRESS 2 26JUN967 LIBR~ P. M. No. 62/ 1967
ECONOMIC CONSULTATICNS
Statement by the Acting Frime Minister Mr John McEwen
The Commonwealth Government will hold a further series
of Economic Consultations with representatives of industry and commerce
in Canberra on Wednesday, 5th July.
The Government welcomed the opportunity to obtain at
first hand the views of current and prospective developments in the
Australian economy from those who were actively engaged in business and
industry. On Wednesday morning, 5th July, Ministers will have
discussions first with representatives of the Export Development Council
and then with representatives of the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council. In the afternoon, they will confer with representatives of national
organisations. Ministers will meet representatives of the Australian
Council of Trade Unions on Tuesday, 4th July.
CANBERRA, June, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: FP. M. No. 63/ 1967
SENATOR GORTON TO REPRESENT AUSTRALIA AT
CORONATION OF KING OF TONGA.
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. J. McEwen, announced
today that the Australian Representative at the Coronation of the
King of Tonga on 4th July, 1967, would be Senator J. G. Gorton,
Minister for Education and Science. He will be accompanied by
Mrs. Gorton. The Coronation is to be attended by the Duke and Duchess
of Kent as Representatives of Queen Elizabeth, by the Governor
of Hawaii on behalf of the United States, and by other senior
dignitories of countries associated with the Pacific Islands.
The King of Tonga, His Majesty Taufa'ahau Toupou IV, K. B. E.,
succeeded to the throne on 15th December, 1965. His mother,
Queen Salote, ruled Tonga for 47 years. King Taufa'ahau Toupou
was born in Nuku'alofa, Tonga, on 4th July, 1918. He was
educated at Newington College, Sydney and at Sydney University.
He was Premier of Tonga from 1949 to 1966.
The Australian Commissioner in Fiji, Mr. R. N. Birbh, and
his wife will also attend the Tongan Coronation. In addition
H. M. A. S. " Anzac" will pay an official visit to Fiji during the
main part of the Coronation celebrations.
The Acting Prime Minister said that the Coronation would
be a memorable event in the history, traditions and ceremonies
of the South PacifiC. The Australian Government and people took
a keen and sympathetic interest in the progress of Tonga and
wished the King a long and illustrious reign.
CANBERRA. 21st June, 1967. 



VISIT TO US, CAN ADA UK SYDNEY, N S. V,;
THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT ON HIS RETURN 22nd JUNE, 1967
PRIME MINISTER: I don't propose to make a lengthy comment this morning
because there will be opportunities in the next few days to deal with
particular matters and for the same reason, I don't propose to discuss
domestic issues which have developed while I have been away. Again, I
shall, no doubt, comment -on some of these as we go along. But I would
like to give a general comment about what has been a most concentrat-ed
journey overseas. I don't think any Australian Prime Minister could have
been treated with more regard, more concern given to his views and I have
had the most remarkable reception, wherever I have gone, from each Head
of Government I have spoken to. I think it is a mark of Australia's growing
international stature and the place we occupy in this area of the world
a significant place that we should have so much consideration given to our
views as was shown to me by the Heads of all the Governments I visited on
this occasion. It is not easy for me at this point of time to give you a
great deal of detail about the results of the journey. I have no doubt myself
that it has been a very valuable and fruitful journey, but some of the most
important matters I had to discuss are still the subject of consideration by
the Governments concerned In respect of British dispositions East of Suez,
for example, as you will know, there are to be talks with Prime Minister
Lee Kuan Yew and Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman and we can't
expect any definite United Kingdom statement until those have been completed
and Cabinet has been able to consider in the United Kingdom all the views
which have been put to us by representatives of the Commonwealth countries
concerned, and indeed by the United States which has a very lively interest
in this matter also. But it is my anticipation that they will be indicating
their general attitude on these matters before the end of next month.
I do feel, however, that the views we were able to put
which I left behind in rather more precise form by way of a letter to Prime
Minister V~' lson have been received with every consideration and I am
confident myself although only a later formal decision will confirm this
that the United Kingdom will maintain a continuing role in that area of the
world. just what form this will take remains to be determined by them, but
I feel confident that they do not intend to turn their backs on an area of the
world which to us and I believe in the long term to them will have such
great significance. In my talks in the United States with the President on a
number of trade and financial matters, we made, I believe, very good
progress, although here again the outcome has yet to be resolved in final
terms. I am bringing some proposals b ack to the Cabinet for consideration,
and there will be consideration given by various Departments of the United
States to the views we have put on a number of matters. This can be stated
quite emphatically: That in the President himself Australia has a staunch
friend who brings a sympathetic outlook to the problems that we place before / 2 
him. I am sure that it would be his wish that the Administration does what
it can within its political and administrative limits to assist Australia in
the problems we have raised with him.
Some of the results of a journey such as this will later be
expressed in tangible form. Perhaps some of the no less important
consequences are of an intangible kind and I refer in particular to the very
warm and friendly discussions I had in Canada with Frime Minister Lester
Pearson. I believe we laid together, both privately and in our public
statements, a foundation there for a growing Australian/ Canadian co-operation
in relation to international questions generally and in particular to the
growing interest I think we will be finding in Canada in what occurs around
the Pacific basin. That country has, for most of its history, been oriented
to the North Atlantic or to North America, but British Columbia, fcr
example, is very conscious of the opportunities which are developing across
the Pacific and I feel confident that, increasingly, the Canadian Government
as a whole and the Canadian people will find a growing interest and display
an increasing activity in this area of the world.
There were, of course, a multitude of other discussions, and the
programme was, I repeat, a very concentrated one. In the countries
visited, I made, as you may recall, a number of speeches which I think could
be classed as significant speeches, in United States, making Australia's
views known; the World Affairs Council in Los Angeles, the Foreign Affairs
Council, the Far East America Council, the American / Aistralian
Association, the Pilgrims Society, " Meet the Press'%. This is a very widelyviewed
programme in the United States and produced a very good reaction
from all the accounts which reached me. So in these ways, Australia's views
were placed before a wide audience throughout the United States.
In the United Kingdom, we had talks with Senior Cab inet
Ministers concerned with our problems, and again in America, not only
were the trade matters under discussion but Viet Nam, the crisis in the
Middle East, the British troop dispositions East of Suez and a variety of
other matters occupi el our attention. Even the concluding function of
yesterday, in Honolulu the formation there of an A merican/ Australian
Association was not without some % lue for us. It has been launched by
the leading figures in the life of Hawaii, which plays a useful role as a
geographical bridge between Australia and the mainland of the United States, of
which country it now forms, of course, a part. And when I learned that
some 800, CO Americans visit Hawaii each year from the mainland, and we
only get something like 20, 00CC of them down here, there is clearly scope
for co-operation in matters such as tourism and other matters which are
of mutual interest to us in our affairs in the Pacific region.
On both visits there, I had valuable talks there with Admiral
Sharp the Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific Command, and after a very
good briefing on my way through, he was able to refresh me on developments
in military activities as I came through this time.
I am very glad to be back home, even to experience a little cool
weather again after a spate of summer days wherever we have gone, and I
come back confident of Australia's place in the world, and a growing
prosperity which I think is assured from the great interest shown towards
us in so many quarters through which I passed on my way. And it is good
to be back again in the country which still seems to me to be the best
country one can find on earth. / 3 
3-
MR. EGGLETON VWill you take a few questions please Prime Mi4nister?
PM: Yes.
Q. Mr. Holt, was there any request by President Johnson for
Australia to increase its commitment in Vietnam?
PM: Well, if I answer that question by " no comment", you read
something into it. If I say there wasn't, you read into that that he was
indifferent as to whether we have more people there or not. I will say
explicitly this matter was not raised with me, but I am not implying from
that an indifference as to whether there should be an increase in Australian
forces. But the President is well aware that we review our situation from
time to time. Usually we study the Defence Vote at Budget time, The
changing position in relation to S1ingapore and Malaysia is, of course, new
element in our calculations. But I don't want to give any impression that we
are under pressure on this matter or that others are indifferent as to what
we do about it.
Q. Indifference on whose part, Sir, yours or President Johnson' s?
PM: VWell, we are not indifferent, of course, to what we do in
relation to Vietnam, but what is recognised is Australia is now providing
close to 5 per cent. of its gross national product for the Defence Vote, that
we have commitments and obligations in various other areas and the
proportion of our people who are there in a fighting capacity ( because we
dont' have the same logistics component' is higher than the mere figures
would suggest.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you showed an acute awareness of the
crisis for the world of the Middle East trouble by suggesting that Australia
would take some of the Arab refugees. I would like you to amplify your
statements regarding this and also to tell us of your concern.
Q. W-ell a great deal of emphasis appeared to be given out here
to this particular aspect, but of course Australia's interest in peace in the
Middle East goes far beyond that particular point. One element in the Middle
East problem is the number of refugees Arab refugees which have not
been satisfactorily dealt with for a considerable time, and I am afraid they
become the pawn of Middle East politics. Clearly there has to be a solution
of this problem and what I was indicating was an Australian willingness to
play a part in company with other members of the United Nations if there
would be value in their settlement around the world, or where they did choose
to settle, in some financial assistance to enable them to settle in the place
of their choice. I have been interested to note that in the " Financial Times"
which I read only last night on the plane, Mr. Pearson in Canada has made
almost precisely the same suggestion, talking about Canada taking its share
of those who might wish to settle there, or else providing some financial
assistance to contribute towards a solution of the problem.
Q. hen do you expect to hear from President Johnson on the
wool tariff? Wle have only got until June 30th
PM: Vliell, there have been some proposals on this which I have
to take to my own Cabinet first. Whether or not these will prove acceptable
to us remains to be seen, but we are conscious that there is a time factor. / 4 
PM ( Contd)
I think it is not necessarily bound to that date. This is the impression we
gained in our discussion with them. The matter was capable of being dealt
with separately but it would be, I thinkc, to everyone's advantage 4f we could
get some decision on the matter quite speedily.
Q. Do you expect to get anything before June
PM: Well, I can't be precise because I don't know now just how
long it will take our own people to weigh the c wunter -proposal which is
being put to us. It relates to tobacco and this may take a little study
before we can get a firm reply to them on this particular matter.
C: Sir, can you give us any details of Britain's defence plans
East of Suez?
FM: No, I have made it quite clear that final decisions will not be
taken on these matters, certainly until there have been talks with the other
two Prime Ministers, . Mr Lee is in London at this moment. I understand
that Tunku Abdul Rahman will be there next month. But in the House of
Commons, if my recollection is correct, Mr. Grossman, replying to a
question, said they expected to give an answer before the end of July.
Q. just going back to the Middle East crisis, Sir, your statement
. that the Middle East affair was at one stage " huffing and puffing" came
in for some criticism. K'ere you quoted out of context or could this now be
construed as an error of judgment?
PM: Well, where did I make the statement? This is the question
I think is fair to ask.
Q. In the United States a few days before
PM: V/ here, though, will you tell me?
Q. I am afraid you are testing my memory
FM: You are testing my statement. In point of fact no such
statement was ever made by me publicly and certainly not ma-: de in context
but Tony Eggleton in good faith, with his usu al capable care of what i s
said at these background briefings, referring to the situation between the
two major powers who clearly did not want to come to a clash themselves
on this matter, and having heard me comment along those lines at an earlier
point of time, did use this phrase in his press briefing. Now, I am not
critical of Tony for that, but we do rely on the good sense of the pressmen
who are getting the press briefing not to try to make in shorthand terms an
over -complicated situation out of what I think was clearly known to be the
intention of the statement. Once you have the tinder-like situation which had
developed as between the Arabs and the Israelis, then no-one could predict
with certainty what would come out as between those two. But we were
confident in our own minds that neither the United States nor the Russians
wanted this to develop into a Big Fower conflict.
Q. Getting back to the troops in Vietnam, Sir. Reading between
the lines, I suspect you think there might be a need for us to send more troops
to Malaya and Singapore? 
PM: Vieli, we are not making decisiorson this matter at this point
of time. The M-ister for Defence is still overseas. We have our Budget
provision for Defence yet to be considered. Australia does what it can
within its capacity from time to time, and I don't want to be pressed on it.
Q. Mr. Frme Minister, the world spotlight is of course on
New York at the moment. You have just come from the United States and
we know you share the concern of President Johnson and also Mr. Iilson
Wie notice today that the British Government has suggested that Israel should
withdraw from Jordanian territory. How do you feel about this and what do
you think the prospects are of a lasting settlement?
PM: Yes, well, I don't propose to make any off-the-cuff
statement on this. My own colleague will have been kept more closely
in touch with the developments and views of other Governments. I will be
talking this over with him, no doubt, quite early when I get to ' Canberra, but
I am not making a detailed statement on Middle East policy at this point of
time.
MR. EGGLETON: Sir, you have an aircraft wIting to take you to % C,: nberra.
Perhaps just one more question if there is anyone with a pressing one you
want to raise
Q. In a lighter vein, Mr. Prime Minister, did you actually lose
your pants while swimming? ( Laughter
PM: W~ ell, you know, the last time I came back, one of the
cartoonists had a statement about the President and myself having a frank
exchange of poems. I suppose this time it could be said we had a frank
exchange of films. ' lie didn't have an exchange of pants, but my luggage not
having arrived, and the day being veay hot and lunch about to be served
around the pool, I mentioned a little wistfully how much I would like a swim.
The President very kindly made these trunks available. I am not implying that
he is a stouter man than I am he's a very much taller man, and what would
sit quite gracefully on his figure was a little ample for mine. Having dived
off the board it is a fact they couldn't stand the impact as well as tb'ey might
have. I don't think any harm was done as I was managing to keep underwater
at the time and I was able to restore the situation without too much
em barrassment. In Honolulu at the dinner after the wind-up of the
A mcrican/ Auntral-an Association function, they presented me with a-pair
about this big ( indicating tiny size). I am hoping they will fit the
grandson. They said if I could ever get into them I would never fall out of
them. ( Laughter"
MR. EGGLETON Thank you, gentlemen. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 64/ 1967
NEW SOUTH VWALES AND QUEENSLAND FLOODS
COMMONVI EALTH SSISTA NCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Following the recent floods in Southern Queensland
and Northern New South V: ales, the Premiers of the two States have
requested Commonwealth financial assistance for the relief of personal
hardship and distress. A lthough relief schemes following events of this
nature are a matter for the States, it has been the practice of the
Commonwealth Government, in recognition of the need on humanitarian
grounds to take special action for the quick alleviation of individual cases
of hardship and distress, to assist the State Governments on a dollar for
dollar basis in the financing of these relief schemes.
Accordingly, I have informed the Premier of Queensland
and the Premier of New South Wales that the Commonwealth will participate
with their Governments on a dollar for dollar basis in the relief of personal
hardship and distress occasioned by these floods.
CANBERRA, 27th June, 1967. A M 



PRESS BRIEFING GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT, FOR THE HEADS OF BUREA JN16
IN THE PARLIAMENTARY PRESS GALLERY AT L1*
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA LB'
27TH JUNE, 1967
PRIME MINISTER: I don't propose to detain you for long because I am hoping
that later in the week I will have the chance to go over a number of
matters on which no doubt you are feeling some interest. There are
just two aspects I wanted to deal with tonight.
The first is just to make some reference amplifying what I
gather Tony will already have told you that today we have been engaged
principally on a series of papers relating to the forthcoming Premiers'
Conference and Loan Council meeting. But prior to that, the Minister
for External Affairs had given us a review of Middle East developments,
and I had indicated to Cabinet that as these other matters were of great urgency
and had -to be disposed of today, I would defer my own account of what
transpired whilst I was overseas until we had got this business out of the
way. Tonight I am hoping to have an opportunity of doing this when we
meet again after dinner.
VWe also discussed the proposed hold-up, as we understand it,
of postal business on Saturday, July 1. On that, the Acting Minister can
be expected to make a statement later this evening.
The particular matter I wanted to mention to you at this
point because I felt in view of all the press discussion and speculation
which had gone on it wasn't desirable that I leave this until our meeting
later in the week is the prominence given in the press to the Basic
Industries Group, its allegations of some association between this body
and my own party, and what I have regarded as quite unfair criticism which
I have read in some sections of the press relating to my colleague, the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade. As to the Basic Industries
Group, I confirm that when I returned from overseas, my own Deputy
Leader, the Treasurer, in reporting to me on the various developments
which had occurred on the domestic front whilst I was overseas, spoke in
relation to this particular matter. He gave me his own assurance that
neither he, nor so far as he could ascertain, any of our Liberal Party
Ministerial colleagues had anything to do with the formation of this
organisation or contact with it. For my own part, I have no contact with
any member of it. I question whether I would know any member of it if
he walked through the door, and I was able to convey this to the Deputy
Prime Minister when we talked together about the matter. I may say we
didn ' t talk about it until this morning. I did telephone him on Friday
after my return, but we spoke then entirely on matters which had arisen
while I was overseas, and my own activities the discussions in LQndon
and my discussions both in Canada and with more relevance to him, the
various trade and economic matters which I discussed in Washington and
at Camp David. So far as the Basic Industries Group is concerned,
therefore, it is open to any body of men or women in this democratic
society of ours if they disagree with policies of the government or individual
members of the Government to conduct their own political activities in
relation to them. They are not necess arily by any means helpful to one side
of politics or to one party in the coalition. The Deputy Prime Minister / 2 
FRIME MINISTER ( Contd.
and I have had a long association now in the Parliament extending beyond
thirty years. W. e have been collengues together in governments as fellow
Ministers for upwards of twenty years, and we have managed to get along
on good terms right through that period. Therefore the activities of any
organisation which could be regarded as prejudicial to the harmonious
working of the coalition is certainly not in the interests of myself or my
Liberal colleagues in the coalition.
But in particular, I wanted to refer to what I have described as
unfair criticism of Mr. McEwen as Minister for Trade and Industry and
of the Country Party directed to the tariff policy of the Government, its
alleged effects on costs, particularly as they bear on export industries,
and its general effects on the direction of the use of resources and the
efficiency of industry.
I want to make it very clear that criticism of tariff policy
generally and of Mr. Mc~ weri's role in particular in formulating tariff
policy is not criticism of himself or of the Country Party, but it is
criticism of the Government as a whole. My colleague was asked by Sir
Robert Menzies, my predecessor, in 1956 to take responsibility for the
newly-created Department of Trade. His activities, amongst other tasks,
embraced domestic and international tariff policies. Tariff policy is
reviewed from time to time by the Government. Normally tariff matters
come before the Gene-ral Administrative Committee of Cabinet, and on
this Country Farty Ministers form a small minority, or, if the policy aspect
is considered of sufficient consequence, they go to the Cabinet itself, in
which, as you will know, there are nine Liberal Farty Ministers and three
Country Party Ministers. So tariff policy is a Government responsibility.
It is not the responsibility of any one Minister or of one party in the
coalition. And I just mention a statistical fact, that the recorded value of
Australian exports exceeded COC million for the first time in 1961/ 62,
and we regarded that as a bumper year for exports, as I recall it, when I
was then Treasurer. This coming financial year, five years later, it is
confidently anticipated that exports will exceed 20, C million. This quite
remarkable growth in export income is certainly not consistent with any
charge that our policies have retarded our export industries in general.
And I emphasise again the fact that they are our policies and not the policies
of any particular member of the Government.
I think that is all I wanted to say
MR. EGGLETON Are there any specific questions? We haven't got much
time.
Q. Your discussion this morning, Sir, with Mr. McEwen. W-, as
that outside the Cabinet or inside it?
PM: This has not been discussed in C," abinet. I should have made
that clear to you. / Ie had a talk together which was the first opportunity
we had had, because he came from Mangalore yesterday, and I was
committed to an engagement with the Governor -Gaieral last night, so we
took this opportunity this morning of discussing these matters, and I felt / 3 
Sa -3-
PM ( Contd) arising out of that rather than defer any comment on it until
we met lter in the week, I should say what I had to say right
now.
Q. Sir, just one question before this ends, this
particular episode......
PM: Well, I think that's an optimistic view for any
politician to take!
Q. On the Middle East report, is there anything you
can say about crystallising the views or anything like this
that came out of it?
PM: No, I've got nothing specific myself to say on it.
I think if anything is to be said, Mr. Hasluck might choose to do
so. But I said in London we were striking a rather muted note
on this issue. 



FOR PRESS: 461 NOS\ 1 sR'S f[ p44
EXPORT OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIAN DIECASTERS
( Statement by Mr. J. McEwen, Deputy Prime Minister and 3JUN 1967
Minister for Trade and Industry) L IBR
The Australian Diecasters Survey Mission found that a market in North
America could be developed for castings produced in low to medium
volume, particularly where expensive dies and subsequent machining
were involved, Mr. J. McEwen, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Trade and Industry, said today.
Mr. McEwen, commenting on the report of the Diecasters' Survey
Mission to the West Coast of North Americ said penetration of
this more specialised market would not come overnight, but would
require a sound, practical approach on the part of individual firms
and the industry as a whole. A calculated approach to the market
could prove most rewarding.
There were opportunities in this field, notably in Los Angeles,
Oakland and San Diego. However, there was no ready-made market for
die-castings in high volume, which was the work the diecasters
would prefer.
Mr. McEwen said the Government lent support to the development of
export trade through such avenues as export incentives, overseas
promotions and the services of Trade Commissioners, but the prime
responsibility for developing this market rested with the diecasters
themselves. He said he was confident the industry would take full
advantage of all opportunities in spite of increasing international
competition which demanded greater devotion to management,
engineering and marketing skills.
The Diecasters Survey Mission comprised Mr. G. V. R3id, General
Manager of Monier C. C. Die Castings Pty Ltd. ( Leader); Mr. R. Hay,
Managing Director of Huckson Diecastings; Mr. F. Hook, Managing
Director of F. Hook Pty Ltd. and Mr. P. Marcusson of the Department
of Trade and Industry. The Mission visited the United States and
Canadian West Coasts late last year to investigate and report on
market possibilities for Australian diecastings.
Mr. McEwen commended the Mission and expressed gratitude for the
conscientious effort of each Mission member.
Canberra, A. C. T. 49/ 67T
27th June, 1967 
-U 



FOR PRESS: LI R AV P. M. No. 67/ 16
HYDRO-ELECTRICITY DEVELOPMENT IN TASMANIA
joint Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt
and the Premier of Tasmania, the Hlon. E. E. Reece
The Commonwealth has agreed in principle to provide
bridging financial assistance to Tasmania for the financing of a five-year
programme of accelerated hydro-electric development in that State based
on the commencement of development of the rugged Gordon River area in
the south-west of the State.
The five-year programme is estimated by the State to cost
$ 212 million and its pur pose is to meet in the best way the projected
electricity requirements of Tasmania, particularly by the large electricityconsuming
industries in the State many of which are important earners of
export income. Because initial development of the Gordon River area will
necessitate large amounts of investment before the first block of electricity
can be produced from it, the implementation of the programme will cause
a temporary " hump" in the rate of increase of electricity investment in the
State. The Commonwealth has accepted that on present indications the State
would be unable to finance the programme without some Commonwealth
assistance of a temporary character.
The. Commonwealth has proposed, and the State has
accepted, that it would be desirable for an independent assessment to be
made of the planning basis of the five-year programme and of the cost
estimates of the programme. It is envisaged that this assessment will be
undertaken as a matter of urgency by the S nowy Mountains Authority.
The amount of assistance to be provided by the Commonwealth
will be determined in consultation with the State from year to year as the,
programme proceeds. Subject to an overall limit of $ 47 million, the amount
of Commonwealth assistance will be based on the need for assistance having
regard to the sources of finance available to the State from its own resources
and those of the Hydro-Electric Commission.
The purpose of the Commonwealth assistance is to hel p
the State over the " hump" referred to. It will therefore be of a temporary
or bridging nature and will be repayable by the State over the period of
eight years subsequent to the five-year programme. The rate of interest
will be the maximum rate applying to semi -governmental securities from
time to time. The arrangements will be embodied in a formal agreement
between the Commonwealth and the State which will be submitted to the
respective Parliaments in due course.
The Prime Minister emphasised that the Commonwealth
assistance is being provided because of the special situation described. It
is not to be regarded as a precedent for special measures of Commonwealth
assistance for the financing of electricity development in the States in other
cases. CANBERRA, 29th June, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: C--3JUN 1967
4' LI8' AD7 PM. No. 66/ I967
POSTAL DISPUTE
Following is the text of a telegram sent this morning
by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt, to Mr L. J. Benaud, General
President of the Union of Postal Clerks and Telegraphists
" YOUR TELEGRAM 2rcTH JUNE. MY COLLEAGUE
THE ACTING POSTMAS TER -GENERAL HAS ALREADY
INDICATED THE POSITION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
AFTER CABINET CONSIDERATION, NAMELY, THAT IF YOUR
UNION ' 7! IHES CONSIDERATION TO BE GIVEN TO THE VARIOUS
UNION REPRESENTATIONS AND TO AVOID THE CONSEQUENCES
OF ANY STOPPAGE OF WORK, IT MUST ARRANGE FOR
CANCELLATION OF ANY STOPVIORK MEETINGS AND REMOVAL
OF ANY THREATS OF DIRECT ACTION. HAROLD HOLT
PRIME MINISTER."
CANBERRA, 29TH JUNE, 1967. 



FOR PR~ S: P. M. No. 65/ 1967
PREEIJER' COTFE\ C JUTNE 1967
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GJRANTS FOR 1967-68
Statemnt by-the Primo iniatcr, Mr. Harold Holt
For purposes of calculating the financial assistance
grants for 1967-68 ( and for future yers) the Commonwealth
has offered, and the States have accepted, the inclusion
in the 1966-67 formula grants the amount of .5.0 million
paid to the States in 1966-67 as a special addition to
the formula grants for that year.
The reduction in the time lag before movements in
average wages are reflected in the grants has made it
much more difficult than previously to estimate next year's
formula grants at this point of time. However, after
taking account of the addition of 4,5 million in the base
for determining the 1967-68 grants, it is tontatively
estimated that the formula grants payable to the States
in 1967-68 will be about 900 million. This would be an
increase of about W73 million, or about 6.9 per cent. on
the total grants actually paid in 1966-67.
The final figure of the formula grants will depend
on the movement in average wages for the twvelve months
ended IMarch, 1968 and on the increase in each State's
population between December, 1966 . nd December, 1967.
These will not be hnown until towards the end of the 1967-68
financial year.
The attached table shows the approximate estimated
distribution of the % 9CO million as between the States.
CANBERR2A. 29th June, 1967. 
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS
million
1966-67 Actual1967-68 Tentative Estimate
Non-recurring
Addition 1.7
1.3 Total ( a)
276.8 208.8
0.8
Formula 275.1 207.5 124.7 93.8 85.9 34.6
821.6 94.3 86.4 34.8
826.6 Formula Grant
( Old basis)
298.0 225.3 137.6 102.1 37.3
894.7 Effect of
adding
million to Base
1.8 1.3
0.9 0.6 0.3 5.4 Total Increase on
197-67
299.8 226.6 138.5 102.7 94.9 37.6
900.1 23.0 17.8 13.0 8.4 2.8
73.5
To be used as base for determining 1967-68 grants.
0.2 5.0
N. S. W.
Vic. Q'id. S. A.
W. A.
Tas. TOTAL 



P. M. iNo. 6GG/ 1967
P13MI7' NF T1A3C 7~ ANDF LOAN4 COUNCIL MV12TING
' tatem,, ntby the Frtme? Kiinister, the Rtt. Hon. Harold Holt, M. P.
De: cisions taken -at the. Loan Council rneetin.'. and Premie--rs'
conf -r--nce which concluded today provid a for substantial incr-ease: s
in 1967-! 5t in the! funds available to the States and their authoritdes
for their capital viorks activitie s, and also for an increase 5), ayond what
existing( arraniments would have produce d in financial assistance
grants from the % Commonwealthto the State-s for their general Oudg etary
purpos es.
Funds for Capital " orks Activities
In 1906-67 funds available to th? States and their authorities for
capital -3xpenditures und-: r borrowiin-, programmes approv--d by the Loan
Council and fromi specific purposa capital payments by the Commorw e-alth
for roads, Universiti--s, rail standardisation and so on% will total
approximately 411, 24A--million, mad? up as followis: $ million
Etatea works and housing programmeas 64 3
Semi -gov-ernmental I-orrowing progamrn s26
Local authority borrowing programme--s ( a0 7C2
Total Loan Council Prograrnme-s23
Cpe-cific purpos e-capital payments 7157 ( b)
ka) !:. uthorities ? borrovin-$' 1esCCC or less in a ye ar.
Thtinate
The Coi-alonw-e: alth put b.-fore the States proposals which would have
produc ~ d an incre ase in the total funds available to State s and th-ir
aut'horitie s from these sources in 1967-63 of about 10 per ce-nt.
As a re sult of th: e discussions with the: States, howve: r, the
prospe ctive incre! ase is nowi estimatad at n. arly 13" j pe-r cent.
T-he Comrcionwaalth agree! d to support a borrowinig programme for
S'tat works and housinng purnoses in 1067-60 of $ 677 million. This is ' 32
mllion more taan the: V1966-67 programme. 
It was also agreed that the total borrowing programmes of
' semi-governmental" authorities in the Stata. should be $ 311 million
in 1967-60, or $ 43 million riore than the 1966-67 programm.
It was also decided that there would ba no limit on the overall
level of borrowings by State authorities which borrow less than $ 300, 0CW
in a year. This means that authorities which had previously proposed
to borrovi between 21C, Ca0n d $ 300, CC a year will no longer have
to be accommodated in the States' ' semi-governmental' borrowinZ
programm s. Consequantly, the smi-rov ernmental" borrowing
programme will now be shared by a smaller number of authorities. In
addition, those authorities whosea borrowin3s have been less than
$ rC3, C00 will, with the approval of their State Premiers, be able to
increase their borrowings up to a maximum $ 30, 400 without coming
within the ' semi-govarnmental borrowing programme-s.
The estimates the States had prepared envisaged " local
authority' borrowings of about $ 73 million in 1967-68. As a result of
the increase in the limit to $ 300, CC0 it seems highly likely that
borrowings by local authorities as now defined will be considerably
hiTher in 1967-63.
The Commonwealth also agreed to provide direct financial
assistance to Tasmania in respect of the financing of its hydro-electric
programme associated with developments in the Gordon River area.
Takin,-account of this, Commronwealth specific payments to the States
for capital purposes are estimated to increase by about $ 73 million in
1967-60. Thus the funds available to the States and their authorities in
1967-63 for capital works purposes under the Loan Council ' orrowing
programmes and from specific purpose capital paymert s are now
estimated to total about $ 1,430 million. That will be close to $ 160
million or almost 13 per cent mrore than in 196-67.
7inancial Assistance Grants
The Frirnme linister recall. d that, at the February 1907 Fr cmi rs'
Conference, it vwas agreed to alter the grants formula used to calculate
the financial assistance grants so as to reduce the time lag before
increases in average v! ages are reflected in the grants. It was also
agre-d to pay the Ctates a special, non-recurring grant of $ 5 million.
The effect of the decisions taken at the February Premiers'
Conf erence was that the States received a total of $ 026.6 million by way
of financial assistance grants in 1966-67. This was $ 11. 9 million more
than they would have received if the previous formula had continued
to operate and if no special grant had been paid.
At the -remiers' Conference just concluded the Commonwealth
agreed that for purposes of calculating the financial assistance grants
for 1967-6C ( and for future years) the amount of million paid to the
States in '% 63-67 be treated as an addition to the formula grants for that
year. After taking account of this addition of $ 5 million to the base for
d etermnining the 1967-63 grants, it is tentativ ly estimated that the
formula grants payable to the States in 1967-7T will be about $ 900 million.
This would be an increase of about $ 73 million, or about C. 9 per cent,
on the total gants actually paid in 1966-67.
( The final figure of the forimula rants will depend on the
movement in average wages for the twelve months ended Miarch, 1963
and on the increase in each State's population betw: een D: ec ember, 1966 
-3-
and December, 1967. These will not be mown until towards the
end of the 1967-62 financial year.
Commonwealth payromnts to the States in 1967-63 other
than the financial assistanc grants and specific payments for capital
purposes are also expected to show some net increase.
Total Capital and Revenue Funds
As a result of existing arrangements and decisions taken at
the Premiers' Conference and Loan Council iMeeting, the total funds
available to the States in 1967-53 from Commonwealth assistance and
from borrowings for works programmes of the States and their
authorities will be of the order of $ 2,450 million compared v. ith about
200 million estimated to have been receiv ed from these sources
in 1966-67. This would represent an increase of about 11 per cent.
CA NBe, C
June, 197.
1 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 69/ 1967
POSTAL DISPUTE
Following are texts of further telegrams exchanged late
today between the Prime Minister and the General President of the
Union of Postal Clerks and Telegraphists, Mr. L. J. Benaud.
Mr. Benaud's telegram was in reply to the one sent earlier
today by Mr. Holt ( text already released).
Telegram from Mr. Benaud:
" YOUR TELEGRAM OF THE 29TH JUNE IS THE FIRST
POSITIVE INDICATION FROM GOVERNMENT CONCERNING OUR
CAMPAIGN FOR A FIVE DAY WEEK FOR POSTAL OFFICE WORKERS
STOP WE CANNOT UNDERSTAND VWHY THIS W. AS NOT MADE CLEAR
TO US WHEN FIRST A. MEETING W,. AS ARRANGED WITH THE ACIll NG
POSTMASTER GENERAL ON THE 2ND JUNE AND LATER AT OUR
MEETING 19TH JUNE V HEN IT WAS MADE ABUNDANTLY CLEAR THAT
OUR RESOLUTIONS FROM MASS MEETINGS STILL HELD CONCERNING
OUR STOP VJ! ORK ACTIVITY ON JULY 1ST STOP AS THE ACTING
POSTMASTER GENERAL MADE NO MENTION FOR WITHDRAWAL OF
OUR INTENDED ACTION AND AS HE ACCEPTED OUR JOINT
DEPARTMENTAL UNION SUBMISSION FOR CONSIDERATION IN ABSENCE
OF THE MINISTER VIE UN DERSTOOD THAT HE VWOULD MAKE EVERY
EFFORT BETWEEN 1c/ TH JUNE AND 1ST JULY TO AT LEAST INDICATE
SOME POSITIVE ANSIW ER TO OUR SUBMISSION STOP I MUST ADVISE
THAT THE THREAT BY GOVERNMENT TO A MOST LOYAL GROUP OF
AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVANTS IS MOST DEEPLY FELT AND
RESENTED STOP K. E ARE STILL ANXIOUS TO AVERT A STOPPAGE AND
BELIEVE THIS POSSIBLE EVEN AT THIS LATE HOUR STOP GENERAL
SECRETARIES BAKER AND SLATER WILL BE IN CANBERRA THIS
EVENING ADDRESSING POSTAL W'ORKERS AND IT IS STILL POSIBLE
FOR THE ASSURANCES 17E SEEK TO BE CONVEYED TO THEM STOP
CONTRARY TO ATTITUDE OF GOVERNMENT IN TELEGRAM FROM
ACTING POSTMASTER GENERAL ANDERSON ON 28TH OUR SUBMISSION
FOR A FIVE-DAY ! WkEEK FOR POSTAL W! ORKERS DOES NOT MEAN
SATURDA Y V. ITHOUT SERVICE.
The Prime Minister tonight replied to Mr. Benaud as follows:-
" I REFER TO YOUR TELEGRAM OF THIS AFTERNOON.
A NUMBER OF THE STATEMENTS IN YOUR TELEGRAM DO NOT
ACCORD WITH THE FACTS. IF YOUR UNION AND THE APV! U CANCEL
THE STOPPAGES PROPOSED FOR 1ST JULY AND IPITHDRAW ALL
OTHER THREATS OF DIRECT ACTION THE ACTING POSTMASTER
GENERAL WILL RESUME THE EXAMINATION OF YOUR VARIOUS
REPRESENTATIONS ASIQ HE PROMISED AT TH4E MEETING ON 19TH
JUNE. THEREAFTER I W.. OULD BE WILLING TO ARRANGE FOR THE
MINISTER AND THE MINISTER FOR LABOUR AND NATIONAL SERVICE
TO MEET REPRESENTATIVES OF YOUR UNION, THE APV! U AND THE
POSTMASTERS' ASSOCIATION FOR FURTHER DISCUSSIONS PRIOR TO
THIS MAITER BEING CONSIDERED BY THE CABINET.
CANBERRA, 29th June, 19167 



FOUNDATION STONE CEREMONY AT ROYAL MELBOURNE
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
Q. C1AUG 1967 ~ Melbourne, Victoria 3DJL, 16
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Mr Wood, Mr Anderson, the Hon Lindsay Thompson, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen, students
I was interested in what you had to say about our talks last
week. I thought I was coming to a much friendlier atmosphere here this
afternoon, but what you have said In your Introductory remarks underlines
the fact that, quite apart from what the Commonwealth Government is doing
by way of reimbursement grants and in other direct payments to the States,
we are and this project is concrete evidence of it, literally concrete evidence
of it we are contributing financially in other important ways. And of course
when I say I speak as the representative of the Commonwealth
Government, but we really should include those people throughout the
Commonwealth, whether they are in one State or another, who are contributing
by their tax payments to the revenues of the Commonwealth which ' n turn in
one form or another find some of their way, at any rate into the activities of
the States. As you were saying, this particular historic college has come
a very long way in the eighty years since Francis Ormond assisted it to
develop with a grant of l' 1, 000. In those days financial objectives were much
more limited than we find at this time.
It is appropriate that the first function of this sort which I
should attend as Frime Minister should be in substance the largest project of
its kind that has been undertaken under this new programme 6f aid for advanced
education purposes. This is one of the two largest building projects of its
kind in Australia. The other one ~ s in Sydney. But taking the money provided
for this project, together with the funds the Commonwealth and State provide
for recurrent expenditure, the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology is by far
the largest recipient of funds within the advanced education programme.
You get some idea of how Commonwealth provision has grown
over recent years when I tell you that from 1961 when our expend-* ture on
education was of the order of $ 45 million, mainly for universities, it has
grown to $ 150 million in the financial year just closed, 1966/ 67, which more
than trebles the 1966/ 61 contribution. Of: course the provision for the years
immediately ahead is considerably greater even than that very large figure.
Inside these expenditures are important new areas of assistance, notably that
made to the olleges of advanced education. Perhaps more important though
than the rate of building and the growth of the student body to which you have
referred, Mr Wood, is the quality of the College itself, and its reputation and
standing in the community. Your cdle ge can claim the highest standard in
its own field in the Commonwealth of Australia.
The prime purpose of Commonwealth assistance is t o enable
the standards of these colleges of advanced education to be raised, where
indeed they need raising, to the level where they provide a genuine alternative
to the university. They will differ from the universities, but they should by
no means be inferior to them. As I read through a list of some of the / 2 
-2
distinguished graduates taking their diplomas from these advanced colleges
of education, I found some of the most notable names in the industrial and
academic life of this country.
From this College alone, you could point in the academic
field to Professor Gordon Brown, Professor in Engineering at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Professor Freeland, Frofessor of Arch-Ite.-ture at
N. S. V1. University. In industry, Mr. WJeichhardt, Chairman of Directors
of I. C. I. Sir Ian Beaurepaire of Olympics, Mr Hans Ernst, Managing
Director of the Cincinnati Machine Tool Company and Mr Perrett who is,
of course, one of our outstandng arch4tects. In the Public Service, Mr G. F.
Browne, Chairman of the Victorian Railways Commissioners, Dr Lennox,
Chief of the CSIRO ' Pool Testing Authority, Dr Symons of the Commonwealth
Serum Laboratories, Dr Grose, of Defence Science Laboratories and Dr
C awsey also with our Defence Science Laboratories. From other Colleges
than RMIT, Sir Mquriae Mawby, one of our distinguished leaders in the
mineral field, and Professor W-; arner, an authority in the metallurgical field.
Now when I recite names of that order of distinction as the
product of colleges such as this, then the point is made that those who come
from these colleges can make for themselves a place in the life of the
community in no way inferior from those who come from our universities.
Indeed the practical knowledge which usually accompanies the work in a
college such as this is becoming increasingly appreciated.
I find myself, as with advancing years my eyesight tends to
weaken, that 1. am taking an increasing interest in the products of industrial
design. Considering such mundane items as the bathroom, the stove, even
wrist watches and matters of that sort, 1 have come to the condusion that
most of these are designed by alert, ikeen-eyed young men and women who
have yet to experience some difficulties which those of us have reached a
more advanced stage cf life experience.
I don't know why we can't standardize, for example, on a red
dot for hot water and a green dot for cold water, particularly when one has to
grope throtgh the mists of the bathroom or when one travels abroad and
they alter the initials in accordance with the description of hot or cold in that
particular country. And occasionally when I try to prepare a modest
breakfast myself down at the seaside, I find that I have to dart for the glasses
these days because the signs on the stove aren't clear enough to tell me
whether it is on or off or medium or high or low, and matters of that sort.
So I do urge that whazever care is given to the theoretical side
of studies and I expect to have a more responsive chord to strike in an
organisation such as this than perhaps in one of the universities that the
practical outcome from those studies will always be borne in mind. It is
all very well to study the humanities but the theories to be applied to the
humanities must at some stage be put -nto practical terms for the human
beings in relation to which the humanities are expressed. It surprises mie
that in so much of industrial design the practical application of what is
intended for a mass of people tends to be lost sight of in the theoretcal
applications-by a person having his own idea, perhaps, of what 4s wanted
rather than visualising the needs of the community as a whole.
But perhaps I may briefly outline what we in the Commonwealth
and our Advsory Committees see as the distinctive features of the colleges
of advanced education. / 2 
-3
I would name them as a wide range of courses to provide a
broad educational basis and cross -fertilisation of ideas; a substantial
proportion of tertiary students; standards of building and services, which can
stand equal to those to be found amongst the best in the world; emphasis on
new teaching techniques; the development of liberal studies both as an
essential ingredient i n all courses and as new courses in their own~ right, and
in making references to liberal studies, I am making no particular allusioni
of course, to any political movement in the country; t heir difference from
the universities in their emphasis on vocational and applied courses; the
part-time students; teaching rather than research; and a close association
with industry and commerce.
As I met members of your Council a little earlier, it was
quite obvious from what I knew of their activities that you have managed to
maintain that close association amongst leaders in their own field of industry
and commerce with the work of the RMIT,
As part of the plan to raise standards, quite apart from the
much larger sums to be provided for buildings and recurrent expenditures,
the Commonwealth is making available for the triennium 1967/ 69 special
unmatched grants of a quarter of a million dollars for research in advanced
education, and of half a-million for library books and materials in colleges
of advanced education. WTithout wearying you too much with statistics, let me
just summarise by saying that from 1965/ 69, the Commonwealth expects to
contribute to advanced education and technical training the following totals
To all States $ 36. 6 million; to Victoria $ 20. 2 million, to RMIT alone
approximately $ 6 million. This $ 6 million reflects a total State and Commonwealth
programme of some $ 13. 9 million It is interesting to reflect on the
fact that in Victoria, for some reason of historical development, we find that
the diploma student population of colleges 3. n this State now totals upwards of
68 per cent. of the total Australian enrolment. In addition to the diploma
students there are large numbers of individual trade or craft students.
Now you have another disti-nction. You are the only Australian
college of advanced education to have a Royal Charter. Yours is the oldest
college in Melbourne. Ballarat I understand is the only older Victorian
college. You were founded at much the same time as our public schools
and the Melbourne University.
Reflecting on the burst of education activity about the time
when you were founded, perhaps there is a parallel in that we are now seeing
again a similar age of expansion in education. New universities of adva nced
education; new emphasis on science education; a quickened awareness of the
importance of training our most valuable asset, the young people of our
community. The Commonwealth has played a significant and, I hope you will
feel, an imaginative part in this new emrhasis on education. Nevertheless,
we have continued to recognise and act on the basis that the States have the
primary responsibility for education.
In referring to the new emphasis we have given to it in our
Commonwealth role, I must pay a tribute to my predecessor, whose drive
gave so much lift to the programme and also to my colleague, the first
Commonwealth Minister for Education, Senator Gorton, who is bringing so
much energy and enthusiasm to his tasks.
In the Department of Labour and National Service, my
colleague, Mr. Bury has been active in the work of the Froductivity Committees
and in the programme of training of apprentices encouraged by that Department.
In other fields in our Australian National University the new university we 
are establishing in Papua and New Guinea you get further evidence of this
Commonwealth activity. It is not often recognised how much we are now spending
on education. I gave these figures earlier and mentioned that the total
would be incieasing very rapidly. But it is rather interesting to note that
payments to the States, the colleges of advanced education, the universities,
the science laboratories and teacher training in the financial year ahead of
us will have increased from $ 0' 2m. to $ 115m. or roughly an increase in that
one year of per cent. The grants for colleges of advanced eduation in the
new financial year will be more than double the grants of the last financial
year. We are of course spending a great deal on education in our own fields
of responsibility, partly by way of assistance to students under the various
scholarships schemes, and partly in our own territories. Mr Thompson may
be interested to know . hat the Commonwealth's payments to the S13tates for
education are increasing at a significantly faster rate than the Commonwealth
payments for its own immediate responsibilities i A recognition I believe
of our growing support of the States in their programmes.
Now, the importance the Commonwealth is placing on
colleges of advanced education is evident from the percentages I have just
given. In the words of my colleague, Senator Gorton, they are to be treated
in the important field of capital development in all respects as universities
as to standards, priorities and so on.
Why is the Commonwealth providing this assistance? Wie
believe in the importance of giving our young people a chance to develop
themselves for their full potential. Wle believe that in these colleges there
is a genuine alternative to the universities on which insufficient importance
has been placed inthe past. Vie value the wide range of courses the colleges
offer, the cross -fertilisation of ideas they encourage, we value the emphasis
they place on the inclusion of these liberal studies in technical training.
And we value the empl'asis they place on vocational and applied courses which
fit their students well for playing their important roles in industry and
commerce. These are the features of education which the colleges of
advanced education emphasise, and which the Commonwealth, in partnership
with the States, hopes to promote, Of them the RMIT is a notable example.
But much of the value of these colleges will be lost if the general public is
not made aware of their existence as a genuine alternative to the universities,
and if people are not given every encouragement to use them.
As to your new project, this is the first and largest of
those being undertaken under the Commonwealth $ 24, million capital
assistance programme for the 1967/ 69 triennium. Your 8-acre site is in
a unique situation I believe the project will take you up twelve storeys
high, and it is being redeveloped under an ambitious scheme which should
result in more unoccupied ground space by 1974, combined with three times the
amount of floor space. It is estimated unless they have gone up since these
notes were prepared for me to cost $ 3C million over a ten-year period.
I thought there was a rather ominous ring about your comment, Mr. Wood this
building is the first step.
The Commonwealth has committed itself during the present
and past triennium to assistance of 1$ 2. 6 million towards the project, to be
matched by a State grant, and already to a further $ 360, OCO unmatched out of
its $ 10 million grant to State technical colleges. They are also providing 
substantial funds to the RMIT for recurrent expenditure over $ 3 million
during the 1967/ 69 triennium. Without this assistance from the Commonwealth
and State Governments, it would not have been possible for the
Institute to develop these buildings and to cope with the enormous increase
in student population for which you are now preparing.
The Commonwealth Advisory Committee on Colleges of
Advanced Education in its report to the Government during 1966, commented
that it has found this t ype of education going on too often in old gaols and
breweries. Well, you should be doing a good deal better than that, Mr.
Wood. The Commonwealth/ State programme of $ 48 million during the
coming triennium for capital projects is evidence of the serious and
determined approach by both national and State Governments in partnership
with the problem. The new building to be erected on this historic site will
be evidence in concre~ e and steel of the outcome of our endeavours.
But, as I said earlier, perhaps I should fittingly close on
this. While we will see a massive project in terms of concrete and steel,
it is in the quality of the student body and the achievements which they are
able to carry out in these buildings, in the maintenance of the splendid
tradition which marks the RMIT as an outstanding example of what can be
achieved in the advanced education field that we will count the results in the
years to come from the financial provisions we are now undertaking to make.
It is in the hope that there will be added important new and significant
chapters in the distinguished history of the RMIT that I now have pleasure
in formally laying the trowel or whatever the phrase is. I saw the size of
it a moment ago. I felt I should have got a union ticket out before I took
hold of it. It will serve as a useful implement for the next Premiers'
Conference if for nothing else! 



1 2 J U L 1% 7
FOR PRESS: LBR P. M. No. 70/ 1967
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
This afternoon the Government began its pre-Budget series of
economic corsultations when Ministers met representatives of the
A. C. T. U. The A. C, T U. representatives were Mr Albert Monk ( Fresident),
Mr J. D. Kenny ( Vice-President), Mr F. Evans ( Junior Vice-Fresident)
and Mr H. J. Souter ( Secretary).
Ministers present, in addition to the Prime Minister, were Mr
J McEwen, Minister for Trade and Industry; Mr W. McMahon, Treasurer;
Mr D. E. Fairbairn, Minister for National Development; Mr L. H. E. Bury,
Minister for Labour and National Service and Mr D. Anthony, Minister
for the Interior.
The A. C. T. U. representatives put forward a number of
proposals and Mr Holt said that the Government also appreciated
receiving the A. C. T. U's views on the economic situation prior to their
consideration of the Budget.
Tomorrow Ministers will hold discussions with representatives
of industry and commerce and with the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council and the E; xport Development Council.
CANBERRA, 4th July, 1967. 



-7-
" FOUR CORRS" 14 JUL 19
67
TELEVISION INTERVIE : ITH THE PRIME MINISTER, p/ BRRI*
MR. HAROLD HOLT OE : TLEVISION I-ET.: ORK
v
7, SD P OTH JULY, 1967.
14JUL1967 SInterviewer Mr. Rojert Moore
LIBRN
MR. MOORE: Eighteen months ago Mr. Holt became Prime Minister.
And just a few days ago he returned from his fifth series of
meetings with President Johnson and his third meeting with Mir.
*. ilson. ell in mid-term, so to sneak Four Corners looks oack
over the first eighteen months of Mr. Holt's office and examines
his policies at home and auroad.
Prime Minister, I think if one was tempted to give a
label however brief, to your period of office it's very tempting
to call you a " foreign affairs Prime Minister. Now what's your
comment on that?
PRIIM MINISTER: 7vWell, I've never lost sight of the importance
of the home front. No politician certainly one who's been there
as long as I have, can afford to do that unless people are finding
themselves doing well through the economy, their social progress.
They don't want the kind of government tnat can't give them these
thins. But my interest in foreign affairs I think has been
overlooked by neople who have seen me through seven years as
Treasurer and have ignored the fact that I've been the first
Australian to chair at least four significant international gatherings
the snly Australian in respect of three of those.
MOORE: . Hell, certainly, Sir, since you came to office
you've probaoly done more in the foreign affairs field and had
more newsoaper publicity about your doings in the foreign affairs
field than any Prime Minister we've had.
P. M. Yes well some of that is exnlained by the need
to make direct personal contact with leaders like President Johnson
and Prime Minister Harold ilson, and also what seemed to me to be
Australia's increasing involvement in Asia made it necessary that
I should spend a lot of time early in my period of office in some
of these countries of such importance to us.
MOORE: I wonder, Sir if I could get straight into that
then now. It seems to me that although in some ways you've merely
carried forward trends that were there before you came to the office
of Prime iinister, what has happened since you ve been Prime
Minister is what one might call a firmin o our priorities, and
I would like to look at these. And the four priorities of our
foreign policy that I'd like to look at in order are: our
relations with the United States, with ritain, with the Commonwealth,
and lastly in your own special interests so far, in Asia. Now, I
wonder if we could look first of all at our relationships with the
United States. It's been often stated by you and your Ministers
that this is a corner-stone of our foreign policy, and in fact, in
the last election a great deal was said about this and what has
been mentioned repeatedly, and I'm sure you're sick of it, but I'd
like to bring it up just again, is your phrase " All the way with
LBJ". Now some of your critics have said that this meant a total
commitment to the United States, but you've gone on to point out that
you restricted this to America's policy in Vietnam. Now what I would
like to ask you is, how far do we go with the United States, just
how committed are we? / 2 
. ell, first I think we realise how much we have in
common in our international oojectives. . e oelieve in much the
same sort of society, world order, as the United Stites of America.
The Unitei States has taken an increasing interest itself in the
South East Asian and Pacific region and in the Asian region
generally, much more so than earlier in its own history. Our
association with the United States in, say SEATO, in ArZUS, these
are powerful elements in australia's own security. Now quite rightly,
as you say, I have used the phrase " All the way with LAJ' in
relation to our involvement in Vietnam, because frankly I jelieve
Australia has an even , reater stake in the outcome in Vietnam than
has the United States.
MOORE: Sir, sorry. Outside Vietnam how far do we go
with L3J? ell, where our interests are in line one with
the other, and in most things they are in line one with the other,
that's an entirely realistic apnreciation. lut there are some
directions. For example, we differ from them in that we've
recognised Outer Mongolia. Ie have diplomatic relations with
Cambodia. In fact, we represent American interests in Cambodia
and Cambodian interests in South Vietnam, which makes us a pretty
good bridge around that area.
MOORE: Do you see any sorry, any division in American
policy and Australian policy towars Communis China, say?
P. M. I think not. '. e've had the same meneral attitude
in relation to the recognition of Communist China. That doesn't
mean zur minds are closed to this possibility, but it does mean that
the conditions have to Je right, and there has to be an acceptance
by China of certain international obligations, certain international
codes of conduct. There also has to be, of course an arrangement
which will assure the future of Taiiwan. out I dont think there's
all that difference anyhow in the attitude of our two governments.
MOORE: On the question of our trading with Communist
China, say, is that a serious.....
P. M. aell that is, that is a si: nificant point of
difference. I've said in America that at some time there has to
be an accommodation with China. It's unrealistic to imagine the
world going on indefinitely with seven hundred million people kept
as it were in coventry, but..... and trade, diplomatic exchanges
cultural exchanges, the exchanes for sportin events, the visits
by journalists and things of this sort can all help to build bridges
. ut nothing more effectively so than trade.
MOORE. Do you find that American leaders use this same
kind of language when they talk about China, about the need for closer
experience of each other
P. M. I find they do nrivately, out the official policy
of the Government, up to the nresent time, has not favoured trade.
But I think there is trend anyhow in that direction.
MOORE. INow, Sir, I wonder if we could look at the other
side of our relations with the United States, the economic relations
between the two countries? Now it's being suggested that in so far
as it appears that the United Statos Government is bartering their
tobacco for our wool in the tariff question that the United Jtates
Government is not as sympathetic economically towards us as it might
De in view of our overall alliance. :. hat's your comment on this?
P. M. 4ell, once you get to trading questions you find
domestic politics having a very big influence on the decisions of / 3 
the government. I ointed out quite vigorously in the United
States, as I have here, that Australia is a very Pig purchaser
of American ' oods I believe the most ranidly grovlng market
that the United States has. I pointed out on my last visit that we
buy ' 68 ner canita in velue of American goods and they buy less
than ner cabita of Australian goods, and there's a very heavy
balance of trade in their favour. I'm sure thtt in the President
we have a friend who wishes to be helpful in these trade directions,
but he, of course, has to look to a 3enate, and a Senate in which
the smaller states, the rural rroducing states have just as much
voting strength as a LC York Stacte r the Ste of California.
And to the extent thau he can be helpful, I'm sure he will and
that his administration could be helpful.
MOOE. ell could I look at the, what I ima: ine are
somewhat similar problems for yourself in Australia? gow do you,
or is there a need for you, to wei'h un the desires of the
Australian tobacco grower a : ainst The ustralian woolgrower? Is
this a real problem for you?
-ell, every nrimary industry is a real problem
for us. I've been pointing this out in Englsand on their'Common
Market application. It ma ue that it represents a small
percenLa'Le relative of trace, but in a vast continent where you
ave sca tered communities some derendent almost entirely on a
particular form of production you can't treat any form of production
as unesser: tial. Certainly it s essential to those people essential
to the balanced develonment of the continent. So we pointed out in
America, where it is the one country in the world industrialised
that imposes a suostantial duty on raw wool. 3ut tobacco in certain
districts of Australia is of importance to us. Jut even so we've
been prepared to move a good way on tobacco to come to a deal with
them.
MOOirE. God. No-the last noint I'd like to deal ; ith
in this area is our militar1 purchases from the United States. The
Christian Science Uonitor tnis week su ested that the Australian
Government was in danger of losin' coni-l1 of its overall budget,
the argument being that such a sutstantial part of our overall
budget is devoted to defence purchases from the United States
which in a way are denendent on the cost structure of the United
States over which you have no control, Now, what's your comment
on this?
P. M. I think this is a passing phase. You see we've
doubled the defence vote and in the course of that there's been a
very heavy equinping pro: raume, particularly for such thinrs as
aircraft, destroyers, sutmarines wihich we're gettin. from the U. K.
and th: re is this hs; . s e ouild up th. equipmcnt of th Syrvices.
ut once . e've ' e min ud to -cquiru thseo things and . c'ro spr ading
th2 p'yL. Jnts out ovcr lon period of years, thun I thinki there will
be less prssure on us cerdnly on our overseas purch-. ses. It may
inter: st you to know tA . t ustrin our. ch: ses for defnrce doubled in
the lst twelve months. e are looking more to our hom,; Ti. rk; t for
such thing-s As we can produce here.
MOOR1. but in the American purch-se, Sir, are you worried
at all about the apparent risini costs, and the fact that the costs
have never seemed to oe identifiable in the F111 anid the Charles
Adams destroyers?
P. M. giell, of course it trou; les us but we can understand
the difficulty that any country . which is an initiator of a particular
defence weanon finds in statir, at all precisely the cost which
will have to be paid. The United Kingdom is in the same nosition as
/ 4 
we are, and we are still satisfied that we are acquiring the best
fighting aircraft in the world.
MOORE. Now, Sir, I'd like to move on to our relations with
the United Kingdom, with Dritain, at this stage what is your
assessment of Britain's intentions Last of Suez?
. ell, you asked first about our relations. I just
want to make it clear that our relations with the United Kingdom
fundamentally remain unaltered they're uasic. They're a
relationship of kinship, of mutual interest and re ard and those
relations remain fundamentally unaltered. But if the U. K. enters
the Common Ma1rket that must affect the emphasis it places on its
dealings with the rest of the Commonwealth, and if it removes its
military presence substantially l: ast of Suez. That must have some
bearing, too, on the degree of intimacy of the relationship and the
closeness of our cooperation together. So that when you ask me
now what my assessment is of their intentions there is no doubt that
Britain intends a substantial wJithdrawal of forces phased over a
period of years. One o-the question marks has been whether it
will retain a oresence, and I don't want to -o t-o deeoly into the
outcome of my bwn discussions in the United ingdom and they're
taking Cabinet decisions on those matters over the next week or so.
But I like to think that the United Kin dom will retain a presence
in the Singanore/ Malays ian area and that there will be continuing
co-operation between Australia, New Zealand, and other Commonwealth
forces with the United Kingdom there.
MOORE. Sir, assuming tha-t a presence in some form does
remair there, but on the other hand that there is a substantial
reduction of forces, what should ue the policy of the Australian
Government? I mean, would we be tempted to try to fill the vacuum
so created in terms of manpo'wer and equipment or is there some
alternative policy completely for us?
P. M. Yes. Iell first, perhans we should make it clear in
relation to the reduction of forces that there was a bi. build-up
of British forces to meet the confrontation issue, and everybody
knew that after confrontation there would je a run down. The ouestion
is to what degree, and how soon that run down occurs. Now Ausfralia
and New Zealand would naturally expect that as they grow in population
and economic strength they will ue playing an increasing part in
contributing to the security of the area. But the details of this
have yet to be worked out. Clearly they can't be worked out until
we know firmly what the British intentions are.
MOORE. How soon would you expect to know firmly enough to
make a decision?
F. M. U. ell, I'd exnect us to know their broad intentions
within a matter of veeks.
MOORE. Before our Budget?
F. M. Yes, out I wouldn't say that it would have a bearing
on the forthcoming Budget because there s no intention on the part
of the United Kingdom, on anybody's , art in their Government so far
as I can discover, to run their forces down so rapidly that we have
to have a dramatic chan-e. I w7ould hope to see a review say 1970, 71
of their position. I t ink it's unwise to commit yourself too far
ahead in this changing world. 
OORE. Sir th is week oth,, Tun Abdt 1 R azak and Lee Kuan Yew
hPave called for Autralis and iNew Zeland to have disoussions with
MJalaysia and Singapore in an endeavour to, I think build up some
consortium of forces to replace an eventual British withdraiwal.
How seriously does your Government take this possibility?
. e look to a growing-contribution by the countries
of the area themselves to their own security and I think they accept
this. At the same time Australia and Zealand wweouwl d form part,
I would believe, of ny general security arran3ement made in
relation to the area, just as I would inmaine the United States
would, and other countries wvho h: ive indic-ted support around
the area in the p1st. But wie can't be precise on the details of
this. I've already said we would exnect to have to make a rowing
contribution to security in the area as a whole. But in Asia at
this time there's a meetin; of kASPAC, nine countries are rre sented
there, and they all have an interest in the security of the area.
MOORE. Sir, now I'd like to tarn rather more briefly
to our relations with the Commonwealth, the iritish Commonwealth.
You were reported as saying that at the Prime Ministers' Conference
last year you were disannointed that so much more time was given up
to Rhodesia than to Vietnam, and you went on to give your reasons
why. Now this could be looked ait in one of two ways. Either we're
out of step with the Commonvelth, or the Commonwealth is out of
step with us. Now , RAhich is it?
th t. ell, we had an eight day conference scheduled. Six
days the first six days, were devoted entirely to Rhodesia. It
wasn t just the dispronortion of time to Vietnam, it was the
disproportion of time to the affairs of the remaining nine tenths
of human kind, and this is where I made my protest. I said,
having re ard to the time avlilable to us, we ought to be turnin
to some ot these other questions, including Vietnam, which wasn'
merely of interest to Australia. After all Ualaya, ialaysia,
oingapore were also represented there and the United I( in; dom has
an interest, although not militarily involved, in the outcome.
1MOOiE. . ell in view of this obvious difference within the
Common-: eulth as to the priorities of Rhodesia and Vietnam last year
anyway, in view of this and the possibility that this could continue,
will you in fact attend another Prime Ministers' Conference?
P. M. Yes been a Commonwealth man all my
public life. I do hold the view that the modern Commonwealth is likely
to have less emphasis in our planning and policy making in the future
than the old Commonwealth did in the nast w1here we were able to come
towether pretty closel on matters of'policy. ut the concept of a
muTti-racial Commonwealth is worth preserving. After all, if fe
can't cooperate usefully and constructively ñ or neaceful purnoses
at any rate, then what prosnect is there for the United 1Natins?
MOORE. Do you feel there is enough for us to have in cotimon
to make up for the oovious aisag; reement over the importance of
Vietnam md all that means?
P. M. Yes, and I do know that the countries of Africa in
particular, and some of the newer Commonwealth countries attacA great
importance to their membership of it.
MOOpRE. ood Sir. Iow I'd like to move on to Asia if I could
briefly again first You've sugested t-hat in talking about asia, and
you visited ten countries there, thit it's a mistake to see Asia as a
unity. That in a sense, it's merely a geographical expression. That
/ 6 
there are as, in fact, s many Asias is there are countries and as
many Asian opinions as there ire countries. This would su_ est
tha in turn we should have not so much an Asian policy bui a
number of Asian policies directed towards specific countries.
Now your critics su est, though that on the whole we have only
one and that is tht our Asian policy is our Vietnam policy.
. ihat's your comment on that?
P. M. :: ell, first of all, we do have a number of policies in
relation to individual countries. I didn't mean we have different
policies for the same country. But our policy with Cambodia,
which is neutral and tends to the Socialist camp; with Laos,
which is neutral but tends to the . estern camn that is a very
different line of policy, say, to what we have in Taiwan, what
we have in Korea, certainly to what we have in Vietnam. but
all of these countries have marked dissimilarities, even of
physical appearance certainly of rolicy attitudes. This is
Why I've stressed that we've got to get ourselves into the frame
of mind thit there are greater differences of policy, of physical
apnearance, of general mental and social attitude to be found
there than there are in Europe, for example. just don't think
of the Europeans as the same sort of people.
MOOE. Could I put this argument another way then? I think
what is often suggested by your critics is that our policies are
much oetter defined towards the smaller, perhaps more vulnerable
and dependent countries in the area than bur policies are defined
towards the oigger boys Japan and Indonesia and so on. The
argument goes on to say ': ell, the ra:: son why we take so specific
an interest in the smalier dependent countries is because it suits
our Vietnam policy, and the argument then roes on to say that it's
about time that we took a more detailed policy towa rds Japan and
Indonesia.
P. M. ', ell, of course, we do have tery detailed policies with
Japan out these are princioally on the trade side because Japan
hasn't been involved in defence or military ore-oaration over recent
years. but Vietnam looms so large for us, not merely because we re
helping to safeuard a small country which is under agressive attack
or errorism, subversion and matters of that sort. This is important,
but it's not the fundamental thing aoout the Vietnam conflict. '. hat
is fundamental there is the shape of Asia, indeed the shar. e of the
free world for the future. If you were to have a Communist domain,
nbt necessarily a Chinese Communist domain but a Communist domain
as we very well might have had if we hadn't intervened in Korea and
then followed that up by the intervention in Vietnam. If you'd
h-d that right down through South-East Asia from China southlwards,
and Derhais even penetrating as I'm sure it would have if the checks
hadn't been apnlied, into Indonesia, then it would have been a very
different kind of world with which we'd oe dealing in the years to
come. . hat we are doing here by these policies is allo. independent
countries to develoo their resources, to ;. in economic growth, to
co-operite. I mentioned ASPC, there was a shining example. -C. FS,,
the Asian Development oink. In a variety of ways the countries of
Asia are co-operating in a manner they've never done through the
centuries.
MOOiE. This week, Sir, Mr. C: uot Lodge was reported as saying
that United States troons could ue in Vietnam for ahot er 25 years.
Do you think Australian trooos should be?
P. M. ', ell, a lot of people speculate. Some say it's all
going to oe over in 2 years, some say another thing. I don't think
anyoody can say with firmness because it's not merely a military
result which will determine this. I've maintained all along that / 7 
a military result will not Je sufficient of itself. It would leave
the way cpen for continuing 6uerilla campaign of the sort we had
to face in IEalaysia.
MOORE. But is the figure of 20 or 25 more ye-rs i ridiculous
one, do you think?
P. M. I would certainly hope it w-; s quite unrealistic. But I
do remember that it took us 15 years to clean up the situation in
Malaysia and tha-t w: s far less extensive, much less complex. On
the other hand, the forces involved were very much smaller than is the
case in Vietnam. No I think the Iorth Vietnamese will find the cost
too heavy much earlier than that, and quite apa-rt from the military
results obtained, there will oe a r-alisation at some point of time
and who can say when, when they decide the game is not worth the candle.
MOOIL. NIow, Sir, I'd like to come at last home to domestic
affairs. It seems to me that this ear, more than any other year
there is a crisis in at least the thinking about CommonwealthState
relttions in Australia. That the federation is under more critical
andlysis than evsr before, nd there are some su gestions that in
fact federation his broken down, in fact, in astralia. That the
St tes are simply the financial i -ents ind none too efficient at
thit, of the Commonelth. Now, how stands the federation.
P. M. : ell, you're speaking a week after a Premiers' nference,
: nd the Loan council meetings, and that's never really the uest time
to . e calmly anailysing the st lte of Commonqealth/. 3tate rel. tions,
because as you know w. e go through these motions each time a-nd certain
results occur. I've found some papers now which sa-id we were too
tight-fisted to begin with and, when they've anal sed what hanpened
last week saying that the ommonwealth h's provide too much mney for
the States. 3o that's a matter of judgment. 3ut could I come really
to the crux of ohat you're saying? I believe in a federal system.
I believe thit in a country as vast n-ird sparsely settled as hustralia
ou must have some decentralised activity of government and rather
han have this come through a jottleneck in Canoerra, it's better that
each State should h: ve its ol.' n governmental odministr.; tion. But there
should ee then close co-operation with the central administration, and
far from the federation breakin. down this is growing as I could point
out in a number of specific insTarnces.
MOORE. * ut isn't one of thie chtr'es made that in fact there is
now a bottle-neck in Canberra, that it's just a matter of bad nujlic
administra: tion to h: ave one overnment collectin taxes and another
government spending it? . ho's responsible for what?
I don't think that creates the cottle-neck. 2ottle-necks
develo out of policy not out of rroviding the funds for neople.
Each St te can make 1 s own -olicies. But there is this much point
in what you're putting, that the electorate is demanding a muc
greater Commonwealth particination in matters which were formally
urely matters within'the constitutional province of the states.
alth, educ . tion, and matters of that sort, 1which were primarily
St. te matters are now regarded as ceing directly of interest for
the Commonealth. Ard, indeed, we're nrnviding vTst sums -s you know
in both these directions. i
S 3But isn't nart of the trouile too that the electorate
or some elements of it, are wanting to know which government do they
blame for either as they reird, inadequrate services or, on the other
hand, increased taxes?
. ell, in my exnaerience they know which government to ./ 8 
-8-
blame. It's al: avs the Commonwealth Government, because they say
the Commonwealth Government's got the money and the State Governments
aren't slow to point out to tiose who importune them that they can't
provide the money because the Commonwealth won't give it to them.
But I think thoughtful people appreciate that a Federal system is
necessary in this continent. And it's up to us to make it work, and I
would assure you that we do that in very many directions. There are
conferences at the Ministerial level on a scale which never existed before
in different departments of Government.
MOORE. Sir, now I wonder if we could turn to a orief -ccount of
your Parliamentary record since you've been Prime Minister? The
first thing about it, of course, is the undoubted triumph at the
last Federal election, your first election as Prime iMinister when
you came back with a record majority and that's an undouDt-d
riumph in anyone's terms. On the other hand, since then some
peole are detecting some black clouds on the horizon and I'd like
to go very quickly through the three which normally stand out, and
ask for your comments on them. First of all the fact that you
at present have a reuellious, to put it mildly, Senate. People are
suggesting that this shows a less of control by the Government over
the Government's business. Your comment on that.
P. M. Jell, first we have a minority in the Senate. e lost
by death two Senators which we couldn't replace on the rresent electoral
system. So we are in a minority in any event. Secondly, the Labor
Party regiments it vote in th-e enate. Our Senators try to behave
as they think Senators should and occasionally depart from the
policies of rovernment. out taking in view the fact.....
MOORE. But you do have some rebellious Senators of your own?
P. M. W ell, I don't know what your definition of rebellious is.
There are one or two I think wvho interoret their indenendent role
rather toe lioerally for themselves. But enerall sneaking
the Senators support the Government, but leave to themselves the right
to dissent where they think this is justified. If the Labor Senators
would behave in the same spirit the Senite would work much more along
the lines that it was intended to work. Jut of course theirs is a
regimented vote. but while you have the pro'ortional basis of voting
for the Sen-te there will always be a trouble for governments from
an almost evenly divided Senate.
MO RE. You don't feel that it would have been po sible for the
Government to have negotiated a w:: ay through its problem in the Senate?
I mean, is it the mere fact that you are in a minority or could you
have with some more diplomacy, or finesse, or whatever the word is,
achieved your end?
P. M. ; ell, there are not many matters of major moment that the
Senate has prevented us from putting through. You've had the recent
instance of the postal charges, out that raises other issues and I'm
not surprised th:. t Mr. Calwell got very angry at ; what he regarded as
a breach of L'oor practice and principle on this matter.
MOORE. Sir, could I now turn to the Vozyaer debate, where it's
sometimes been suggested that this showed that the Party had lost some
of its control over its members, and you were reported saying,
admittedly only reported as saying, that you were led to say, tat you
would rather lead a solid Party of 20 than a rajule of 00. Now did
you say anything like that?
P. M. This was not in relttion to the Voyager matter. Jut I would
say it iwas over that general . eriod but not in relation to that, oh no.
/ 9 
It T5s on the occasion though, wasn't it?
No I didn't object at all to the line tken by
our own mnembers on the Voyager matter, and I think I can say quite
fairly that on the morning on which I armounced the Government's
decisions to the House, Ye h-d a snecial Party meeting and I've
never known the party more united than it was at tha-t point of time.
I ias very haprpy with the atmosphere in the Party.
MOORE. That wasn't on the morning on which you were
reported to have said.....
P. M. No. No.
MOORE. ! lell, now the Nexus iReferendum and its defeat.
Did you take this is a Personal affront to your position as
Prime Minister? 1o more so than I took the nine to one vote for
the ARori ines proposals as an overwhelming endorsement of the
Government. No, peoole voted, I think the vote on the Nexus was
not based on very solid information and revealed a prejudice
against more politicians. That was the cry that was put up, although
in substance it was likely to have just the reverse effect.
MOORE. You don't sea it then : s in any . ay a defict for a
Prime inister th-it he can't carry a referendum in wihich he h s the
support of the Leader of the Opposition?
P. M. ell, a lot of Prime inisters would feel. themselves
rebuffed if they took that attitude. There have -en very few
refe-endum nroposals adopted throunh the histo of the Federation
but ,7e felt we hd to give the pu ic the onnor unity of deciding this
before we tackled the task of redistrioution. The vital t-ask because
the electorates are so ill . ala; nced even in the same State and in the
same city areas.
MOORE. Now, Sir could we turn very briefly to relations
between the Coailition Farties. Low a lot of peodle lot of thins
have ceen said recently nd headlines made about an alle., ed rift
within the Party and it's often su,, gested that the Liberal Party is
out to et rid of the Country Party and rule in its own right. Now,
what's in this? ell, nothing as far as I'm concerned, because it's
my own pelief that as far thead zs I can see there should oe in the
interests of good government in Australia a coalition oetween the
Liberal Party and The Country Party. I've made this quite cleair to
my colleagues and to Mr. cwen. Mr. McEwen and I are old colleaues
we've been together in Parliament for more than thirty years. ve
been in governments together for just on twenty years as fellow
Ministers, and we can usually sort our way through our problems. 3ut
we're competitors for votes let's face it, we're separite Parties,
we're out to get the best of what we can for the electorate and they
are, and they have a difficult problem in a neried in ' which the urban
growth is tending to outstrip the rural : rowth of maintaining cn
identity and I can understand some of te thin. s that go on inside
the Coun ry Party.
WMORL. And inside the Liberal Party? Are there no tensions
there? P. M. ell ag'ain vie are competitors and some Liberals
of course, tend to take more extreme views of where we should stand
in relation to thle Country Party than others, but over the whole field,
MO * RE 
-1
rjlations are as good and -hen you trace it back over the period of
the coalition, I think remarkabl good and may I just conclude
on that by sayin I find in nrac ice I have fewer problems arise in
relations with te Country "&gt; rty than I do with some of my colleagues
in what is non a very large Libera. l Party.
MOORE. Sir at the beginning of this discussion I sugjested
that one mi-ht descrioe you as a " Foreign Aff irs" Prime Minister. If
it was put To you, how would you de3cri e government Holt-style?
P. M. I don't think there should be a smecial emphasis placed
on neople's view as to foreign affairs or home a-ffairs. I've said
at the outset what hlipens on the home front is vital and overwhelmingly
important but placedias Australia is, of course, so do our foreign
policies become of great importnce to us. but if you ask me what
is my general approach.
MOORE. .; hat is your style of government? How would you
surmarise it?
P. M. ell, I put it to President Johnson that I tried to
be firm fair forthrifhtfand friendly if you like a fair deal
Government. Ae told me that his objectives were rogress reace and
prosperity I said 11, let's marry them together, and we've ot
it made", and I would descrioe m own approach in those terms an
I think you avoid a , reat deal o the complexity of government when
people accept you as bein fair and understand that you'll be firm
and forthright, but also now tAt you'll be trying to be friendly.
MOORE. rime Minister, thank you for giving us your time.
P. H. Thank you. 



FOR PRESS: 9 JUL LIBRV P. M. No. 72/ 1967
CORIO BY-ELECTION: MR WHITLAM'S CLAIMS
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Mr Whitlam, as Members of the Federal Parliament well know,
has little regard for the truth when it stands in his political path. In his
eagerness to score in Corio, te has again resorted to fabrication. He
alleged last night that, prior to the last Federal Election a " deal" had
been made for Mr Opperman to go to Malta as High Commissioner. Not
only so the allegation runs were Mr Opperman and I party to the
arrangement, but the Government of Malta was also aware of it. In all
these particulars, Mr Whitlam's statements are untrue. On the basis,
however, of this piece of fiction, he makes the accusation that a confidence
trick has been perpetrated on Corio, electors. There was no discussion
between me and anybody else and this includes Mr Opperman and the
Government of Malta until after the results of the general election were
known and I had been able to give thought to the composition of the Cabinet.
A moment'B analysis will show how silly, as well as unfounded,
the allegations are. The Government had a comfortable majority in the
Corio area at the last Senate election, and subsequent public opinion
polling had clearly indicated that we were again set for a good win in that
seat. It would have been much more convenient for the Government to win
the seat, as we would confidently have expected to do, with a new candidate,
than subject ourselves to the inconvenience, effort, expense and hazards
of a by-election. His loose and unsupported charge that my speech to the World
Affairs Council . n Los Angeles, supporting the United States Administration's
bombing of North Vietnam, had embarrassed the Johnson Administration,
Is equally baseless and silly. Apart from my direct contacts with President
Johnson personally, my Government is in constant communication with his
Administration at the diplomatic level. We can claim a deeper insight and
closer knowledge of what that Administration Js thinking than Mr VWhitlam
can possibly possess.
CANBERRA, 13ch July, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: 9 JUL 967
L PM No. 73/ 1967
POSTAL DISPUTE
Following are texts of telegrans exchanged today between
the Prime Minister and Mr Albert Monk, President of the ACTU
Telegram from Mr Monk
" EXECUTIVE OF ACTU DEALT WITH POSTAL WORKERS
DISPUTE LATE YESTERDAY AFTERNOON AND RESOLVED AS FOLLOWS
QUOTE THE ACTU OFFICERS ADVISE THE UNIONS INVOLVED IN
THE POSTAL WORKERS DISPUTE THAT EVEN AT. THIS STAGE THEY
HAVE A DUTY TO NOTIFY THE ACTU IN ACCORDANCE VW! TH RULE 14
STOP THIS EXECUTIVE IS FURIOUSLY CONCERNED V. ITH THE PENALTIES
IMPOSED ON INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS AND CALLS UPON THE
GOVERNMENT TO WITHDRAW THESE PENALTIES STOP WE REQUEST
THE GOVERNMENT TO CONVENE AN ALL-IN CONFERENCE
COMPRISING THE GOVERNMENT THE ACTU THE POSTAL UNIONS AND
T HE PMG DE PARTMENT TO DISCUSS ALL ASPECTS OF THE DISPUTE
UNQUOTE WOULD APPRECIATE EARLY ADVICE AS TO WHAT YOUR
ATTITUDE IS TOWARDS OUR RECUEST STOP WILL ENDEAVOUR TO
CONTACT YOU BY PHONE AFTER YOU HAVE HAD AN OPPORTUNITY
OF RECEIVING THIS WIRE."
The Prime Minister replied as follows
" I HAVE RECEIVED YOUR TELEGRAM. AS YOU KNOW,
THE MATTER INVOLVED HAS BEEN THE SUBJECT OF PREVIOUS
CABINET CONSIDERATION AND I AM THEREFORE PROPOSING TO
ARRANGE FOR YOUR MESSAGE TO BE PUT TO CABINET AT ITS NEXT
MEETING, W! HICH WILL BE ON TUESDAY, FOR ITS CONSIDERATION."
CANBERRA, 14th July, 167 



Prime Minister' s Pres-s Conference
BRITAINS " EAST OF SUEZ"' DECISION
( Main points from press briefing by the Frime Minister,
Mr Harold Holt, to H-eads of Bureau in the Parliamentary
Press Gallery, Canberra) -19TH JULY,-1967
PRIME MINISTER: One useful result from all the discussion which has
proceeded on the " East of Suez" question over recent months has been
the development of a closer contact between the other interested countries.
I speak in particular of the United '_ tates, New Zealand, Malaysia and
Singapore. Australia has been in frequent contact with these countries
on various aspects of the matters covered by the United Kingdom defence
paper, and we have, I think, established a basis as a result of these
contacts for even closer co-operation for the future, though 41t is of
course much too early to say in what direction the co-operation would
develop or to discuss it in any detail.
The second thing which I thirk does come out of is that over the
years ahead and we do have a very considerable period of years in
which to carry out our defence planning and our consultations together
there will emerge no doubt some regional defence arrangements. But
who will be party to these, or again, what form they will take remains
to be resolved. But the very fact that a group of countries are associated
in the Vietnam conflict and the fact that others of us have been associated
in maintaining the security and stability of Malaysia and Singapore at
least provides the groundwork of some future co-operation in directions
which may develop arising out of consultations we shall be having together.
The third pont I would like to make about it ; is that it becomes
all the more important to Australia that we should have in office a
government which at least has a consistent foreign policy and an ' ntelligible
foreign policy, and a government capable of working in close co-operation
with allies who see the needs of the area in much the same terms.
Fourthly, these developments will, I hope, bring home to the
great mass of Australians the fact that -we don't live in some sort of a
lotus land, that we are placed by geography in an area of the world where
some of the greatest dangers, and at the same time some of the greatest.
opportunities exist in the world today. We can't afford an attitude that
we can defend and develop this vast continent on the basis of ' 5weeks of
work a year of ' 2hours a week. ' e just have to realise as fellow Australians
we have to put our best efforts forward 4n the years ahead for the security of
the country and for its growing strength and prosperity, and out of that the.
growing contribution that we can make to the security and stability of the area
in which we live.
Q. Sir, reference to your remark about 45weeks of 610 hours, you are
not suggesting that you are going to shorten the holidays and lengthen the
working week?
FM: No, I'm not. I'm just putting that that is the current si tuationthree
weeks' annual leave, ten days of holidays, public holidays, a
week of sick leave is usually taken, and an accumulative week for
long service leave that is the net effect of it. I merely used that as
an illustration 17e have got ourselves, many of us, I think, into the
frame of mind that we can just go on indefinitely, doing less and getting / 2 
2-
PM ( Contd.)
more in a period of our history when we have very important problems of
defence and development ahead of us.
Q. You are not 4mplying, Sir, that there will be an increase i~ n
the working hours?
PM: No, I'm not. Of course I recognise that many Australians work
considerably longer hours, But what I am trying to direct my comment at is
a mental attitude which does exist in some places and which will, I hope,
receive something of a jolt from developments such as these, I'm speaking
in particular, in making this comment of the younger generation of
Australians who -are building their future in a country which, I repeat,
has great opportunities, , but by virtue of its geographical position and
political developments in the region also faces dangers which this country
has probably not been conscious of earlier in its history.
Now, there is one fairly obvious question: Is Australia likely
to build up forces to compensate for the United Kingdom force reductions
In South-East Asia, particularly in the(" Commonwealth Brigade? Australia
has had this long-standing association with the United Kingdom and New
ZLealand in assisting in the defence of the Malaysian area and we wil I
continue in co-operation with these gove-.. nr-i-ts and the Malaysian and
Singap~ re Governments to contribute to the stability of the area.
First, there is the fact that the United Kingdom withdrawals
will be spread over a fairly long period of years, measured in modern terms
in a fairly rapidly changing world, and also the United Kingdom has made the
statement clearly that she will continue to honour her obligations to defend
this area under the present defence agreement and will engage in
consultations as to the best way of meeting those obligations. The fact
that these plans for reductions are spread over a fairly long period of time
indicates the United Kingdom's continuing sense of responsibility for
assisting the security and stability of the area. The precise shape and
size of Australian forces deployed in the area in the years to come will
have to be determined, of course, after the review which will become
necessary of our own defence arrangements, but it will require not only
considerable study by us but consultation with our allies. This applies in
particular to the Commonwealth Brigade which Australia has always rated
as a valuable protective force from the point of view of preserving . a military
presence in the area and for the deterrent effect it provided In that it
indicated the backing to It of the countries concerned.
V/ ill the British decisions mean an increase in our contributions
to aid Malaysia and Singapore to build up their own forces?
Aiustralia has already committed $ 25 million towards the
build-up of forces the Malaysian area, and following the visit of the
Malaysian Minister for Defence, Tun Razak, to Australia several months
ago, the Australian Government announced that it would continue to provide
aid up to 1970. A technical mission was sent to examine needs with the
appropriate representatives of Malays-: a and Singapore and its report is
now being submitted to Ministers.
The question of our further aid is under consideration at
present in relation to Budget matters generally, but it may not be possible
to resolve this in any detail at this time because we will need to consider
the bearing that these developments will have on it. In any event, it may a. 9 / 3 
-3
PM ( Contd.)
appropriately form part of a wider discussion with others later on.
Will the United Kingdom announcement preclude a further
Australian contribution to Vietnam or even necessitate a withdrawal of
Australian forces deployed there?
Australia will maintain its commitment to contribute to the
defence of South Vietnam against communist subversion and aggression in
that country. As I have said on a number of occasions, the Australian
Government maintains a continuing defence review which includes the size,
and shape, of its force contribution to the Vietnam conflict. This review
is made in the light of military developments in the area kind in concert
with our allies. The reduction of the United Kingdom forces over a fairly
long period of years will not require us to change this practice.
Well, another question that might be likely to arise is whether
the Australian defence expenditure is likely to rise rapidly in the next few
years as a result of the planned British force reductions.
Wle have a Budget in preparation right now and I am not discussing
it nor to be taken as discussing it in any sense. But given the long-term
nature of the United Kingdom plans for reducing forces in the area, I
wouldn't expect that any of the adjustments arising out of the British decisions
will have large and immediate financial implications. This is a gradual
phasing out and already, of course, our defence provision is a very
substantial one. I am thinking in terms of a percentage of GNP exceeded by
very few countries in the world the United Kingdom and the United States
perhaps, but it wouldn't be easy to point to others. In the longer term, as
I have stated on previous occasions, Australia will continue to contribute
to the defence of South-East Asia and its own defence needs on a scale which
will be related to our economic growth and the view we take from time to
time of our interests and responsibilities in the area.
Tell, I think those are the main items. There may be others
which are in your mind. just before I go on, I don't think I need to fill
you in on the sort of discussions we had with the United Kingdom Government.
I did that pretty thoroughly, I think, while we were in London those of
you who were there and when I came back here subsequently. You will
know the sort of views we put forward and the reasons for them, but what
I would like to make clear is that they were not only views put by Australia,
but this was the general approach of the other governments I mentioned,
including the United States.
C. Have you had any request from President Johnson yet for more
military aid in Vietnam?
PM: Well, as Secretary McNamara pointed out, this is not the way
business is done between governments who are interested there. There
is a process of consultation and discussion. One government indicates what
it feels necessary to be done. I've not even had a proposal put to me in
any form which you could term a specific request but we recognise, of
course, that whatever any of the of the allied countries are able to contribute
is welcomed by the Government of South Vietnam, and we do from time to
time review the size and nature of our own contribution. I have already
pointed to the very considerable defence provision falling on our Budget and
indicated earlier, without trying to prejudge the outcome of our Budget, that / 4 
-4-
PM ( Contd.
this year's appropriation for defence will, J'n the nature of things, be
larger than that of last year. just how large depends on the view taken of
our Budget responsibilities generally. I would believe that the kind of
continuing review which includes, from time to time, an assessment of
what we can do in Vietnam would need, on the next occasion we come together
for it, to take account of these developments in the Malays ia/ Singapore
area and just what provision we need to make in relation to those.
C. Sir, the tone of that suggests that any additional aidwhich we
might give in Vietnam will be only marginal.
PM: Well, I wouldn't like to have too much significance read into the
tone at this point of time. There have been suggestions which you may
have seen for another meeting of the countries represented at the Manila
Conference, and I can just fill you in on that to this extent.
In the course of the year I have discussed this myself with various
heads of governments in the countries concerned with whom I have been in
contact Mr Holyoake when I visited him, Prime Minister Ky when he wa
out here, the Prime Minister of Korea when I was there, and Presidert
Johnson himself. And all those with whom I have talked about the matter
when it has arisen 4 n discussions between us have favoured another meeting,
but the timing of it we felt called for some consideration in view of the
impending elections South Vietnam. But for that, I think, you would have
seen a conference held In an earlier point of time than this.
Now, for my part, I would prefer some discussion on force levels
to take place In this kind of company because we could all assess what could
usefully be done and what commitments we had in other directions.
Australia, of course, does have to make defence provision in other
directions and this is not always clearly perceived by our allies who look
to what we are doing in South Vietnam and tend to ignore that we are also
making a contribution in the Malays ia/ Singapore area and that we have some
responsibilities in respect of Papua and New Guinea as well as responsibilities
in relation to the Australian mainland. Another factor which is not widely
recognised, it * seems to me in the countries concerned, is that Australia
is the one country in addition to the United States of America which i~ s
providing a three -S'ervice contribution. Australia, of course, is paying
its own way entirely for what it is contributing. If it is a case of doing
more, then I think it would be helpful if we all considered together what
each is contributing, what each is capable of doing.
C. This meeting is likely to be in September, Sir, in South Korea,
is it?
PM: Well, I have heard September and October mentioned. I would,
myself, have thought it would appropriately be held after a Presidential
election, possibly even af ter the assembly elections they have in South
Vietnam. I should have mentioned that the matter was discussed at the
conference in WTashington attended by Mr Hasluck. I think it followed on
the SEATO discussions. It was discussed there and both Korea and Thailand
have apparently indicated their willingness to have a conference held there.
I think it gets pretty cold in Korea abou~ t October. 
C. When do you hope the conference will take place from your
point of view?
FM: Well, first, as you will be aware, it is not a conference which
occupies a great deal of time. The whole exercise for me last time took
two days of travel and two days of conference
Q. Talking in terms of October, what month do you think
PM: The Assembly elections are held in November, I am told, but
I think the really important thing is the Presidential election, and no doubt
the appointment of a Prime Minister and a Vice President. They would be in
a position to speak for the country, so I don't think it would be necessary
to await the Assembly elections, but I would have thought it desirable to
await the Presidential election.
C. VWhich is when, Sir?
PM: September 3rd.
Q. VWill the increased costs of defence next year have any impact on
national development?
PM: Well, we can't indicate at this stage what the defence bill will be
You mean the defence bill we are now deciding in our Budget discussions?
Q. Yes. You said it would be larger next year than it was this year.
Will this mean that
PM: Well, our revenues will be larger also. It would be the aim of
the Government to retain sufficient flexibility in its Budget arrangements to
keep the process of development going steadily forward.
C. W~ ill this mean higher taxation?
PM: Not necessarily. You are e sking me to indicate the contents of
the Budget. We have just started our discussions on it.
Q. Mr Holt, do you visualise an early meeting on a Minister,; al
level of the countries concerned with Singapore and Malaysia?
PM: There have been press reports that the Tunku is thinking of
a five-power conference to discuss future arrangements for defence in
the Malaysian region in the light of Britain's planning decisions. However,
no proposal has yet reached me at the governmnental level, and whether a
formal conference is necessary I think is still too early for us to say. My
own Government would first wa nt to study the British decisions closely and
consider, as I have said, how our own arrangements and policy might be
affected and whether any changes are desirable. Clearly there will need
to be consultations among interested governments. Tlbse have been taking
place already as I mentioned and will continue. A proposal for a conference
could arise out of these consultations. Vie should then want to consider
what the conference is intended to do and how other governments feel about
it, but at this stage, the question has not arisen in our own considerations.
It hasn't been discussed as a substantial matter by Cabinet. / 6 
-6
Q. When do you expect to be in a position to tell the Americans
the result of Cabinet's review on the Vietnam commitment?
PM: Well, first of all I have indicated that there has been no
particular proposal put to me from any source, although if the Americans
are reviewing their own force contribution, I imagine that they would
expect that once they have reached their own conclusions that their allies
would have also been giving some thought to theirs, but I would not expect
us to be making any early decision on this matter because, as I have said,
we have first to resolve just what we can provide through the Budget for
defence and, secondly, we have to see the total picture which includes
future developments now notified to us formally in Malays ia/ Singapore.
Q. Mr Holt, how much regard do you attach to the British suggestion
about sharing bases in Australia.? WHill the discussions that have been
going on be stepped up?
PM: I would like to give you a fairly precise comment on that.
Yes, well, the United Kingdom air, land and sea forces already make
some use of our facilities in Australia in exercises, and as you will be
aware, we also have begun a preliminarxy study involving an initial
survey in relation to Cockburn Sound. I did speak in my statement about
feasibility studies and that includes this one. But the question of specific
facilities for use by British forces in the 197C,' s is, as indicated in their
own White Paper, a matter for further examination between our countries.
You will remember that when Denis Healey was here, one of the points
made at the time was that if it became impracticable to remain on In
Malaysia and Singapore, then either they would need to come to bases in
Australia or they would need to go home. We put in hand some studies at
the Service level on various possibilities.
Q. Mr Holt, in view of the rapidly-changing assumptions on which
we based our defence policies, is it likely that Mr Fairhall will be bringing
out a White Paper, giving our estimates and saying where we stand and what
we see the policy alte-;-natives are in the years ahead?
PM: Well, I couldn't comment on that yet. We havent really ha'd the
opportunity to sit round on this. I imagine it will be a fairly early item
of business for us, but we have first to get through what is a major exercise
for us and that is the Budget, including the defence vote in the Budget.
While I have no doubt that at the Service level and in the Departments
concerned there will be immediate activity in reassessment of where we
stand and the implications flowing from all this, we should still have in
mind that this is a programme which runs for over eight years at least
or it is likely to run for at least eight years, it could conceivably be
longer, it could conceivably be less, but at least it is going to run over
some years. That doesn't mean that we can just sit back and take our
time; it doesn't mean that we are faced with decisions that have to be
announced in the next few days. 



PRESS : RELEASE RA P. M. iNo. 75/ 1967.
POSTAL DISPUTE
Prime Minister's Reply to Mr. Monk
Following Cabinet consideration of the two telegrims
received from the President of the Mr. Monk, the Prime
Minister, Mr. Holt today sent a telegram to Mr. Monk in these
terms ( full text of telegram follows)
The Government last evening considered your telegrams of
last Friday and Monday.
The Postmaster-General and Minister for Labour and National
Service will be ready to meet with representatives of the A. C. T. U.
and the postal unions concerned next week at a time to be arranged
with you. As Mr, Bury and Senator Anderson stated on 4th July, the
Government, believing that the public requires Saturday services,
intends that appropriate services will oe provided.
As to penalties, you will recall that Senator Anderson, as
Acting Postmaster-General met with the three unions on 19th June
and undertook to examine the claims they submitted. Yet within days
threats of stonna: es were published. I; hen the Minister sought
assurances that there would be no stoppage he received evasive replies
except from the Postmasters' Association.
Following Cabinet's consideration of developments, the
Minister on 27th June, i. e. before the 1st July stoppage, ublicly
indicatea Cabinet's view that the unions' claims coula not oe
considered under threat of a stoppage and Cabinet's direction that
if a stoppage did occur disciplinary action would be taken under the
Public Service Act.
Notwithstanding the continuing threat of a stoppage I
myself telegraphed Mr. jenaud on 29th June that Mr. Bury and Senator
Anderson would meet the three unions concerned provided the U. P. C. T.
and the cancelled the proposed stopnage. The text of this
telegram was conveyed on the same day to Messrs. Slater and B3ker.
Despite all the Government's efforts to have this whole
matter discussed in a sensible fashion, a stoppage did occur on
1st July. The course taken could mean only one thing namely
that the leaders of the A. P. and the I. P. C, T. were bent on a
direct confrontation \. ith the Government. were however " lad to
note that a lare numoer of their members did not support tne stoppage.
Relevant to all this, I must remind you, is the agreement
of 8th Aril, 1964, to which you and Me:; srs. aters and Slayer were
signatories. The relevant passage reads
" For their part, the A. C. T. U. and the A. P. U. : ill not
suonort any stoopa5e of work on an industrial issue in
future but will negotiate and failing agreement, will go
to aroitration. In the event of the men stopning work
the A. C. T. U. and the U. agree that the orescribed
penalty nrovisions of the Act will je appropriately applied."
It so happens that the fines will not have been deducted
by the time the Miinisters meet you. You and your colleagues will thus
have the opportunity to make to the Ministers any further representations
you wish on the question of penalties.
CA1JERLA. 19 JULY, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: 2 C, 9
2 4 JUL 1967 S. FM. No. 74/ 1967
LBRAF
BRITISH WHITE PAPFL ON DEFENCE
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
The principal decisions relating to British defence policy east
of Suez now announced in the British, Government's White Paper on Defence
have been the subject of consideration by the Australian Cabinet.
My visit to London in June this year was, of course, primarily
to discuss these important issues w-: h Mr Wilson and other senior members
of his Cabinet. Mr Wilson and Mi: * e. rs also held talks with the Prime
Ministers of Malaysia and Singapor-arid also with the New Zealand Deputy
Prime Minister, who was represenr!:;-Mr Holyoake. Consultations also
took place with the United States Administration.
These discussions were clearly desirable since it is not only
British interests that are affected by the decisions taken.
The VWhite Paper sets forward a number of decisions and states
plans or planning intentions. It is important that it should be seen in full
perspective. The decisions and the plans will be phased over a considerable
period of years running into the mid-7C's.
There will first be a reduction of British forces deployed in
Singapore and Malaysia between now and 1970/ 71 to about half current levels.
We have for some time assumed that some reduction would occur. British
forces in Malaysia and Singapore were increased at the time of confrontation
and we have recognised throughout that this increase would, as occasion
permitted, be reversed and the level of forces reduced. There are, however,
reductions proposed over the next few years going conside. rably beyond our
earlier expectations. Beyond 197C/ 71, the United Kingdom Government plans would,
as they stand, lead to total withdrawal of British forces from their bases in
Malaysia and Singapore some time in the mid-1970' s. By then Britrii proposes
to have reorganized its armed forces about a highly mobile strategic reserve.
But it has clearly stated that it cannot plan beyond 1970/ 71 in the same detail
as for the period up to that time, and the precise timing of the w'thdrawal from
the mainland will depend on progress made in achieving a new basis of
stability in South-East Asia and in resolving other problems in the Far East.
This is an important element in British Government intentions. It indicates
that Britain will play a continuing military role in the area.
This intention is again illustrated by the plan announced in the
White Paper, to maintain a military capability for use in the area if required,
even after withdrawal from mainland bases. Further Britain undertakes in
the White Paper to continue to honour obligations under SEATO and obligations
under the Anglo-Malaysian Defence Agreement. The Australian Government
welcomes these particular policy decisions.
The British people have made a notable and indeed historic
contribution to the establishment of stability and security in the Malaysia/
Singapore region since the Second World War, and, in our view, Britain can
a till play a role no other country ' s so well qualified to play. / 2 
-2
Some aspects of the British Government's announcement, of
course, are disappointing to us. ' Ile do not overlook the economic problems
with which Britain is at present contenft": mg, and the substantial savings in
defence expenditure, including expenziiure overseas, which its Government
believes to be necessary. Neither do we overlook the British view that the
requirement to station large forces in bases in Malaysia and Singapore will
lessen as those countries, over the next decade, increase their own military
capacities. But even so, we very mxth regret that the British Government
should feel itself impelled to plan now for final withdrawal from Malaysia and
Singapore at a date so far ahead, and when it is so diff icult to predict how the
situation in South-East Asia will move.
One of the principal aspects of my discussions with Mr W~ ilson
was to urge that his Government retain as much flexibility in its forward
planning as was possible. His Government has felt it necessary to set out
a plan for withdrawal. It has explained its reasons for this, It has given
recognition to the need to have the precise timing of the further moves beyond
19,70/ 71 towards withdrawal from the bases depend upon progress made towards
stability in South-East Asia and on other factors in the Far East. We attach
considerable importance to this.
The British announcement carries implications which obviously
must form part of the continuing review we make of our defence policy and
planning. The WI-hite Paper mentions the possible use by Britain of facilities
in Australia. This flows out of the discussions which Mr Healey, the British
Mlfister for Defence, had in Canberra early last year with the Australian
Cabinet. The examination of these pos sbi lities, including feasibility studies,
has been conducted at Service level. This examination will be continued.
I would add that I have maintained personal contact with
Mr Holyoake, the Tunku Abdul Rahman and Mr Lee Kuan Yew, and our frank
and constructive exchanges with them and also with the British and American
Governments in relation to these matters will also continue.
CANBERRA, 19th July, 1967 



Speech by the Prime M inister, Mr. Harold Holt
OPENING OF MURRAY 1 PO.: 3R STATION
KHANC0j3A, 22ND JULY, 1967.
Mr. Fairbairn; Mr. Morton representin the Government
of New South " ales; Mr. Rylah the Government of Victoria; and
Mr. Riches the Government of South Australia; Mr. Courtney
representing Her Majesty's Opposition in the Federal Parliament;
Mr. Pettitt representin the Country Party; Sir ' illiam Hudson;
Mr. Raymond Hill MLr. . ilkinson, f. Thiess Mr. Perini and Mr.
Loutit who are all representative of Contractors who participated
in this gre: at scheme; and also Mr. Rodd; and then the Commissioners;
Mr. Dann and the Assistant Commissioners, Messrs. ; arrell and
Skinner; Your Excellencies; ladies and gentlemen:
I felt I should give you that full introduction oecause
it helps to demonstrate just how many people and interests have
been participating in this magnificent scheme. I come to the
Project today, not to the Snowy Scheme generally for the first
time but erha s not as often as I should or would have wished,
usually concerning myself with the Snowy Project from the documents
which reach us in Cabinet, the graphs, he diagrams the pictures,
the statistics and the narrative; and we sit around the able
as each year the Minister puts his bid ( as the Treasury rather
indelicately calls these a -nroaches from Departments) and we
consider what we should aptly for the needs-of the Snowy Mountains
Authority in a particular year. 3ut I find it a very different
thing from doing that to come to what is for most of us a rather
remote area and to see carved out of the native wilderness this
magnificent engineering project.
I don't know how most of you feel about it as most of
you no doubt close to the project itself have become a bit blase
about it out to me it is a stirring thin. to feel that here in
this young country of ours we have added this magnificent engineering
achievement, this further stage in what has oeen a most imaginative,
ambitious Australian project, the largest and in many ways the
most successful that we have ever undertaken. And it spells out
quite a few things to us as we have heard the Minister give us his
stor it was a very good story, I thought, because it absorbed
about five of the best points I had hoped to make to you here this
afternoon. 3ut, be that as it may, as he unfolded this story we
had a picture before us of the happy combination of Government decision
and planning with the enterprise of competitive entrepreneurs,
themselves setting out to give the oest service they could on a
tender basis and' how successfully that has oeen was demonstrated
by the Minister in his speech.
I was certiinly most impressed and it couldn't have
been a more timely tonic to me, having come from three days,
afternoons and nights of Cabinet discussions on the Judgel to
find at least here is one section of the Australian economy
measured in terms of Government financial provision which is
keeping inside its 3udget allocation, inside its estimate, and
producing the results inside the scheduled time. That is a
matter for congratulation, of course, to all concerned.
The other thing which must strike anyone who cares to
think about the matter at all, sitting in this reat ouilding,
is how well we do in Australia to recognise that with less than
/ 2 
-2-
12 million people trying to develop a continent the size of the
United States we make he machine and we make power come in aid
of our quite inadequate population.
Here I suppose the actual mannower involved in operating
this equiroment, :. hich will bring to INew South . iales and Victoria
the additional electrical power to assist industrial growth in those
States, will be quite minimal when compared with the outpouring of
power from these impressive machines. So we have much cause, not
only for conratulation for those who have contrijuted to the
enterprise, but of self-congratulation as a nation that we are
seizing the opportunities available to us and making machine and
power serve the needs of the Australian population.
This is the first phase, I am told, of the Snowy/ Murray
diversion. The three earlier power stations already opened Guthega
in 1955, Tumut 1 in 1959 and Tumut 2 in 1962 ha-e a combined
capacity of six hundred and sixty thousand kilowatts. This new
Murray 1 Power Station is lar er than all of them together, with a
capacity of nine hundred and fifty thousand kilowatts.
It is important to see this particular occasion in its full
context. Immediately, this power station marks the first completed
project in the second half oi the two-pronged Snowy development.
Today's opening represents the expenditure of two hundred million
dollars one quarter of the estimated total cost of the scheme of
eight hundred million dollars, and the revenue already received is
of the order of one hundred million dollars. So the Government is
not only getting this project completed within the time allowed for it
and within the cost estimated for it 17 or 18 years ago, but it is
getting its money oack on time as well.
It goes without saying that there has been great skill both
in planning and execution to bring a nroject as large as this to its
oresent stage without excesses of cost or time. There must by now be
many thousands of Australians to whom the nation should be grateful
for this achievement and not really our fellow Australians but all
who have contributed from whatever country to this project. I am
sure that the Ministers responsible Sir .; illiam Hudson ( who so richly
deserves the tribute warmlyaccordea him by the Minister), our able
present Commissioner, Mr. Dann, would all want to je amongst the
first to pay tribute to the many thousands of workers, many of them
recruited from overseas, whose untiring work has brought all this
about. Nor could it have , een achieved without the work of the
many engineers, skilled in a wide variety of disciplines and
techniques who helped plan it all and watched over its successful
achievement. In this spirit I am sure you will recognise my motive if
I permit myself to mention specially the various Ministers in
successive Commonwealth Governments who have played their part of
leadership in the project. There was first Mr. Nelson Lemmon,
Minister for ' orks in the Chifley Government; and then successive
Ministers in our own Governments since the end of 1949; our present
Governor-General, Lord Casey; the late Sir . illiam Spocner; and now
my colleague iMr. Fairoairn; and, together over the past years since
1949, they have oeen responsiule for bringing this scheme towards its
full maturity. I should also mention the willing and effective
co-operation in this great scheme that we have received from successive
Premiers of New South ' ales and Victoria and their Public ' orks
Departments and Electricity Authorities, and of course the South 
-3-
Australian Government has also had a close interest in this
development. jehind them all as guidiny and guardian angel has
stood Sir Hilliam Hudson. In fact it might also oe called " The
Hudson Authority", so closely hAs he been associated with it. 7e
are very glad to see him here today and the nation owes him the
conratulations and thanks already voiced uy my colleague. all
join in wishing all those concerned including Mr. Dann and his
colleagues, successful progress as they carry on the good work.
The fact is, of course, that the Snowy Project,
although it serves directly in principle two of the major States,
is a national achievement and serves national purposes. It has
been warmly supported oy all political parties and all of us, as
Australians, can take pride in the example it his set us in many
fields. It has been the product of successful co-operation oetween
the Commonwealth and the State Governments between management and
workers. In a sense it has been an international project as the
flags that you see around you here today will help to indicate.
International in that some 33 nationalities are represented amongst
the employees of the Snowy Scheme and amongst the contractors and the
suppliers there are of course many countries re" resented is well.
Fallure in any of these import &gt; nt relationships" ould have materially
affected the successful working of the roject but, ouite obviously
from the results, that cooperation has een close and effective.
I now want to say a word also as my colleague did,
about our attitude to the future of the Snowy Aountains Authority.
It will oe immediately recognised that a good deal of the success of
the organisation springs directly from the fact that they have been
associated with a project so exciting in itself, the nation's largest
single effort at development. In a sense, the very name the Snowy
Mountains Authority implies that its role ends once the Snowy Project
has been completed. There would be understandable criticism if the
Authority were retained fully in its present form without any major
project to sustain it and I am sure nboody, least of all those
associated with it, , wants to see the Snowy Authority to turn before
our eyes into a sort of white elephant.
But there are skills and experience gained in the
course of this great project which it is eminently desirable to have
continue serving the national interest and, with this in mind the
Government has turned in a responsible and constructive spirit to
seeing how much of the very valuaole skills and experience now
existing in the staff of the Authority could oe retained for further
projects of national importance. After a great deal of thought, it
has oecome clear that elements of the investigation design and
scientific services staff, including the hydraulic laooratories, could
very usefully be retained. Staff in these sections will not form a
nucleus for construction activities but, with their snecialised skills,
will be available to assist in major civil engineerin .: ork. It is
in this field particularly that the Authority has justly earned
Australian and even world-wide acclaim.
Je found that Commonwealth and Territory programmes
were not in themselves on a scale sufficient to maintain even these
important skills, so we approached the State Governments who have
themselves of course lirge constructive authorities, to see if they
had suitaole civil works in which they would ue prepared to engage
the Authority on a scale which would sustain a workable organisaion.
It now seems that the States individually would not have sufficient work
to justify retaining the specialised and necessarily expensive skills
of the Authority. But we find that their combined needs would justify
maintaining the specialist staff I have mentioned. So we can see an
/ 4 
-4-
important future for those who remain with the Authority. It is a
future which I like to see as spreading the successes which have
attended the Snowy venture into many parts of the Continent, and
overseas as well, in support of our Colombo Plan projects.
Just oefore we came here, Mr. Dann very kindly
presented to my wife and myself a oeautiful small table made up
of stones taken not only from projects in the Snowy area, but also
from those projects which the onowy authority has assisted in
overseas as part of our Colomoo Plan arrangements. This will be
a constant reminder to me that there is a usefulness in the Authority
which stretches even beyond the border of this country.
I am sure we can see the future of the Authority
in this way as forward looking constructive and efficient. There
will be no need to look back Ath regret on the disbanding of a highly
efficient organisation geared to achieve a very special purpose.
Rather, we will be looking forward to a new Authority holding
to-ether important specialist services and we will be seeing those
not needed for this purpose taking the skills they have learned and
applied in the Snowy pro ect out into the highways and plains of
Australia and perhaps into other parts of the world in our immediate
neighbourhood. And in this connection, Mr. Morton, we were delighted
to learn that the offer we made to the Government of New South '
that the advisory and designing services of the Authority could be
made available on suitable terms to your Government in relation
to the Eastern Suburos Railway, has oeen gldly accepted by the
Government of New South * ales.
Turning to development generally, there will always
oe found, of course, critics to argue that a government is not doing
enough for development. This Tovernment, we believe, is doing a very
great deal and we turn to the facts to tell that story for us. There
has ueen, over recent years in particular, a remarkable development
in Australia both oy private enterprise and by puolic authorities.
The result has been that Australia devotes a greater proportion of
its national product to fixed capital investment than does any other
major country in the world with the exception of Japan. That is the
only country that surpasses Australia in what it reserves from its
gross national product for its fixed capital investment. Our
percentage is in the neighbourhood of 27% of our national product
compared with just under 25% in Canada, 24% in NIew Zealand, and around
about 16% or 17% in the United States and the United Kingdom. This
investment comes very largely from our own domestic savings. ie
take pride in having an economy which can and does produce savings
of this order and a people responsible enough to accumulate them in
a continent which cries out for development.
Over the past ten years there has in fact been an
increase in the percent ige of our gross national product devoted to
capital expenditure by pblic authorities. Ten years ago a little
over 3 per cent of went to public authority investment. Now
it is a-little over 4 per cent and that is just short of the total
percentage of our G._ I that we now apply for defence purposes.
This increase reflects the concern which we and other Governments
have with providing our fellow Australians with their basic needs.
But the smallness of the fiures underlines at the same time the
wide scope left for the rest of the community to plan and execute
its own investment decisions.
In its own field of expenditure the Commonwealth
has oontinued to place great emphasis on capital works. If defence
expenditures are excluded, the pro ortion of expenditure from revenue
devoted to capital works has over he past 10 years remained over 
of the total and, as I shall mention in a little more detail
later, this has been coupled with ra-idly increasing grants to the
States for important capital works.
The place of the Snowy project in the Commonwealth's
own capital works prora~ mme is interesting. In 1949-50 we sent
million dollars on The Snowy and that was 4% of our total capital
works expenditure. The peak of expenditure on the Snowy was in
1959-Go when we spent 56 million dollars and it occupied no less than
2U% of our capital works budget. As the Scheme nears fruition and as
other caoital works projects are developed, the proportion of the
Commonwealth's capital works expenditure devoted to the Snowy has
now reduced to auout 10%, but this is one demonstration of the
broadening of the Commonwealth's developmental activities.
In the late 1940' s there was a concentration on
the Snowy project. That was due partly to its size but partly, I
suggest, oecause there were not many other major projects being
developed. with our new emphasis on development at particular
places and to meet particular needs, the number of active developments
has increased enormously. In the private sphere there are at present
associated mostly with mining some'of the biggest projects being
carried on in Australia today. In the public sphere the concentration
is on transport and on water. . es-tern Australia and Queensland in
narticular are benefiting from the 50 million dollar programme for
the construction of beef cattle roads. . iestern Australia and South
Australia are benefiting from the Commonwealth's expenditures on rail
standardisation in Western iAustralia alone the Comnmonwealth has
provided some 53 million dollars since 1962-65 for these purposes.
NewSouth -ales and Victoria have benefited from the Snowy Scheme
itself and from other assistance iven b the Commonwealth. I think,
for example, of the development of coal loading works at Newcastle
Port Kemola and jalmain in New South ' iales, of the railway standardization
and the Murray River developments, including the 3ufFalo and
Chowilla Reservoirs in Victoria. In Tasmania we have agreed to
assist with the financing of the Gordon River Project which will
accelerate hydro-electric development in that State.
In addition to these projects, the Commonwealth
has been active in promoting the national water resources development
programme which was announced in my policy speech last year. Through
this scheme we are wanting to extend the conservation and use of
water in rural industry and Australia surely is a country which
desperately needs development of this kind.' There are many other
projects related to water use and conservation with which the
Commonwealth has been associated. I hardly need rehearse these,
but they show how importantly we rate the efficient use of water and
how widely spread are the projects we are willing to assist.
In all of these projects we are tryin, to take a
national view. The money and resources bein' devoted to them are too
important and too scarce to waste. ; e cannot afford inefficiency or
laxity to enter into our decisions aoout development projects. , e
have made them and will continue to make them on the oasis of
jud ments about tieir economic importance and their national significance.
Much as we all would like to see our own particul r local projects
prosper, the national government will only oe serving the people best
when it endeavours to see parochial considerations in their national
setting and act in the interests of the nation as a whole.
As I have su gested, our concern for development
has extended beyond the projecs undertaken by the Commonwealth and
its instrumentalities. In this the Snowy Authority is an example of
whit is becoming a firmly established Commonwealth policy. / 6 
-6-
ie reco nise th-t both the national and ti. e
State governments canm n should play significant parts in the
development of australia. The Snowy has men one such development.
is it araws to its conclusion, the important skills it possesses
will be made availale to all pulic : uthorities throughout the
Commonwealth. Likewise we hive accelerated greatly our grants to
the States for canital purnoses. Ten years a ro tiese grants totalled
only 60 million dllars-la-st year they totailed 257 million dollars
and will be over 325 million dollirs this year. It can oe seen that,
far from the Commonwealth's expenditures on its own capital projects
declininY as expenditure reduces on its . reatejt single project the
Snowy Scheme they are, in point of fao rapidly increasing. Further,
the emphasis is on partnership with the States in'the int-rests of the
nation as a whole. Turning now to m immediate task today it is to
open the Murray 1 Project. I am old that each of the 10 , eneratin.
units in this station can ce started un automaticail ly by the closin.
of a switch in the control room. For The purposes of today's
ceremony I have been told to close the switch in front of me. Now
I add that any memuer of my family knows ti-t my mechanical ineptitude
is a matter of notoriety. At one point you are asked not to leave
this p lace until we have done so. I asked Mr. Dann what closing a
switch meant whether you pushed it foriaird or pulled it Oack. I
regret to say he ; asn't too sure himself and I hope that if I pull
it the wron, way, you all don't leave this place oefore I do.
However, I ave since oeen -cmforted by the information from Mr.
Dann that it only moves in one direction. So, by a fairly simple
process of trial and error, we shall get there. When I do eventually
successfully pull it in the right direction, the Numoer 1 unit will
start its full automatic sequence if everything goes according to
plan and will be comnnectyd to the line for the generation of
ower. It and the nine other units will each ce aule to produce
thousand kiloiatts of power for tAe grid which links New South
ales and Victoria for power purposes. I understand that, apart
from the noise you have already heard, you will hear some noise from
the turbine valve when I close the switch and the water be rins to
turn the t. uroines. ithin acout 20 seconds the machine wil oe: in
to rotate and then two minutes later the turbine will be producing
full power. So0 -is I now close the sitch, I have much pleasure
in declaring open the Murray 1 PoKer Station. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 77/ 1967
VISIT BY PRESIDENT OF ITALY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
It gives me great pleasure to announce that the President
of the Republic of Italy, President Giuseppe Saragat, accompanied by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Hon. Amintore Fanfani, will a
State Visit to Australia later this year.
The President is expected to arrive in Canberra on
Monday, 25th September. Before leaving Australia on Sunday, ! st
October, he will go to Melbourne and Sydney.
The warm friendship between Australia and ! taly has
been strengthened by the many thousands of Italians who have made their
homes ; n this country. The successful assimilation of large numbers
of his countrymen in Australia will no doubt be an aspect that will be of
special interest to the President.
President Saragat will be a very welcome visitor.
The significant increase in recent times of visits by Heads of State and
Heads of Government is a measure of Australia's developing stature and
her growing importance to the rest of the world.
CANBERRA, 23rd July, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 76/ 1e67
CCRIO BY-ELECTION RESULT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Labor has had a good win in Cor'o and Mr Scholes s ent* tled
to his congratulations. No doubt some electors felt they could give the Government
a knock without the risk of changing it, and there were some local factors
contributing to the swing from the Government.
In a by-election, voting usually runs against the ruling party
but 4s a notoriously unreliable barometer to voting at a general election.
This was demonstrated last year when Labor's win in Dawson was followed
by their greatest rout in history at the subsequent general election.
I still believe we offered Corio the best candidate and the best
policies. The majorfty of the voters preferred a local man despite the
uncertainties which persist in regard to future Labor policies and
organisation. Mr Vlhitlam, who literally installed himself in the electorate,
will gain credit from many for the contribut'on from his vigorous
campaigning, just as he will lose credibility with others for the gross
misstatements he so blatantly perpetrated.
Our reverse in Corio will make us determined to regain that
seat at the first opportunity.
CANBERRA, 23rd July, 1967. 



Op4
e r
-7AUG 1967
FOR PRESS IIBR AVW4
PM. No. 78/ 1967
VISIT OF U. S. MISSION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
President Johnson's special representatives, General Maxwell
Taylor and Mr Clark Clifford, arrive in Canberra tomorrow morning.
Accompanied by Ambassador Clark, they are to commence talks with me
and some of my senior colleagues at the Lodge at noon. We will have a
working lunch and continue our talks through the afternoon.
If necessary we shall meet again in the course of Sunday.
Other Ministers present will be the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Trade and Industry, Mr McEwen, the Treasurer, Mr McMahon, the
Minister for External Affairs, Mr Hasluck, and the Minister for Defence,
Mr Fairhall. This visit will be part of the series General Taylor and Mr
Clifford are making at the request of President Johnson to the group of
countries represented at the Manila Summit Conference of October last
year. One of their purposes will be to canvass the desirability, time and
place of another such meeting. Wie had agreed at Manila that it was
desirable we should confer again. The question of another meeting has
been discussed informally by me with four of the national leaders who
attended the Manila Conference with whom I have come into direct personal
contact in the course of the year Prime Minister Ky, Mr Holyoake,
President Park and President Johnson. We feel that it would be useful to
meet again, but it has been my own view that this meetiffg should occur
after the Presidential election has been held in South Vietnam.
Tomorrow's meeting comes within a sequence of exchanges,
not only between Austr alia and the United States, but in various forms between
the countries represented at Manila. The Foreign Ministers of all the
countries met in Washington in April and there have been subsequent
discussions between Ambassadors, in addition to extensive diplomatic
communication. Australian/ American consultations are continuous at the
diplomatic level, supplemented from time to time by visits of Government
leaders or representatives to the United States or to Australia. The present
visit falls in this latter category.
As President Johnson has publicly indicated, the purpose of
this particular visit is to follow up the assessment made by Secretary
McNamara from his recent mission to Vietnam, and to discuss fully with
the Manila Conference group of nations all aspects of the situation there.
We welcome it as a practical and further expression of the known desire of
the United States Government to conduct its policies in relation to Vietnam in
full consultation with its allies.
The visit will be most valuable in sustaining at the top levels of
government of the participating countries a close exchange of views about the
conduct of our comibined effort to bring an end to communist aggression and to
/ 2 
-2-
promote peace and progress in Vietnam.
Mr Clifford and General Taylor have a high place in the
confidence of the United States Administration and of the allied governments.
WVe give them a warm welcome to Australia as friends and partners in the
tasks we share with their country and our other allies.
CANBERRA, 28th July, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 79/ 1967
TALKS WITH UNITED STATES MISSION
The Frime Minister tonight described as " very valuable
and informative" the talks held today between representatives of the U. S.
Government and senior members of the Australian Cabinet.
The talks, which were held at The Lodge, ran from
11 a. m. to 6 p. m. The U. S. group comprised Mr Clark Clifford, General
Maxwell Taylor, the United States Ambassador, Mr Clark, Mr R. C. Steadman
of the U. S. Defense Department, Mr H. Freeman Matthews, State
Department and Mr E. Cronk, Counsellor, U. S. Embassy. The Australian
party was made up of the Prime Minister, Mr Holt, the Minister for Trade
and Industry, Mr McEwen, the Treasurer, Mr McMahon the Minister for
External Affairs, Mr Hasluck, the Minister for Defence, Mr Fairhall, the
Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department, Sir John Bunting, and the
Australian Ambassador to the United States, Mr Keith V 7aller.
The Prime Minister said that the talks were extensive
and had ranged over all those aspects of the Vietnam situation which the
representatives from both groups had raised.
He and his colleagues would be reporting on the
discussions to Cabinet. No decisbns had been sought or taken on any aspect,
but the exchange of information and views would be helpful to further
consider ation by the Governments of both countries.
CANBERRA 3Cth July, 1967 



r I FOR PRESS: PM. No. 8C/ 1967
END OF TRANSITION TO DECIMAL CURRENCY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Tomorrow will see the end of the transition to dollars
and cents. Reports reaching me show that the public and the business
community generally are already reaping benefits we had anticipated from
conversion to decimal currency.
There is, however, some danger that the greatest
benefit that of simplicity in our money dealings may not be fully
realised for a time because we find some still showing the value of
commodities, particularly higher-priced commodities, in pounds, shillings
and pence. This will only confuse the public, who have demonstrated
their ready acceptance of the new currency.
The Treasurer and I have discussed suggestions that
the Government should legislate to prohibit refercnces to pounds, shillings
and pence. We both considered this to be undesirable, and preferred to
make a joint appeal to those concerned. Accordingly, I have written to
representatives of the Australian newspapers, television and radio stations8,
and to advertising agencies, seeking their co-operation and assistance in
putting an end to 9. s. d. advertising. I have also written to interested
national commercial associations informing them of this, and asking them
to co-operate with the Government and advertising media by eliminating
all references to pounds, shillings and pence from their prices and
advertising. With the co-operation of these groups, the last vestiges
of the old currency should rapidly disappear. The replies I have already
received assure me of a genuine desire to work with the Government in
this matter. We changed our currency because of the considerable
advantages of a decimal system. We would be depriving ourselves of the
essential simplicity of the new system if we continued to use Outmoded
pounds, shillings and pence. The Decimal Currency Board, the machine
conversion companies, banks, business houses and news media have all
done an excellent job in assisting to shorten the transition . The
Government asks that pricing and advertising in the old currency
now cease.
CANBERRA, 31st July, 1967. 



EMBARGO: 8 p. m. Monday, 31st July, 1967 Q. t~ 6
DEAKIN MEMORIAL__ LECTURE
Title :" ALFRED DEAKIN.-HIS LIFE AND OUR TIMES"
" The Liberal Tradition in Australia"
INAUGURAL LECTURE DELIVERED BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. HAROLD
HOLT, CH, MP, AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MELBOUR NE 31ST JULY, 1967
When Alfred Deakin died, the Commonwealth of Australia was
not quite twenty years old. It was peopled, in Deakin's phrase, by a little
more than " five million Australian Britons" and had just emerged in the flush
of victory from the horror of World War 1. Six States, six former colonies,
united in a Federation by constitutional processes, had been fused by the
searing process of war and were beginning to reach out again in the forward
march as a nation. Deakin had watched the nation's ordeal from the wings. It
was the evening of his brilliant career, for his memory was failing in those
years and his intellectual powers were almost spent. Yet he saw the nation
he had done so much to create, and in whose service he had exhausted his
strength, face its first great test and emerge triumphant, with honours
written large on the banners of its short history. This was one measure of
his labours, and those of his fellow-founding fathers. He, and they, had
built well. What Alfred Deakin achieved in Victorian politics, in the union
of the States and in the first thirteen years of Commonwealth are well recorded.
The honour board is bright with his achievements, and in a nation not given
to loving, or even liking, its great men, his name Is revered and remembered.
He was a Liberal, with a little and a capital and it is of the man and
his work, and how, in the perspective of history, we see him against the
events of our time, that I speak to you tonight.
There was an age of Deakin and it embraced many things. The
spotlight fell first on Federation, and Protection as a policy for the nation.
These were our beginnings as a nation. Many laboured in those vineyards at
the beginning of the century and the credit must be shared. But Deakin was
the architect, the leader, the advocate three times Prime Minister in the
first thirteen years of Federation. His was the mind and his was the heart
that gave the new nation a course to steer.
We knowa good deal about him for he wrote as fluently as he
spoke and his letters and papers are voluminous. They are, however,
fragments of a whole, for in the six years that were left to him when he took
his leave of politics his wearied mind was not able to finish its task of giving
us his complete, personal story. His own book, now published as " The
Federal Story, is only part of the record.
He was born in Fitzroy in 1856, the only son of English migrants
who had made a honeymoon voyage to Australia and landed first in Adelaide,
where a daughter, Sarah, was born. Then the lure of gold brought the / 2 
2-
family to Victoria. Young Deakin had the great boon of a happy home. He
was not born to riches, and had no castles to defend in later life. Nor was
he born to poverty. There was no bitterness in his heart.
His father made a modest living in the coaching business
between Melbourne and Bendigo, and with Cobb and Co. Alfred had a good
education, first at a small mixed school ( mainly for girls) in South Yarra and
later at Melbourne Grammar School where it is fair to assume he learnt the
art of eloquent speaking from the talented Dr Bromby, a Cambridge man who
was then headmaster. Deakin was a voracious reader. He devoured books
and poetry of every kind with a fever that consumed most of his leisure hours.
Some biographers have been tempted to give him a dual
personality#. a lively, larking schoolboy, casual with his studies and a
dreamer, a visionary beyond his years. I don't think he was two people.
We all have our dreams, but it so happened that Deakin made many of his
come true. He was, in my judgment, a normal, intelligent schoolboy,
showing early signs of scholarship and the questioning of an alert mind on
matters of religion, philosophy and the social problems of the day. His
Christian faith was real from an early age but was never neatly packaged and
his mind wandered in lively interest through spiritualism and along nonconformist
ways. He was a liberal but, in the tune and temper of the times,
he was also a radical.
He came to politics at the age of twenty-two. Behind him was the
law he had had a few briefs as a barrister, some teaching, including a
period voluntarily given to night classes for the street urchins who excited
his interest and compassion, and experience in journalism as a political
writer for " The Age". He won the seat of West Bourke in Victoria in 1879
and resigned on his first day in Parliament at the conclusion of his speech
moving the Address -in-Reply because of an irregularity in the poll caused by
a shortage of ballot papers.
" If I am the representative of the majority of electors of West
Bourke, I will be returned again. If I am not their representative, I have no
right here. He was returned again and for twenty years was a State Member
and a Minister for seven of those years.
In those turbulent days when the life of the colony was raw and
privilege rated high, the Liberal spoke for most of the people against the
entrenched representatives of the aristocracy of wealth and prcperty. There
was a force and a fever about Deakin, the State politician who, though always
a Liberal, began as a free-trader and was converted by David Syme, the
proprietor of " The Age", to be a foremost advocate of Protect ion. He
injected the basic elements of long-lastingiberalism into Victorian politics
and is remembered, not only for what he did to bring Vi ctoria to the
Federation but for his irrigation policies and factory legislation.
His writing was his highroad to politics and in politics he found
his life's work. The British historian F. S. Oliver has aptly described
politics as " the endless adventure of governing men". Deakin was quick to
catch the tide. For him it was a vocation as well as a great adventure.
He was, like Sir Robert Walpole in another century, a
conspicuous example of the man who came at the right time. W alpole, you
will recall, fathered the system of Cabinet Government in the British
Parliament. Deakin was the right man fcr the infant Federation and showed
his superb skill by achieving so much, despite the fact that he headed a
minority party In government during his three terms as Prime Minister. / 3 
-3
He did, in his time, what Walpole did in another way in the eighteenth
century, an immemorial service to democracy by advancing the purpose
and authority of the Parliamentary system.
It was Walpole who governed Britain for a record term of
twenty years as chief minister and gave the House of Commons so much
of the strength once held exclusively by the Crown. It was Deakin who, on
the Australian scene, focussed the thinking of the States and State-minded
people on the institution of the Federal Parliament and on the national issues
that flowed through its corridors. The strength of the Australian
Constitution was there but it needed the eloquence and steadfastness of
Deakin to make it manifest and make a people one.
I find much in common between Walpole and Deakin though
the differences were there too. On V1 alpole I quote from Oliver
" He is the archetype of the normal politician who forces his way
into the highest positions. Hfe had a strong, clear, practical
judgment. He was valiant and steadfast. His crowning merit was
faithfulness to the King he served and his country. Neither fears
nor temptations could ever shake his fidelity.
Deakin was out of the same mould nearly two hundred years
later. Oliver goes on
" At the same time it would be senseless to deny that he ( Walpole)
was a self -seeker, an opportunist, a man without any tincture
of book-learning or philosophy."
Deakin was none of these. His scholarship was plain for all
to see and hear. He took nothing personal from politics and he commanded
respect on both sides of the House.
For all his magnificence as a speaker he seldom tipped his
shafts with venom. He was not ' vindictive. I think the sharpest tongue he
turned on a fellow member was when he once described the late W. M. Hughes
as " behaving like an ill-bred urchin whom one sees dragged from a tart
shop, kicking and screaming as he goes. It was a rare excursion and was not
his usual form. He later apologised for it.
The art of politics has not changed all that much since Walpole's
day or from Deakin's day. But the practice of politics has, and of course
the issues and causes have. The British blend of representative with party
government, from its beginnings, left a politician no choice but to usel~
best endeavours to defeat his opponents and, while that habit is still with us
today, we do it in a rather more sophisticated way. What we are concerned
with are the principles that guide us in power and which govern our conduct
in opposition. This is where we recognise the constancy of Liberalism. It
is a philosophy, with a translation in practical terms into a party platform,
and always matching the contemporary scene.
Gladstone asked and answered the question: " What do I
understand by Liberal principles? I understand in the main, THIS, by
Liberal principles: the principle of trust in the people, only relieved by
prudence. BUT, by the principles of thieir opponents I understand mistrust
ofth pople, only relieved by fear
am talking to an audience largely composed of Liberals 
-4
tonight and it is worthwhile us all remembering that the Liberal idea is
permanent, though the forms of expression are shaped to the times in which
we live. We are in the words of our own party platform, " dedicated to
political liberty and the freedom and dignity of man
Deakin wrote " we are liberal always, radical often and
never reactionary". There has inevitably to be change in emphasis according
to the needs of the times. There are today issues of great importance to the
nation which occupy the attention of politicians but they are not of a nature that
attracts radicals or do they call for radical thinking in the terms of those early
years of Federation. There have been changes in our party and in the opposition
forces, and in the Parliament itself. New systems and methods of communication
between the politician and the public have changed our habits and the tasks
which fall on Ministers andi back-benchers alike. But the old values remain.
It is because of the very fact of our pledge to political liberty and indiv.' fAival
freedom that we can absorb change and maintain our identity. Some comparisons
are appropriate. Deakin stood for a two-party system in Parliament, but he
never secured it in his own right. So he sought it, first by negotiation, and then
by fusion. From the outset of Federation he also recognised that the Senate
would be a party house and not a States' House, though it came into being to
satisfy the anxieties of the States who had taken a half -century or more to come
to the point of Commonwealth. Things, then, really haven't changed all that
much. Let me recall the procession of events and the course the
Liberals followed in those early years which eventually gave us the Liberal
party as we know it today. In 1901 the non-Labor parties were largely identified by:
their attitudes to the national issue of Protection as a fiscal policy for the nation.
There were the Liberal Protectionists under Barton and Deakin, and the Free-
Traders under Reid. The Labor Party held the balance of power in the first
Parliament, but it gave sufficient support for the Liberals to govern, with
Reid and his supporters making up the official opposition.
Then, in 1909, with Protection a settled policy for the
nation, the non-Labor forces of Deakin and Reid came together officially as
one party called the Liberal or Fusion party. In 1916, when the Labor
Government split on the issue of conscription, the late W. M. Hughes and others
who supported conscription, were expelled from the party and after attempting
to maintain a shaky Government with the Parliamentary support of the Liberals
for a few weeks they merged officially with the Liberals to form the
Nationalist party. So briefly there was a clear-cut two party system, but in
1919 the Country Party was formed and that party has retained its identity
to this day. The Nationalists were reorganised in 1931 into the
United Australia Party under the late J. A. Lyons, who like Hughes, was a
Labor man who had broken with his party and the Scullin Government, in this
instance, on matters of economic policy during the depression. The U. A. P.
was with us till 1944. That was the year of the re-birth of the Liberal party,
the year when the Liberal Party re-established itself -An name and policy under 
the leadership of Sir Robert Menzies. Its policy was broadened to meet the
needs of modern Australia and ; n response to the urge for reform and
rejuvenation from those who had become increasingly dissatisfied with the
limited horizons of the U. A. P. It was closer to the Deakin concept of a
party with a wide appeal, not limited by any of the divisions by wh! ich society
tends to stratify itself.
Deakin was a Prime Minister of minority governments there
were mostly " three, and sometimes four, elevens" in the House of
Representatives. But his skill as a negotiator, his affability, his patience
and the constructive nature of his policies enabled him to secure support,
substantially on his terms, to carry out effective and progressive government.
This gave us a permanent tariff policy, imperial preference, a defence
policy, a Federal legal system, an arbitration system, a basic wage and
age and invalid pensions.
In the Parliament today we have three parties in the House of
Representatives, and we are getting things done because of the way in
which, by our coalition with the Count ry Party, we are able to operate a
two-party system in terms of work and practical politics. The present
coalition has shown durability in the seventeen years of government since
its formation in 1940, although we have competed for votes and although the
role of the Country Party has been affected by the national need to promote
manufacturing industry and as urban growth outruns rural growth.
In the Senate, as you know, we are a long way from effective
two-party government having four parties and two independents or again
in terms of practical politics, three parties when we count the coalition as
one. There is no doubt that the advent of the Democratic Labor Party, as
yet another group, disillusioned in recent times, as others were in the past,
with Labor policy, has influenced attitudes in the electorates -and in the
Parliament, where the party is represented only in the Senate.
There has been little change In the principles the Liberal Party
applies to the conduct of its business and this if I may seem to speak in an
apparent contradiction is why we have been able to adjust smoothly to changes
in the political, economic and social worlds around us.
The party constitution says " Once an endorsed candidate is
elected by the people as a Member of Parliament he represents the whole of
the people in his electorate and is not subject to any directions from the
party's organisation. When he becomes a Member of the Parliamentary
Liberal Party he, with his colleagues, is expected to implement the party's
platform, but is favoured with complete freedom of action without any attempt
to coerce hiim This stands in remarkable contrast to the highly regimented,
sternly disciplined org-anisation of the Labor Party, where policy-makers
outside Parliament dictate what the elected representatives should do and,
furthermore, exclude parliamentary leaders from a vote on policy-making
decisions. In the Liberal formation, the party has policies through which
it expresses its Liberal philosophy. It recommends sometimes strongly
and advises the parliamentary party, but final decisions are in the hands of
the elected members, with Cabinet giving the lead.
To give an example of the freedoms the Liberal Party allows.
In the Parliament, while Senators meet with members of the House of
Representatives i n joint Party meetings, the Senators also hold their own
party meeting to determine their approach to issues in the Senate. And
again, of course, the same individual freedoms apply. Labor, on the other / 6 
-6
hand, has a single Parliamentary Caucus which determines the actions of
both parties and all their members, In both Houses.
The Liberal Party has its rules, its platform, and a
wide-ranging organisation. You might call it a loosely-knit co-operative,
inside as well as outside the party room and Parliament. There was a
signal demonstration of the liberality of the system recently during the
discussion and debate on the " Voyager" disaster. This was a grave matter,
raised by a Liberal back-bencher and taken freely through the party room and
the Parliament, although the Government had long ago reached a considered
judgment on the issues that were then re-opened.
And while 1 am on this point I would remind you that,
despite criticism of the growth of Cabinet power and its apparent domination
of Parliament, here was an example that the end authority remains with
Parliament in all matters. It is true, however, that the increasing pace of
government, and the number and range of matters that now have to be dealt
with, require positive leadership from the Cabinet and also decisions by the
Cabinet which, in Deakin's day, would have been the subject of long and
exhaustive debate in the Parliament.
The individual parliamentarian has a duty to represent
his electorate, to watch the interests of its people and be responsive to their
needs. He can do that most effectively when his representation fits into the
pattern of stat and national policy. He must, figuratively, lift his sights
from the parish pump to the Snowy Mountains.
There is, to my mind, as clear an obligation on the
Cabinet, as there is on the individual member, to take the responsibility of
leading in matters where new ground has to be broken or where action has to
be taken that has not been the subject of a mandate from the electorate. A
government, in simple terms, is elected first of all to govern and the
greater Information available, by virtue of their office, to those charged with
this task should encourage them to be bold, imaginative and forward-looking.
This is vital for a Federal Government today which has
to give leadership in significant fields not strictly within the constitutional
division of its powers. There is an old judgment, and a true one, that power
tends to move to the centre. Certainly, political responsibility has flowed
that way, although the Federal Parliament is not much larger or its powers
substantially greater. In the first Parliament there were 75 members in the
House of Rperesentatives. There has only been one major increase to 122
in 1949 and a recent submission to referendum for another was rejected by
a large majority. Yet to the business of Federal Government and Parliament
now come the needs of near twelve million people and a weight of extra
responsibilities which include national development, immigration, social
services, education, health, aborigines, civil aviation and tourism.
To deal with the work~ the Ministry has trebled in size
in the last fifty years. Deakin's last Ministry in 1909 was nine strong, with
one Minister without portfolio. Today the Ministry has twenty-six members,
of whom twelve are senior ministers making up the Cabinet.
You might like to have some Budget comparisons not the
one just coming up, for that is the business of my colleague, the Treasurer
but the one produced by the first Deakin Ministry in 1905-6 and the one we
brought down in Canberra last year. 
-7
Deakin's first Government raised $ 24 million, spent $ 9 million
and gave $ 15 million back to the States.-
Receipts towards our last Budget were 400 million, of
which me spent 600 million and gave 800 million back to the States.
! n Deakin's Budget, the States got 62 per cent of total receipts, . last year
they got 34 per cent giving substantial evidence of how the responsibilities
and commitments of the Federal Government have grown.
Defence has become a major itern in our Budget nowadays.
In 1938-39, the last year of peace before World War 11, the Federal Budget
was creeping up towards its first œ 100 million figure ($ 200 million) and the
defence provision was 800, 000.
The total Budget topped; 10O million in 1939/ 40 and included
a provision of œ 12 million for defence and war, which in the event grew to
million in the first year of the war. In our last Budget, the defence
provision reached the record level of 000 million.
In brief, spending on defence 30 years ago tock
around 8 per cent of the Budget. ( In Deakin's day it was much the same).
Today defence is taking close on 20 per cent of the Budget.
The first basic, or minimum, wage in 1907 was four dollars
twenty cents a week. Today the minimum wage is thirty-seven dollars
forty-five cents a week.
There are new issues to face today, totally different from the
battle-cry of the Deakin age, and in a different nation and society. We have
absorbed into the British stock from which we sprang, people of forty or
more different nationalities. We are an affluent society, we have full
employment, a total wage system and a prescribed working week.
The Labor Party today has not the industrial issues to support
that it had in other years and in seeking new footholds of power it is, of
necessity, moving towards the centre. The pull of Labor to the left has
lost its momentum and the party is now seeking to invade ground firmly
held by the Liberals, while at the same time being reluctant to jettison its
doctrinaire attachment to socialism, a borrowed philosophy that has not
had any significant revision since 1921 despite all that has happened in
the forty-six years since then!
The issues bef ore us are those of national growth, the welfare
of our people, national security and our place in the international community.
We are deeply committed to the orderly and energetic development of the
rich treasures of this continent, a better education for our young people,
improved health for the population, security for the aged and infirm, the
advance of our technological skills, aid for the under-developed nations,
a strong defence system, fulfilment of our obligations under treaties and
the continuing encouragement of a special relationship with Asia.
These things carry us forward, and others drop away into
the mists. The imperialism of Deakin's time has gone and the " White
Australia" cry from his first platforms does not have the same relevance,
and happily the term is no longer used by us. It is true that we have an
immigration policy with restrictive aspects as do all countries in one form
or another, but it is humanely shaped,
it takes special note of our geographical position in Asia and it has recently / S 
8-
been liberalised. Today we have just on 40, 000 people of non-European
origin living in Australia, of whom almost half are now Australian citizens
by bi rth or naturalisation. We are proud of our British heritage, and proud to share it with
these new Australians. While some of the old forms have disappeared, ties
of kinship remain and the traditional institutions of Britain are mirrored in
much of our life today. We have added to this special relationship with
Britain a complementary friendship with America, which too has drawn heavily
on British stock and institutions in the beginnings of its growth to be a mighty
pow'er. Liberalism is not static it belongs to the old world and the
new. In all the movements that have taken place it has been flexible,
pragmatic if you like, and yet it has never lost sight of fundamental
principles. I said earlier that the art of politics had not changed but that the
practice had. One biographer has ifiiminded me that Deakin was the only
Prime Minister of Australia to be summonsed for riding a bicycle on a
footpath. I confess tkat, as Treasurer, I was fined for speeding on the road
from Portsea. Mention of. this makes a point that the pace of politics is faster
today. It is also tougher and more demanding althougH we have new services
at our command. The stresses that took their toll of Deakin have been
replaced by new stresses and no parliamentarian can insulate himself from
them. We live in a jet age and we move into the supersonic age of
flight In three or four years' time. We live in a space age and, when the
orbiting satellites of the two most powerful nations on earth wink overhead
in the night sky as they pass in their endless orbits, few of us spare them a
glance. We live in an age of instantaneous communications and of the
exposure by television of public figures to audiences of millions in almost
every corner of the globe at any one moment in time. We have a new intimacy
with the world. The death of Julius Caesar took two years to become known
throughout the Roman Empire. Today we can speak by telephone to the South
Pole, we can see the shape of the earth on which we live photographed from
outer space. We can see pictures transmitted from the cratered surface of
the moon. In Canada recently when I attended Australia's Day at EXPO 67 in
Montreal I was able to read a facsimile of that day's front page of " The Sun"
newspaper, published here in Melbourne.
These are some of the fascinations of our day and age, but with
their excitements come new pressures on public men. Today a Prime Minister
goes round the world, not " trailing clouds of glory", but trailing a comet's
tail of cablegrams which lengthens as he goes and which keeps him posted with
going ou at home and jui abx eirywhe -else. He flies the jet streams at
33, 000 feet and six hundred miles an hour and can girdle the globe in fifty
hours. He sleeps, if he is lucky, in catnaps. Mostly he is at work on
his papers in flight and at most stopovers he has to face tlepress, radio
and television. He is expected to know what happened at Khatmandu that
very day and " Would he like to comment on what the Leader of the
Opposition said last night". The critics are unforgiving if a loose phrase by
a tired traveller can be taken the wrong way. 
-9
He has dinner when he should be having breakfast, and
lunch, perhaps, in a no-man's-land of time above the clouds. He breaks
every known rule for good digestion. It used not to be like that. It took fifty
days to London In a ten-thousand-tonner at the turn of the century and a
travelling pprllamentarian had time to rest, to study his subject, prepare his
brief and be on his mettle for his first engagements. He also had the perfect
excuse, if affairs of state abroad could best be handled by diplomatic absence,
of pleading he couldn't spare the time that would be taken in travelling. Now
it is a case of " Come over for a day or two.
In my foreign journeys, I have travelled many routes,
across the Pacific, through Asia, across the Atlantic, over the Polar ice-cap.
You measure your journey in hours, not weeks, and drive yourself just a
little dizzy by keeping up with the clock changes, especially when you find
yourself flying forward into yesterday! On my last journey I had two Sundays
going over and lost a Wednesday out of my life on the homeward run.
At the beginning of Federation there was really only one
popular route for parliamentarians bound overseas to London and back by
sea. Yet I note from the record that at one Imperial Conference Deakin
attended he was in London for six weeks and ave-Zaged only four hours' sleep
a night. So the pressures obviously were there though the forms were
different. The practice of politics at home was also different. There
was a sharper awareness among the voting public, they had things on their
mind and they wanted something done about them. The class divisions were
clear-cut and there were great causes around every corner. Apart from
organised meetings and street corner addresses, the press was the only
means of political communication. And the press of the day had " fire in its
belly". Newspapers took up opposite positions and saw little compromise.
" The Age" stood for protection and tariffs, " The Argus" stood for free trade.
Political speeches were reported at length and the
reporter, a fast, skilled and knowledgeable fellow, happily inserted his
comments, according to the policy of his paper.
A two-hour election speech of those days would rate ten
minutes on radio or five on TV today. It would rate half an hour on the
platform and half a column of main points in a daily paper. Speeches in the
Parliament of the new Federation were packed with immense detail. Many
ran longer than two hours and on one occasion Deakin spoke for three and one
quarter hours. I shudder to think what would happen to the business of the
House if Members claimed so much of their parliamentary colleagues' time
today. When Deakin made his first election policy speech as
Prime Minister at Ballarat it got six columns of solid type in the daily press.
And the type was smaller and the columns wider than they are today.
I liked the warm and friendly touch of one report of
Deakin's first Eastern States election campaign. He went by train to Sydney
and by carriage to the City Hall, where the " Town Clerk formally welcomed
him over a glass of wine, the Lord Mayor being absent in Melbourne for the
Cup. i Today news reporting of politics is not interlarded with
opinion and it is good that this is so. The opinion is supplied by editorials
and identified commentators. The cover is not as extensive, though major 
q 10
policy speeches and Budgets always get extended space. There is no
violent collisbn of newspaper policies as there was in the wilder, colonial
days. The general habit of the press, while broadly liberal or conservative
in its inclinations, is to keep its columns open to other opinions and the
presentation of policies opposed to its own. The press treatment of
politicians is much more an exercise in personal journalism and human
interest than it used to be.
Throughout his Federal political career, even as Prime
Minister, Deakin wrote anonymously for the London " Morning Post" and
for all his familiarity with the press, he remained sensitive to the
harsh light it shed on men in the posts of political power. In his " Federal
Story" he says
" Public life in Australia is impaired by the almost entire absence
of respect for the privacies of official life and for the persons
of those in power. The passion for equality which sways the
multitude contains a spice of envy which encourages the belittling
of even those whom they are delighting to honour. The crowd
always retains to itself the privilege of chastising its gods in
time of adversity while worshipping the m in days of prosperity."
Now it chastises them, even in, aiys of prosperity:
I like Oliver's comments. He says that a politician's critics
claim that " A politician lacks natural intelligence as well as education;
he has no foresight, no constancy of purpose beyond the pursuit
of his own advantage M oralists, idealists, humanitarians
are equally severe. They are shocked by his unveracity, by
the deadness of his soul to all the higher emotions.. he is never
more than a lip-servant of sacred causes and then only when they
happen to be in fashion.
" Soldiers, sailors and country gentlemen are convinced that no-one
who talks so much, and obviously knows so little, about the
conduct of war and the management of land can possibly understand
any department whatsoever of public affairs.
" The great army of company directors, and others of a certain age
whom newspapers describe as ' captains of industry' condemn
him for his lack of practical ability, initiative, push and go; they
suspect him of being a lazy fellow who likes to draw a salary for
doing next to nothing.
" Jingoes denounce him as a traitor if he is not forever plucking
foreign nations by the beard.... pacifists consider him to be the
chief cause of war
" The magnates of the popular press, secure behind their private
telephone entanglements, sneer at his want of courage; and the
man-of -the -world most ingenuous of dotterels takes up the
same tale from his club arm-chair
" What humbug, it is, for the most part, and what a welter should
we be in, if the politicians, taking these lectures to heart, were
to hand over the management of public affairs to their critics"' 
11
Ours is a grudging democracy which holds politicians
in low esteem. In the United Kingdom, with its long political tradition,
there is more respect for the office-holder, and he is more likely to be
judged on his merits. In America, the political leader is built into something
larger than life-size and there is disenchantment when it becomes obvious
that the leader cannot live comfortably In the rarefied atmosphere that has
been created for him. In Australia there is a comparative apathy towards
political issues. For example, you do not see the same surge, the same
vitality of political interest in student bodies that you get in other countries.
This, I believe, is because we have moved along ordered lines under the
Constitution, and because we have become an aiflucnt society, with a clear
course ahead of us, comfortably situated in a congenial Pacific environment.
Most contemplate the dangers of our geographical location as casually as
they accept the promise and opportunity opening before us. There are real
dangers in this if we let complacency over-ride the satisfactions of a job
well done. I find great encouragement in the type of young men and
women who are now being attracted to the Liberal Party. There is no " fiery
cross of Federation" ( as Deakin put it) for them to hold aloft and make the
sky bright with its blazing, but they have a challenge to take up. I have
mentioned it earlier and I repeat it now
It is concerned directly with the continuity of good and
responsible government.
II t i s concerned wi th tie growth df Australia and the
development of our new external relationships.
* It is concerned with the preservation of free enterprise
and political liberty.
It is concerned with Australia today, strong and free,
going forward across new horizons.
Our critics have said " Where are the great memorials
to all the years of Liberal rule?" My answer simply is that the nation itself,
and the shape it is in, is the finest memorial of all. The orderly but rapid
national progress in qn environment of political, social and economic
stability; the preservation of liberty, personal freedom and incentive for the
individual; the continui-ty of em, 51lyment, improvement in living standards and
social welfare, the growth in international influence these are some of the
more notable achievements consistently sustained in the years of post-war
Liberal leadership. Australians would do well to recognise the good fortune
we enjoy in a world where so much wretchedness, turbulence and insecurity
persist. We do not wish to be remembered by solitary spectaculars,
but by what we have done to ensure the happiness, prosperity and security
of the people of Australia and to be respected abroad for our policies and
achievements. There are new excitements around us and adventures
to share. The skills of new Australians have been joined to our own. Things
are happening in the cities and on the plains, along the valleys and over the / 12 
12
mountains. From the gold and the wool and the wheat of Deakin's day, we
have spread our energies and our initiatives very widely indeed.
We can make most things that others can make; we
have found oil and we are taking gas from the sea. The immensity of our
recently discovered mineral resources and the rapid start with their
development is helping to shape a new order of growth.
We can travel through the old kingdoms and former
colonies of Asia and we number among them more friends than most European
nations can count. This is the wider world in which we have to live now, and
we take our place in it with confidence, secure in the knowledge that the
Federation, the Commonwealth of Australia that Deakin did so much to
establish, has strength and that its people are proud of their great inheritance.
There is one final matter I want to put before you
because it will be of critical importance to all of us in the years ahead. I
refer to defence and the British Government's historic decision to make a
total military withdrawal from the mainland of ' South-East Asia by the
We are facing fundamental changes in our defence
strategy and in our foreign policy. For some time now we have had under
active examination the alternatives for Australia in the event that Britain
should decide upon the course its Government has now declared. In o~ ur
planning we take account of the interests and capabilities of our friends in
this area and elsewhere. It is appropriate to remind you that our defence and
our security are covered by two parallel defence lines in the Pacific and
South-East Asia. The first line is one of friendships, trade and aid
over the whole area. Our trade has increased by loseon f pr cenwflth
Asia in recent years but much of it has been with Japan. We must diversify
this effort so that we can help the economy of Asian nations to become viable
and so assist them to develop their own defences.
We are giving 0. 7 per cent, of our national income to
external aid and in this we rank second in percentage terms after France,
among the aid-giving nations of the world. At this time, the average level
of world aid for the needy nations is declining and nations like America and
Britain are reducing the relative percentage they give. Australia on the other
hand is still increasing her level of aid.
Already we are associated with every established
international aid-giving organisation of any substance and we are giving our
aid without strings. Our traffic in friendship is also increasing. As your
Prime Minister, I have been to Asia three times in 20 months and my Ministers
have been in the aggregate many more times than that. A cultural exchange
programme with South-East Asia in due course will, also, I hope add to
goodwill and understanding. All these things are elements in the first line of
defence. The second line of defence is one covered by treaties / 13 
13-
with friendly powers and includes currently a military capability in South-
East Asia. We have been associated with Britain for many years past in the
Commonwealth area of Malaysia and Singapore. Yet this is not the only
forward post we are manning or where our only interests lie and I need not
tell you how vital it is to us that the cause for which we are fighting in support
of the United States and other allies in Vietnam should be sustained until an
honourable peace is won. It would be wrong for me at this stage to attempt
to indicate to you what the new shape of our military defence line will be,
but I want to say this. The two defence lines that we have are of vital
importance to us. Their strength is a responsibility that a Government has
to assume for the people who have placed it in power. It is a responsibility
falling sqtnrely on a sovereign, independent nation
In the first days of Federation, Alfred Deakin fought
stoutly for an Australian Navy. He urged the formation of a permanent
Australian military force and for compulsory national service to support
those forces. He foresaw the tasks that one day must come to a young nation
in the Pacific and Asian areas. We face them now. There is no turning
aside from our geography nor must there be any turning aside from what we
Liberals conceive to be Australia's national destiny. 



Ct'
Ch IOAUG I9
FOR PRESS: LBR PM. No. 81/ 1967
PRIME MINISTER TO VISIT W~ ESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Frime Minister will inspect a number of centres
concerned with the development of natural resources, particularly
mining, when he goes to Western Australia in S1eptember for the official
opening of the U. S. Naval Communication Station at North WVest Cape.
The itinerary, which is still in the planning stage, will
be designed to enable Mr Holt to see projects that he has not previously
vis ited. He will probably go to the mining town of Kambalda
( near Kalgoorlie), to Port Hedland to see the new port and loading
facilities for Mount Goldsworthy, to Dan'. pier and to Mount Tom Price.
On his way to the West he will make his first visit to
Woomera, to inspect the township and the Blue Streak launching area and
control installations. He will also spend a day IM Ferth.
He will make the tour between the 12th and 16th
September. CANBERRA, 2nd August, 1967.
I will be in touch later about press arrangements for covering this tour.
A. Eggleton
Press Secretary 



PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA.
3rd August, 1967.
PRIME MINISTER'S PROGRAMME
Mr and Mrs Holt left for Bingil Bay today. The Prime
Minister will return to Canberra next weekend Sunday 13th August), unless
circumstances make it necessary for him to come back earlier.
It will be a " working holiday' for the PM. A special
phone has been installed for official calls from Canberra, and documents
and papers will be delivered regularly to Bingil Bay. Two members of
the Frime Minister's personal staff will set up office in Townsville to
handle material for the PM.
Mr Holt wil11 celebrate his 59th birthday on Saturday.
He plans to spend it quietly wth family and friends at Bingil Bay.
A. EGGLETON
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister
I intend to take advantage of this opportunity to take some time off myself.
All being well, things should be fairly quiet and Mary Newport will be on
hand to cope with queries. A. EGGLETON 



PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA. 3rd August, 1967.
PM's VISIT TO THE WEST PRESS ARRANGEMENTS
In order that I can assess requirements, I would
like to know how many news organisations would be interested in
sending representatives to cover the Prime Minister's West Australian
tour in September, including the opening of North-West Cape.
As I see it at this stage, transport arrangements
will probably be similar to Mr Holt's recent Asian visits, with the
participating media contributing to the cost of a special press aircraft.
Cost per seat would probably work out at much the same rate as
commercial fares for the routes to be flown.
I would like to know as soon as possible how many
newsmen would be wishing to cover the tour on this basis.
A. EGGLETON
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister 



S 14 AUG 1967
4c L I BR P,(
TEXT OF RADIC/ TV COMMENT BY THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR HAROLD HOLT, IN LAUNCHING
THE " FITNESS AUSTRALIA" CAMPAIGN 7TH -AUGUST, -1CZ~ 7
" FITNESS AUSTRALIA"
Australia does not have enough people all the more
need for us to be fit people. Good health is an obligation of good
citizenship. If more people gave as much attention to keeping their
bodies in good working order as they do their motor cars, they would
feel a lot better and enjoy life a lot more.
For most of the 70 per cent of Austral ians living in
cities, fitness is a challenge. Our successes in sport do not prove
that we are a physically tough people. Too many are spectators
not enough iD articipate. Not easy perhaps to find opportunities for
sport, and many city jobs make little call on physical effort.
ie can make our own opportunities quite simply!
To help you keep fit, a book of simple
exercises has been issued today throughout Australia.
here. It is free' I hope you will get yourself one.
life, and they
not be soft as physical I have my copy
Fit people lead longer lives. They get more out of
can give more to it. To be strong as a nation, we must
its citizens. 



FOR PRESS PM. NO. 82/ 1967
FREE REPLACEMENT OF LOST MEDALS
Earlier this year, Senator J. E. Marriott of Tasmania
asked a Question V ithout Notice in regard to medals lost in the
Tasmanian bushfires. Mr Holt today sent the following reply to the Senator:
" Dear Senator Marriott, On 18th April, 1967, you asked the Leader of
the Government in the Senate a Question Without Notice
concerning Service Awards and Decorations lost in the recent
bushfires in Tasmania. It is the practice to replace Campaign Stars,
Decorations, etc., on production of a Statutory Declaration
setting out the circumstances of loss or destruction
In the past, a small charge ( including package
and postage) has been made to cover the actual cost of the
item to the Service Department concerned.
I have now decided that free replaeement will
be made to all ex-servicemen who can satisfactorily explain,
by Statutory Declaration, the loss of the original free issue.
This, of ourse, will apply to ex-servicemen who lost their
medals in the Tasmanian bushfires.
My colleague, the Treasurer, has been asked to
refund any amount charged to ex-servicemen who have applied
and paid for replacement consequent on the bushfires.
Yours sincerely,
HAROLD HOLT.
CANBERRA, 17th August, 1967 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH 23AUG1967
BY
The Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 17 August 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister) [ 8.20]--This debate was initiated
by the Minister for External Affairs ( Mr
Hasluck) who, I think it will be agreed by
all sections of the House, gave to this
chamber one of the most thoughtful,
informative, articulate and valuable statements
on the foreign affairs of this country
that has ever been presented to the chamber.
It is to me deplorable that it was
followed by such an incredible speech from
the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam).
I use the term ' incredible' in two senses.
It was incredible in the sense that anybody
who had any knowledge of the facts about
which the Leader of the Opposition spoke
could place no validity on the comments
which he made in relation to those facts.
It was also incredible in the sense that a
man holding himself out to be the leader
of an alternative government should have
such a disregard for the facts and make
such reckless and loose use of them as he
did during the debate. I shall give some
instances of that as I proceed.
The Leader of the Opposition has put to
the House what purports to be the views
of the Australian Labor Party on a variety
of important issues. I say ' purports' because
nobody in this country can be sure of the
views of the Australian Labor Party, taken
as a whole. I shall deal with that, too, in
a little more detail as I go along. He holds
himself and his colleagues out as the source
of an alternative government for this
country. 11671/ 67 There is, of course, a very direct link
between the welfare, security and economicprogress
of a nation and the Government
that leads it. So it becomes an obligation,
of citizenship in a democratic society to
examine closely the policies offered by thosewho
aspire to national leadership. And there
is an obligation on the part of the public
and of the Press of Australia to bring the
same strong searchlight of scrutiny to thepolicies
of the Australian Labor Party
which they direct so penetratingly and persistently
to the policies of the present
Government. I stress that because there has been for
so long a disposition on the part of some'
sections of the Press and some members
of the public to say: ' There is no effective-
Opposition, so we are the Opposition.' If
they are going -to alter that role and look
to honourable members opposite led by thepresent
Leader of the Opposition as an,
alternative government, then they have a
responsibility to probe as closely as they
would the policies of this Government what
is put forward by honourable gentlemen'
opposite. It is not easy to pin down in any precise
form the policies offered by the Australian
Labor Party under its present leadership,
either on foreign affairs or on domestic
affairs. In this respect, the Leader of the'
Opposition has already revealed himself as
something of a political chameleon. At: 
times, we find him assuming the guise of
a Christian crusader charging down against
the infidels of the Victorian executive of
the Australian Labor Party. But when he
speaks to an audience consisting predominantly
of Liberal sympathisers, as when
he talked to the Junior Chamber of Commerce
in Victoria the other day, we find
him uttering honeyed words about the
Socialist objective, an objective, incidentally,
to -the implementation of which he has
pledged himself.
Mr Uren-I rise to order. This is a discussion
of a statement delivered by the
Minister for External Affairs. When discussing
a previous statement made by the
Minister for External Affairs I was called
to order by the Chair for not speaking to
the statement. My point now is that on this
occasion the Prime Minister is not speaking
to the statement delivered by the Minister
for External Affairs.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no substance
in the point raised by the honourable
member. Mr HAROLD HOLT-I can understand
the concern of honourable gentlemen opposite
at any analysis which challenges the
credibility of their spokesman. But, Sir,
this is tremendously relevant to the policies
of an alternative government in Australia.
Unless there can be faith -and trust in the
policies of . those who offer themselves as an
alternative government, then the country is
put at peril if those people take over the
Government of the country. I want to question
tonight whether honourable gentleman
opposite have a valid claim to govern this
country. I repeat that the Leader of the Opposition
is committed to the implementation of this
policy. But at times he is to be found tilting,
like Don Quixote against imaginary Liberal
windmills. I can quote instance after
instance of that. Many of them occurred
during the recent Corio campaign. On that
occasion he alleged that I had made some
sort of deal with the former member for
Corio ( Mr Opperman) before the last general
election. That was a completely false
allegation which I shall deal with in more
detail later. He also made the false allegation
that by advocating a continuance of the
bombing of North Vietnam I was seriously embarrassing the American Administration.
Then ' he made the completely false
allegation that I had openly advocated an
extension of the formal hours of working in
Australia. Not only was that allegation
made by the Leader of the Opposition but
it was repeated by the newly elected member
for Corio ( Mr Scholes). Yet he quoted
from a Press release of mine that clearly
indicated ' that I had specifically said in
answer to a question on this matter that I
was not advocating a longer working week
in that sense.
As I have said, these are just imaginary
Liberal windmills that the honourable gentleman
has created for himself. But then, after
emerging from the throes of his Federal
Executive discussions, he publicly expounds,
admittedly not very enthusiastically, policy
decisions that have taken him significant
strides leftwards. He is not so much a man
for all seasons as a man for all policies. The
essence of his approach is: If you want it I
have got it. What the honourable gentleman
will discover as ' he proceeds in this course
of leadership is that what he has said on
earlier occasions will come up to haunt him
in ithe statements which he will be making
thereafter. Some of these allegations I shall document
as I proceed. I apologise in advance
to the House for having to quote so extensively
in what remains for me to say. But
When you have loose and reckless assertions
I believe the most effective answer is a carefully
documented reply on the facts as they
can be presented.
Let me return now to one or two of the
matters to which I have referred. I spoke
of his attack on the Victorian Executive.
This is significant because of the bearing it
has on the foreign policies which were subsequently
produced. Speaking to the Victorian
Labor Party conference on 9th June,
the Leader of ' the Opposition said:
The Victorian Executive included an influential
handful of men who had flouted ALP policy
on unity tickets, organised or led political strikes
in defiance of the ACTU, disregarded and repudiated,
party and ACTU policy on the manning
of ships to Vietnam--
Mr Hayden-I rise to a point of order.
Mr Uren-I rise to a point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! 
Mr HAROLD HOLT-Cannot honourable
members opposite take it? We gave
the. Leader of the Opposition unlimited
time. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The House will
come to order. The honourable member
for Oxley has taken a point of order.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I direct
attention to the inconsistency with which
the rules of the House are being applied.
Mr SPEAKER--Order! The honourable
member will withdraw that remark. He is
reflecting on the Chair.
Mr Uren-I too rise to a point of order.
The matter before the House is the statement
that was made by the Minister for
External Affairs. The Prime Minister is not
discussing that statement.
Mr SPEAKER--Orderl There is no substance
in the point of order. The honourable
member will resume his seat.
Mr Bryant-Mr Speaker, I take a point
of order. At an earlier hour the Leader of
the House moved that standing orders be
suspended so that the Prime Minister could
speak without limitation of time on the
subject before the House. As a matter of
courtesy, no opposition came from this side
of the House.
Mr SPEAKER-Orderl The honourable
member for Wills cannot debate . the matter.
What is the point of order?
Mr Bryant-My point of order is that
the Prime Minister is trespassing upon the
decision of the House.
Mr SPEAKER--Order! The point of
order is without substance.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-This has a wide
bearing on the foreign policy decisions
which emerged from the Labor Party's
Federal Conference in Adelaide. The comments
of the Leader of the Opposition
from which I am quoting go on to show
that these men whom he now condemns
could be in a position to exercise influence
on the policies of the Australian Labor Party
at the forthcoming conference. Let fne proceed
with the quotation:
It is disgraceful that these men should be on the
ALP Executive which can appear to influence
Federal policies and selections.
11671/ 67-2 He is quite right. He continued:
I will exercise my right to repudiate such men
as I believe disloyal to the ALP, disruptive of its
electoral prospects and destructive of all the ALP
stands for.
As I shall show in greater elaboration later
this has considerable relevance to what
emerged in Adelaide. Mr W. Brown, the
State President of the Australian Labor
Party, commenting on the Conference, is
reported as follows:
The Labor Party throughout Australia was moving
further to the Left, the State ALP president
Mr W. Brown, said yesterday.
This had been shown at the party's Federal
Conference in Adelaide two weeks ago.
' The trend at the Federal Conference was Leftwards,'
Mr Brown said.
Mr Brown was speaking on the 3KZ Labor
Hour. He said the conference had ' strengthened' policy
on the Vietnam war.
It attached a meaningful set of objectives to what
basically was and remains a ' troops out' policy,'
he said.
' Possibly we could say now that it is a policy
of " troops out unless".'
Mr Uren-I rise to a point of order,
Mr Speaker. What has the ALP Federal
Conference got to do with the statement
made by the Minister for External Affairs?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable
members will cease interjecting. The House
will come to order.
Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I respect the
Chair. I respectfully point out to you that
we are discussing the statement made this
afternoon by the Minister for External
Affairs, not the ALP Federal Conference
and not what Mr Brown or anybody else
has said.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no substance
in the point of order.
Mr Uren-We were discussing the statement
made by the Minister for External
Affairs. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable
member will resume his seat. There is no
substance in his point of order. It has always
been the practice of the House to acknowledge
that foreign affairs statements have
a broad base. The policies that are now
being referred to are related to the foreign
affairs policies of members of this
Parliament. 
Mr HAROLD HOLT-May I point out
to the honourable gentleman, if the fact
has escaped his attention, that the foreign
policy that he will be required to advance
publicly if he is not to forfeit his preselection
at the next election is the foreign policy
that was worked out at the Adelaide Conference
at which those condemned by the
Leader of the Opposition were present and in
which they participated. I do not need to rely
on authorities from this side of the House
as to what occurred and the significance of
the policies declared there. The honourable
member for Yarra ( Dr J. F. Cairns) himself
has been vocal on this. matter, as I
hope I will be able to show shortly.
The former Leader of the Australian
Labor Party, the honorable member for
Melbourne ( Mr Calwell), at least had this
virtue in our eyes: However much we disagreed
with him, we knew where he stood
and what he stood for and we could challenge
fairly and honestly the views that he
put to us. In an article in the Melbourne
' Herald' on 8th August of this year which
he headed ' My stand on Vietnam vindicated',
the former Leader of the Opposition
said: Decisions on Vietnam at the ALP Federal conference
in Adelaide show there has been no
weakening of Labor opposition to the continuation
of the war and Australia's part in it.
I will not read the whole article but it is
available if anybody wishes to read it. He
went on to say:
The conference refused to be stampeded by all
sorts of people-
No doubt, including the present Leader of
the Opposition:
and influences, and the policy in all its essentials
is the same as it was in November last, and as
it will be when the 1969 election is held.
I feel that my stand before the last election
and since has been vindicated.
If I may bring the honourable member
for Yarra in as further support for my comment,
I take the Australian Broadcasting
Commission's news bulletin of Monday, 7th
August, which reported an Hiroshima Day
rally held in Melbourne under the auspices
of the Association for International Coooeration
and Disarmament at the Princess
Theatre. I quote directly from the ABC
news bulletin. It reads: Dr Cairns told the rally that unless the United
States stopped the bombing of North Vietnam
and recognised the National Liberation Front, a
Labor Government would have no alternative to
withdrawing Australian armed forces. Dr Cairns
said the ALP now had a precise policy on Vietnam
which condemned and opposed the war. He said
it did not matter what the ALP leader, Mr
Whitlam, or the Deputy Leader, Mr Barnard, said
on Vietnam. It was the Federal Conference which
had decided the policy.
So, we have Mr Brown saying that they
have been taken to the left and we have Dr
Cairns, the honourable member for Yarra,
saying: ' It does not matter what interpretation
the Leader of the Opposition or the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition puts on it.'
We have the precise policy now which the
former Leader of the Opposition says was
fully in line with the policy he advocated at
the last election and which will be the policy
of the Australian Labor Party at the election
in 1969. I believe that these matters
are relevant.
Mr Uren-Was that a newspaper
clipping? Mr HAROLD HOLT-No.
Mr Uren-The Prime Minister was not
very happy about a newspaper clipping this
morning. Mr HAROLD HOLT-Which one was
that? Mr Uren--During question time I asked
the Prime Minister a question about an
interview with him at London Airport.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-The honourable
member for Yarra will be speaking in this
debate. If the honourable member for Yarra
tells the House that he was misreported by
the Australian Broadcasting Commission-
Mr Whitlam-Which he will do.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-We will be glad
to hear it.
Mr Whitlam-It was not repeated in later
news items.
Mr Wentworth-I do not wonder.
Mr . Whillam--It was not repeated
because . the ABC checked with the honourable
member for Yarra.
Dr J. F. Cairns-Mr Speaker, I claim
that I have been misrepresented. 
Mr SPEAKER--Order! The honourable
member will resume his seat.
Mr Bryant-You are spoiling Harold's
speech. Mr HAROLD HOLT-It is not spoiling
it for me. Let me turn now to one or two
other statements made by the Leader of
the Opposition and I do not think an
attempt will be made to interrupt my remarks
now, because these statements to
which I will refer were made in the course
of the honourable gentleman's speech this
afternoon. I quote first from a report which
appeared in the Melbourne ' Sun' at the
time of the Corio by-election. Under the
headline ' PM embarrassed U. S. says
Mr Whitlam' the following statement
appeared: The Prime Minister, Mr Holt, had embarrassed
the U. S. Administration by his recent support for
the bombing of North Vietnam
Mr Whitlam claimed the bombing had to go on
for ' a bit longer' because it had been supported
by Mr Holt and the King of Thailand.
That, surely, is one of the most audacious
and fantastic propositions ever advanced by
a political leader in this country. What the
Leader of the Opposition is saying in effect
is that the President of the United States,
in order to humour me and the King of
Thailand and not embarrass us, would
sacrifice American lives and aircraft. This
is the purport of what he has not only
seriously and solemnly put in the heat of
a by-election but has repeated here in a
considered speech in this House. He
aggravated the offence by saying that I
constituted myself as the spokesman for
Admiral Sharp. It is true that as I passed
through Honolulu I had a very thorough
briefing, as did others in the official party,
with Admiral Sharp and senior colleagues
of the Pacific Command. They were quite
convinced in their minds of the
effectiveness of the bombing. They were
convinced also that any lull in the bombing
merely presented the North Vietnamese
with an opportunity to build up rapidly
supplies which could be used against
American, Vietnamese, Australian and other
allied troops in South Vietnam.
In Fonolulu I saw films taken over one
North V; etnarnese port. In the film taken
on the day becor the lull in the bombing
. there , v. s scarcely a ship to be seen, in
the port but on the day afterwards the port was seen to be crowded with shipping of
one kind or another, rushing in to take
advantage of the lull. Every time there has
been a lull in the bombing that is what
has happened. This fact has been made
public repeatedly but this does not prevent
honourable gentlemen opposite from urging
that the bombing be stopped, notwithstanding
the cost in lives, as well as in terms
of security, to the American, Vietnam-se,
Australian and other allied forces in South
Vietnam. When I spoke in Los Angeles it was not
merely with the knowledge of views or
facts presented to me in Honolulu by
Admiral Sharp and his colleagues. This
Government is in virtually daily contact
with the American Administration. We
know its views intimately, as it knows ours.
I knew with complete confidence that the
views which I expressed in Los Angeles
would certainly not be unpalatable views to
the United States Administration. I do not
have to go into confidential discussions, as
the honourable gentleman sought to do
this afternoon, in order to prove my point.
I make that assertion and I do not purport
to quote anybody in relation to it.
I will summarise the reasons for a continuation
of the bombing, as I stated them
in Los Angeles: It has consistently been the
view of the Australian Government that
North Vietnam must not be permitted to
remain a haven immune from military risk
from , which military aggression against the
south can be mounted with impunity. The
case for controlled bombing is strong and
the bombing has been conducted with great
care and precision. The principal reasons
are that the bombing upsets the flow of
men and materials to the fighting zones; it
damages the transport systems through
which that flow goes forward; it helps to
destroy the enemy's base areas, thereby
weakening his capacity to fight and so
saving the lives of allied fighting men; it
ties up hundreds of thousands of the North
Vietnamese work force in repair and reconstruction;
it demonstrates to the fighting
forces of South Vietnam that America and
her allies are giving them full support;
it demonstrates to the people of South
Vietnam as a-whole that we do not expect
them to suffer and to fight the aggressor
only where he chooses to fight; and it has
the political and psychological effect of 
reminding the North Vietnamese that they
cannot hope to win this conflict.
The United States Government has not
accepted arguments in favour of cessation
of the bombing. Indeed, if anything, in
recent times it has increased the tempo and
the scale of bombing. The Australian
Government has not accepted the arguments
against the bombing. I make the
reasons for that abundantly plain here
tonight. The next matter which the Leader of
the Opposition chose to throw at me was
what had developed in respect of the British
position east of Suez and in particular in
the Malaysia-Singapore area. He said that
we should have known for the best part of
the last two years that the United Kingdom
intended to withdraw in the Singapore-
Malaysia area. Do I quote the honourable
gentleman correctly?
Mr Whitlam--Yes.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-The honourable
gentleman says that we should have known.
In other words, as I will demonstrate, he is
saying that I should have placed no reliance
whatever on the firm, publicly stated
assurances of a British Labor Government.
I will quote the assurances-not private
assurances or anything of that sort, but
publicly stated assurances by spokesmen for
the British Government in the relevant
period. I do not do this in any spirit
of recrimination. I have reason to believe
that there has been an appreciation in the
United Kingdom of the temperate way in
which I have addressed myself to this
matter in this country. I say that not illadvisedly.
But when I am taunted by the
Leader of the Opposition that we should
have known what the British were going
to do, I say: ' Here is the record on this
matter. What would he, as head of a Labor
Government in this country, have felt about
assurances given to him by the head of a
Labor Government in the United Kingdom,
and chief spokesman for that Government?'
I cite first the defence review made by
the United Kingdom Minister for Defence,
Mr Healey, in the House of Commons in
February 1966. He said:
It is in the Far East and Southern Asia that the
greatest danger to peace may lie in the next decade
and some of our partners in the Commonwealth
may be directly threatened. We believe it is right
that Britain should maintain a military presence in this area. Its effectiveness will turn largely on the
arrangements we can make with our Commonwealth
partners and other allies in the coming
years. I hasten to add that there has been no factor
of that kind which has led to the ultimate
decision. I have never heard it suggested
by any spokesman for the British Government
that its decision has related to any
failure on the part of ourselves or any of
the other countries in the region. Mr Healey
continued: As soon as conditions permit we shall make
some reductions in the forces which we keep in
the area. We have important military facilities in
Malaysia and Singapore as have our Australian and
New Zealand partners. These we plan to retain
for as long as the Governments of Malaysia and
Singapore agree that we should do so on acceptable
conditions.
Nobody has imposed unacceptable conditions.
The review continued:
Against the day when it may no longer be possible
for us to use these facilities freely, we have
begun to discuss with the Government of Australia
the practical possibilities of our having military
facilities in that country if necessary.
Anyone who was party to the discussions
knows that what the United Kingdom meant
by the expression ' against the day when it
may no longer be possible' was some action
on the part of one or other of the countries
in the area which would make it impracticable
for the United Kingdom to continue to
use the facilities in Malaysia and Singapore.
I pass over the statements made by Mr
Healey in Canberra in that year and turn to
Mr Wilson's speech to the British Parliamentary
Labor Party in London on
June 1966. He said:
Our policy is based on full support for the
United Nations, not just with words but with the
ability to be able to act for and with the United
Nations. What we have to ask is whether it is or should
be the policy of this Party to pull out of all
influence in Asia except the very limited influence
we shall be able to exert in United Nations debates,
telling other people what they ought to do. If this
is the policy the result will be our inability to
intervene whether in a United Nations or Commonwealth
context to stop a small conflagration
becoming a big one.
It will mean this as well, that you will be
leaving Asia to three main powers, China, the
United States and the Soviet Union with a small
peripheral influence exerted by Australia and New
Zealand, but Japan coming up fast on the tails.
It is really said that we have nothing to contribute
except speeches that no-one will listen to.
I believe that Britain through history, through
geography and Commonwealth connections has 
a vital contribution to make-I believe a Socialist
Britain has even more.
Perhaps there are some members who would
like to contract out and leave it to the Americans
and Chinese eyeball to eyeball to face this thing
out. The world is too small for that kind of
attitude today. It is the surest prescription for
a nuclear holocaust I could think of.
Do we want to force countries like India to
choose between the power blocs? Or go nuclear
herself? Our presence in Asia gives us a chance
to prevent polarisation. Do we really believe the
only way to world peace is world polarisation?
I believe Britain has a role, and not at prohibitive
cost, in preventing polarisation. We have
a role in influencing America.
My final quotation is from the last statement
made before the announcement of
withdrawal, and that is in the Defence
White Paper of February of this year. Mr
Healey said:
We are continuing to study the scope that exists
for reducing our foreign exchange expenditure
throughout the world always with a proper regard
to the interests of our allies and our ability to
meet our commitments there is much to
learn from the arduous three years' campaign.
against confrontation it was a fine example
of what British forces can do outside Europe to
maintain international stability. Without their contribution
to the Commonwealth effort much of
South East Asia might have collapsed into disorder
perhaps inviting competitive intervention by
other powers with the consequent risk of general
war. But provided that they are needed and
welcome, the continuing presence of British forces
can help to create an environment in which loc! al
governments are able to establish the political and
economic basis for peace and stability. There can
also be no certainty-so long as threats to stability
remain-that those forces will not be required
to give help to friendly Governments, or to play
a part in the United Nations peace-keeping force
as they have done in recent years.
Mr Stokes-When did he say that?
Mr HAROLD HOLT-That was in
February of this year. I have not quoted the
passages as a means of criticising the United
Kingdom Government. I believe that it is a
measure of the difficulties that the United
Kingdom Government has found itself compelled
to face that, despite these assurances
which I believe were given by the men who
uttered them in good faith and with good
intention, it had to depart so radically from
the assurances in the final statement it made.
We continued our discussions with representatives
of the United Kingdom Government
until the time of that announcement.
We have not sought to rake over the embers
of the past. As my colleague pointed out, we are devoting ourselves to the problems
of the future and we hope to have co-operation
with the United Kingdom and other
countries in the area.
Perhaps having made a passing reference
to co-operation with other countries in the
area, it is interesting to note that one passage
in my colleague's speech that attracted
some commendation from the Leader of the
Opposition was the passage in which he
spoke of the development of regional
co-operation for security and other purposes.
But this comes from the man who recently
told the world publicly on television that
Australia is the only respectable ally that the
United States has. That is not a very good
way to encourage regionalism amongst the
free countries with whom Australia is
co-operating in a military, economic and
civil sense. This is the man who demands a
process of regionalism.
There is another statement that I wish to
correct. The honourable member stated
quite directly that this Government was bent
on securing a military victory in Vietnam
regardless of all else and that we had given
no thought. or support to a political settlement.
Since I became Prime Minister I do
not think I have made a statement in which
I spoke about military consequences without
having commented that a military result of
itself will not be sufficient to meet the
situation; there must also be a political
settlement. I have said that with the full
knowledge of the problems we had in
Malaya, as it then was, over many years. I
know that if the military effort of our
opponent is defeated without a political
settlement having been reached, in the kind
of country with which we are dealing
guerilla activity can go on indefinitely. This
happened in Malaya. So we must work for
a political settlement, but we do not include
in that the kind of recognition that the
honourable gentleman and his colleagues
want to give to the Communist instrument
of the Government of North Vietnam. We
will negotiate with the Government of North
Vietnam, but he is demanding that the
Government of South Vietnam and the
Government of the United States recognise
the Communist organ of the Government of
North Vietnam in South Vietnam. This is
one of the points that the North Vietnamese
seek to have fulfilled before they will
negotiate. 
Before I left the aspect of the bombing,
I should have said that this Government
has as much access to informatlon as any
other government has, almost without
exception. We have almost as much information
as the United States possesses on
this mattr. Nothing has come to our knowledge
that would warrant us holding the
belief that there would be a reasonable
prospect of negotiation if only the bombing
were to cease. If the North Vietnamese
want a negotiated settlement, there are
many ways for them to make their wishes
known. All possible avenues have been
explored by us. The honourable member for
Brisbane ( Mr Cross) said that there have
been many occasions in recent years when
the United States could have sought a peaceful
settlement. I think he said that some
forty countries in all have sought to achieve
some sort of peaceful negotiation. So the
avenues for negotiation are there f the
North Vietnamese want to follow them. I
know of nothing that has emerged during
the period of the dispute that would suggest
that the North Vietnamese are ready to
negotiate. Now let me come to the present policy
on Vietnam of the Australian Labor Party,
if we can find it. I introduce my remarks
on this point by quoting from the policy
speech made by the honcurable member for
Batman ( Mr Benson) during the course of
the last election campaign. It reveals the
background to developments inside the Australian
Labor Party in its decisions on
foreign policy since then. I quote him as
having said:
The Labor Party's Federal Conference last year
removed the clause from the Party platform which
said Labor would honour all existing treaties. The
Labor Party now did not recognise international
security treaties. This is not the time for Australia
to break her treaty ties but it is the time to
strenthen them and to stand by any nation wishing
to remain free.
I have quoted that passage because I have
in my hand the text of the decisions taken
at the recent conference of the Australian
Labor Party as they were handed out to the
Press. Without going through the full document,
I take the summary that appears at
, page 2 of the roneoed copy. I do not think
anybody opposite will challenge its
accuracy. The report states:
Satisfied that the war in Vietnam does not
Involve any obligations for Australia under
ANZUS, SEATO or the United Nations
charter-I pause there to remind the House that South
Vietnam was one of the protocol S: ates
mentioned in SEATO. I concede that the
legal point could be taken that there was
no obligation, but it was not so remote
from the consideration of the SEATO
powers as this statement would imply.
Secondly. I point out that under ANZUS
we are linked with the United States of
America and with New Zealand. Can it be
seriously argued that the policies that I
shall be outlining here as they appear in
this document have no bearing on the
strength of our alliance with the Americans
under ANZUS? For example, could an
Australian government which withdrew its
troops, having virtually served an ultimatum
on the United States, look with the
same sense of security to ANZUS in the
future as we feel we are able to do today?
Having interpolated to make that comment
I go on to read from the document:
and does not ascist the Vietnamese people to
determine their own affairs-
Apparently they are to be determined for
them by the Government of North Vietnam:
and that no threat to Australian security from
China is involved-
My colleague dealt with that in his own
paper, as I did briefly during question time
today: the ALP seeks primarily to bring the war to a
conclusion. To do so, the ALP on achieving
office will submit to our allies that they should
immediately cease bombing North Vietnam,
recognise the National Liberation Front
as a principal party to negotiations,
transform operations in South Vietnam into
holding operations thereby tr avoid the involvement
of civilians in the war, cease
the use of napalm and other objectionable
materials of war and provide sanctuary
for anyone seeking it.
Should our allies fail to take this action, the Australian
Government would tlen cos: der that. It
had no alternative other than to withdraw our
armed forces.
No wonder the former Leader of the
Opposition said that this was in essence what
he put to the electors on the last occasion,
but here it is put more strongly in the form
of an ultimatum to the United States. Just
as in the North West Cape matter the policy
of the Labor Party was to serve up a set
of conditions which it knew would be
unacceptable to the United States, this is its
policy again. Time will not permit me to 
go at any great length into these particular
matters, but let me, without speaking at too
much length on the situation of Vietnam,
remind the House of this.
The fighting primarily involves the Vietnamese,
of course, but this is no civil war.
In 1954 a fourteen-nation conference at
Geneva agreed that newly independent
Vietnam should be separated into two parts
-North Vietnam for followers of Communist
leaders and South Vietnam for those
who wanted another way of life. Since then
the two parts have gone their own ways-
North Vietnam as a typical Communist
dictatorship. The war against South Vietnam
is directed from Hanoi. The National
Liberation Front is a creature of Hanoi.
After partition the Vietnamese were given
an opportunity to move north or south, and
so select the type of government they
wanted. Less than 100,000 went north, to
become subjects of the Hanoi Communist
regime. Ten times as many-almost one
million-fled from the Communist dictatorship
to South Vietnam. Yet we are now
told that this is a nationalist movement, that
all we are doing is interfering with the
normal nationalist processes inside this
particular country.
Those who heard the honourable gentleman
will recall that he made a great deal
of the state of Congressional and Senate
opinion in the United States. Again I can
give some facts which I think will be rather
more persuasive to this House. I suggest
that it would be difficult to obtain more
convincing evidence of Congressional support
for the President's policies than the
votes taken in March this year in both the
Senate and the House of Representatives in
Washington on the supplementary Bill on
the military budget relating to the war in
Vietnam. In the Senate the voting was 77
in favour of the Bill and 3 against. In the
House of Representatives the voting was
385 in favour of the Bill and 11 against.
We are parliamentarians. We know the
significance of voting figures. When I am
told that half the senators and a great proportion
of the Representatives of the United
States are against what the present'administration
is doing, I throw those figures in
the teeth of the honourable gentleman.
Unfortunately, in the United States as in
this country, minorities can be very vocal
and the mass of people can be much less vocal if they are in support of the Government's
policy. Some of those vocal
minorities will form part of what I have
to say now before I conclude.
Yesterday when we were dealing with a
question in relation to the collection of
funds for the Vietcong or the National
Liberation Front I said that there was a
species of psychological warfare being
waged in this country, as indeed it is being
waged in the United States, and that I
thought we should be made much more
publicly aware of this than we are at the
present time. I want to give the House a few
manifestations of this. I start with a reference
to the Association for International
Co-operation and Disarmament. I do not
need to go into detail about this organisation.
Our colleague who was then Attorney-
General, the present Minister for Immigration
( Mr Snedden), mentioned it in this
House on 3rd September 1964. But it is
rather interesting to recall that in March
this year the executive of the New South
Wales Branch of the ALP decided that:
ALP members can no longer associate with the
AICD and directs allA LP members of this organisation
to resign
But the Federal Executive of the ALP,
chaired by Senator Keeffe, who, I understand,
was unanimously re-elected recently
President of the Party, ruled on 30th March
1967 in Canberra that the NSW Branch had
exceeded its authority in proscribing the
AICD. I understand that in July Senator
Keeffe and the honourable member for
Yarra ( Dr J. F. Cairns) spoke at a protest
meeting organised outside the United States
Consulate in Melbourne under the auspices
of this organisation, a meeting which has
been described as an all night vigil. It was
the Victorian arm of the AICD which sponsored
this meeting.
The August mobilisation committee was
set up by the Association's New South
Wales' division to conduct the annual
Hiroshima Day celebrations. The committee
was obviously carefully selected to involve
as many groups as it could in the Vietnam
protest movement. It would appear to me
that as a tactical move Communists were
exclude from the committee but were active
in organisational matters. August mobilisation
includes certain members of the clergy,
academic students, Youth women, professionals
and trade unionists. A new feature 
of the demonstration this year was a short
religious service before the march.
There was an overseas speaker at this
demonstration, a Dr Takman. Let us consider
Dr Takman. He is the chief medical
officer of the Child Welfare Board of
Stockholm city. He is a member of the
Swedish Communist Party and is currently
on its central committee. In 1950 he was
refused admittance to the United Kingdom
to attend the Sheffield Peace Congress.
Early this year he visited North Vietnam
to gather medical evidence for use at the
Russell tribunal which, as honourable members
will be aware, sat in Stockholm in
May. He has also attended various other
Communist Party conferences and has participated
in other activities concerned with
Vietnam. Since September 1966 he has
been a Communist Party member of the
Stockholm City Council. These facts are all
ascertainable. I am surprised that honourable
gentlemen opposite have not asked
me why we admitted him to this country.
A business visa was issued to him on 3rd
August. In his application he explained that
the object of his visit was mainly scientific
and that he was engaged in a social
and medical study of Swedish gypsy
minorities for Upsala University. He said
that for this purpose he needed direct information
about aboriginals and other
minorities, particularly in Australia and
Japan. I referred a little earlier to a meeting at
the Princess Theatre in Melbourne which
was addressed by the honourable member
for Yarra. The meeting was held after an
Hiroshima Day march under the auspices
of the same body. A number of organisations
connected with the peace movement
joined in the march and the subsequent
meeting. A television programme showed
the march. I did not see it but I have been
informed-I think reliably-that the representatives
of the Victorian Branch of the
ALP carried a large banner and that several
members of the Monash University Labor
Club carried Vietcong flags. That was one
occasion on which members of the ALP
apparently were not too unhappy to associate
with members of the Monash University
Labor Club.
It may be felt that many people associated
with the bodies to which I have referred are well meaning people. I have
no doubt that many of them are. I am
sure that at least some of them have no
knowledge of the use to which they are
being put by background influences. In
order to give the House an idea of the
nature of the organisation to which I am
referring, I have in my hand a quite scurrilous
sheet issued-it is so endorsed-by
the Queensland Peace Committee for International
Co-operation and Disarmament,
608 Ann Street, Fortitude Valley, Queensland.
It is an attempt to poison the minds
of Australian people in relation to the proposed
visit by American servicemen to this
country under the rest and recreation programme.
As honourable members can see,
it has on its cover a picture of a young
lady partly clad. The text alongside the
picture refers to the worry that Australians
will have about their womenfolk on the
arrival here of United States servicemen.
On the other side of the sheet is what purports
to be a genuine report bur I question
very much its authenticity because it bears
no authentication, no date and no source
reference. It purports to be an account of a
rape committed on a twenty year old Vietnamese
girl by four United States servicemen.
This sheet has been circulated as
poisonous literature by an organisation
which has an aura of respectability and
attracts to it the eminently worthy people
to whom I have referred.
I place in a rather different category the
activity here in Canberra today of the International
Committee of Conscience on Vietnam.
I make no allegation in relation to
the background or the attitude of mind of
the people associated with it. I have no
doubt that they are well meaning people.
I suppose that many members of this Parliament
were given a copy of the little
pamphlet that they were distributing. The
emotional quality of the pamphlet I think
can be illustrated by this quotation from
it: We, who in various ways have assumed the
terrible responsibility of articulating the fuman
conscience, must speak or, literally, we should
expect the very stones to cry out.
I would like to say that there are people
who have a conscience in relation to Vietnam;
who have a conscience in relation to
aggression, terrorism, oppression subversion
and the other crimes that have been com-
mitted in the name of a national liberation
-front. By way of antidote I shall quote, with
the full authority of the writer, a letter I
have received from the Reverend Colin
McLean. Mr James--Why did the Prime Minister
refuse to see the church leaders?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable
member for Hunter will cease interjecting.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I wrote very
politely, I can assure the honourable
gentleman, to the Reverend Alan Walker
who had asked me to receive representatives
of the organisation. I explained the reasons
why I could not do so.
Mr James-Why did you refuse to see
them? Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable
member for Hunter will restrain himself.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I said in effect
that I had carefully read their pamphlet
and that it was evident to me that a very
different interpretation was placed by the
sponsors of the movement on events in
Vietnam and the courses which should be
followed in relation to them. I said that
while I had studied their views it was quite
impracticable for me, or for that matter,
any senior Minister to see all the people
who had views to express in relation to
Vietnam. However, I paid them the
courtesy of studying what they had to say
and of writing to them.
Mr James-But you refused to see them?
Mr HAROLD HOLT-Did the Leader
of the Opposition see them?
Aft Jamnes--Yes.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-That would not
surprise me. I wish now to quote from a
letter I have received from the Reverend
Colin McLean, who is the minister of the
Hughesdale Congregational Church at Oakleigh
in Victoria. He writes:
I write to disassociate myself from that vocal
group of clergy who are opposed to your Government's
policy in Vietnam.
Lately I received a letter from an ' International
Committee of Conscience on Vietnam', inviting
me to take part in a demonstration outside Parliament
House on Thursday, 17th August. I deplore
this demonstration.
The growing number of rallies and demonstrations
of a semi religious nature, in our country,
which play into the hands of international Communism
is alarming and is not representative of
the majority of Christian people. The letter referred to ' an amazing consensus
among Christian leadership around the world in
opposition to the Vietnam war'. This simply is not
true: many of us realise that if Godiess Comnmunism
is not halted, the ensuing bloodshed and
suffering in the world will be far greater than that
being inflicted by our forces in Vietnam. We too,
want peace, but only peace with honour and
justice, and which guarantees the great freedoms
and Christian heritage we enjoy.
You have our prayers and support.
I have quoted that letter to show that other
views are held around this country than
those to which we have had to listen.
Mr James---Did he sign the letter?
Mr HAROLD HOLT-Yes, and the
honourable member may read it if he wishes
to do so. Not only did he sign it but he
authorised me, when I asked if I might do
so, to give it full publication. The final
reference I make is to the document
' Ramparts', which no doubt has reached
many honourable members. I will not discuss
it in detail because its bona fides have
been attacked, I think convincingly, by
others. Mr James-Is it a Communist paper?
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable
member for Hunter.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-It was released
in thousands during the Corio by-election
campaign by the Liberal Reform Group,
so styled. I mention it, not in association
with any other organisation, but as an
illustration of the processes of psychological
warfare which are designed to confuse and
perplex the people of this country and to
destroy support for the policies of the
democratically elected Government of this
country. Unlike the Labor Opposition, I
am in the happy state of being able to stand
here tonight knowing that there is not one
member of the two Government Parties
which provide a record majority behind
me who does not support the Government
in its policy on Vietnam. I feel it my duty
in those circumstances to bring home to
the Australian people that these processes
which are poisoning the minds of the people
and creating disquiet in their minds are
processes which are designed to weaken
Australian support for policies which the
people at a democratic election have
endorsed in their Government. I believe
that we have heard-the Leader of the
Opposition today give expression to policies
which I suspect are by no means entirely 
tasteful to him, but which have merged
from a conference which senior members
of the Party have described either as an
endorsement of what they presented at the
last general election or as a move leftwards
from where they were before. I say that these things, too, can only confuse and perplex
the Australian people, and it is a
responsibility of the Australian community
as a whole to have a clear and plain understanding
of what is put to them by spokesmen
of the Opposition.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH OOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



FOR PRESS PM. NO. 83/ 1967
ASSISTANT GCVERNMENT W/ HIP
The Prime Minister, Mr Holt, advised the Joint
Government Party meeting this morning that Mr Kevin Cairns had
accepted his invitation to succeed Mr D. J. Killen as Assistant Government
Whip. Mr Holt said that Mr Killen had asked to be relieved
of these duties. Mr Cairns has represented the Queensland seat of
Lilley since 196-?. During the current Parliament, he has acted as the
Government Whip's assistant on a number of occasions.
CANBERRA, 23rd August, 1967 



25AUG 1967
' k IS RR'
OSAKA EXPOSITION 1970
Text of Statement made to Parliament by the Prime Minister,
Mr Harold Holt on 23rd August, 1967
In response to an invitation from the Government
of Japan, Australia has indicated . ts decision in principle to participate
in a world exposition with the theme " Progress and Harmony for
Mankind", to be held at Osaka from March to September, 197C.
This will be the first exposition of this kind to be
held in Asia, and the Government's decision has regard to Australia's
increasingly close relationships with ksia and with Japan in particular.
The exposition is to be similar in character and concept to EXF-O 67
at Montreal, at which Australia has a highly successful presentation.
It offers the opportunity for us further to portray to our friends . n Asia
and indeed to the world at large Australia's way of life, our achievements
and aspirations. The Government has not yet reached any decision on
the nature or scale of Australian participation at Osaka. These aspects
will be studied in tile light of the experience of our participation in EXPO 67 



FOR PRESS: 31 AUG1967 FM. No. 25/ lc7
REVIE.. COF STRIP T3GY IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
The Cabinet Committee on Foreign Affairs and
Defence today continued : ts comprehensive review of Australia's future
policy and strategic role " n South-East Asia.
The main elements of the review are the ' mplicati ons
for Australian defence policy of the British plans for withdrawal from
East of Suez and the Australian contribution in Viet Nam.
Today's discussions were of a preliminary nature
and did not nvolve the taking of any specific decisions. The implications
of the British decision require a fundamental reappraisal of our role
in South-East Asia. They are extremely complex and will require
considerable time to work out. As well as studying these for ourselves,
we intend to talk to other governments about them.
There are certain short-term aspects arising from
Britain's plans. These are mainly of a logistic or other technical nature,
and have already been under discussion at the Service level. But the main
implications are longer term.
A number of more immediate matters were also
reviewed today, including the state of the Vietnam war, which remains the
most immediate and urgent defence preoccupation of the Government.
The meeting considered the assessments given by the American envoys,
Mr Clark Clifford and General Taylor.
Present at today's meeting were members of the
Cabinet's Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee, Service Ministers and
the Defence Committee. Other meetings will1 be held as necessary.
CANBERRA, August, 19c7.
BACKGRCUND NOTE The Defence Committee referred to -n the last
paragraph ( in addition to the Cabinet Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee',
comprises the Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, the three Service
chiefs, and the Secretaries of the Frime Minister's, External Affairs and
Defence Departments, and the Treasury. 



FOR PRESS: 86/ 1967
DEATH OF LORD BJRUCE.
Tribute from the Prime iEinister,
Harold Holt.
Stanley Bruce died with honours thick upon him from
a long life of eminent achievemrent.
It was an active life that wion him distinction as
a soldier, as a parliamentarian, in public service and in the
academic and sporting fields.
He was an Australian statesman who kept Australia's
name high and respected in whatever he did. But he earned
recognition outside his own country as a statesman of the
world. He will be remembered as one of Australia's most
distinguished Prif.-e M . inisters; as our first President of the
League of Nations; and as our first citizen to be made a
Member of the House of Lords, where he established himself as
a spokesman for Australia's interests.
His wide--ranging vision was always directed to
practical ends. The : V1orld Food Council, the British Finance
Council, the Australian Loan Council and the CSIRO exemplify
the practical bent of his statesmanship.
In mourning his passing, Australia honours the
memory of his many notable services with appreciation and
gratitude. CANBERRA. 29th August, 1967. 



FOR PR ESS: P. M. No. 87/ 1967
DEATH OF LORD BRUC.
Tribute from the British Prime Minister,
Viñ r. Harold Wilson.
In a special message to 1r. Holt this week-end,
the British Prime Einister, HHra. r old ailson, said;-
" 11Y COLLEAGUES AND I HAVE JUST H2IARD &gt; ITH THE
GREATEST RLGW1LT OF THE DEATH OF LORD BRUCE OF
HE AS A STATS1'; MT -a-HOS-SERVICE TO AUSTRALIA AiI1) TO
THE CO!-ON ALTH ~ ILL BE LOiNG TVI~, IK~/ EDED BY ALL HIS
' IANY FIEDS III RITAIN. -WCAILNL P ARTICULAR ALL
THAT HE DID ? IER' AS HIGH COriv: ISSIONLR AND AS A COLLEAGUE
DURING ' ORLD -IAR TVIO. I PERSONALLY ; flOR'ED CLOS* LY ITH
HIM FOR FOUR L1O:' THS AT THE FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
ORGANISATIOr CONFERENCE IN WASHINGTON IN 1947 AND
MiiEKBER JLLL H11 PRACTICAL AND II,'. 1GINATIVE APPROACH
TO THE PROBLEMS OF D-4VEFLOPING COUNT"" LS. HIS DEATH
WILL BE DE-FLY F7LT.;'
CANBERRA 29th August, 1967. 



R Is
CHAMBER OF MANUJFACTURhES
A7-NNUAL DINNER, SYDNEY, N. S. W. L I BR A9
AUGUST, 1967
Main points from speech made by
the Prime Minister, Mr. HaroldiTlolt
Developments since , iorld_'\' ar II
Since the second world war thereo has been a
tremendous surge of development which has completely
transformed the Australian economy.
iiany of you will have little difficulty recalling
the days when it was said " Australia rides on the sheep's
back". There was some important mining activity and an iron
and steel industry. But in the main, manufacturing was still
confined to food processing plus some embryo industries
struggling to penetrate the local market.
There was a time when the tag " imported" appeared
to mean " superior". The pos,_ ibility of exporting manufactured
goods would have been regarded as rather fanciful in those
days. In the two decades since, Australian primary
industry has progressed to a point where it is one of the
most advanced and diversified in the world; it is highly
productive with perhaps the only obvious limit to its
potential being the barriers it meets in marketing its
products overseas. This development has stemm--ed largely from the
application of capital and improved technology a
development in which secondary industry has had a large
and important role to play. Improved machines and
fertilisers combined with the skills of our farmers have
combined to make these adva-nces in primary industry possible.
The massive mineral discoveries of recent yeors
not only offer gi eat new sources of export earnings but they
will provide new sources of power and the prospects for the
development of a great new range of processing and manufacturing
industries. They are also calling for many products of
secondary industry, for mining on the scale envisaged in this
country today is a highly inechanised, capital intensive
operation. Once we got settled down after the immediate
post-war period, Australia's manufacturing industry made
rapid progress. For some, old traditions die hard, but I
think it is fair to say that in this period the old tag
" imported is better" was laid to rest. Dfanufacturing
quietly and efficiently went about the business of supplying
a wide range of domestic needs, and a whole new range of
consumer durable industries appeared to meet the demands
of rapidly improving standards of living which put
refrigerators, washing machines and other appliances into
almost every home and added an ever-growin' stream of
motor cars to the roads.
The Lord lyayor and Yr. Askin might, of course,
have mixed feelings about some of the blessings engendered
by the latter item. I recall here Henry Kaiser's aphorism
" problems are opportunities in work clothes' ( quoted at
the Queensland alumina opening early this month). And all
these things demanded great quantities of the products of 
the more basic secondary industries such as iron and steel
and these in turn responded with a tremendous development
and expansion which can be seen so dramatically in the area
from Newcastle to : i', ollongong and at Whyalla.
Australia now has a very wide range of manufacturing
industry with over 60,000 factories employing about 1.3 million
people. This is some 28% of the work force, a proportion which
is higher than that engaged in manufacturing in Canada, France
and Japan and little lower than that in what are truly the
great industrialised nations of the world. For instance, in
the United 63tates the proportion of the work force employed
in manufacturing is 29%.
Dut these bare statistics, important though. they
may be as indicators of industrial progress, do not reflect
the impact that manufacturing industry has had on the lives
and well-being of millions of Australians.
If I may again revert to the immediate post-war
period in the first post-war census, that of 1947 the
Australian population was about 7.6 million, today it stands
at 11.7 million. In those days the wrork force numbered
3.2 million, today it is about 4.7 maillion. But this
accumulation of people and of workers did not come, as it
were, only from our own resources, many came to us from
overseas. Our continuing immigration policy has since
become an absolutely basic factor in the economic life of
Australia. But these new settlers needed jobs and they -wanted
homes and all the things that go with them. IW. anufacturing
has delivered on both sides; it has provided the goods and
the jobs. Some 26% of the work force currently employed in
manufacturing industry are migrants. In the period ' 1947-61
the male wiork,, force employed in manufacturing rose by
270,000 of whom 222,000 or 82% were people who arrived in
Australia since 1947.
Pe rcentage o Jirants of
otl Emplonmnt-in rcent age
Car and ship-building industry 28
Petroleum and coal products 36
Extracting, refining and founding
of metals 33
There is no overall figure for th-e iron and steel
industry, but the employment of migrants is relatively highin
some cases as much as
In the vollongong-Port T,' embla area where there
has been so much manufacturing development, 28,/ of the
popjulation is overseas-born. For these people the development
of industry in Australia is not just a statistic, it is a
vital part of the way of life they have come to emnbrace in
this country. I talked earlier about the importance in this
country of the production of consumer goods and particularly
consumer durables. But we must remember that Australian
industry is not merely concerned with producing washing
machines and T. V. sets, important as these things are in
our standard of living. Australian manufacturing industry
is much more varied and sophisticated than many people
realise. 
vle produce items many people associate only with
the most highly developed industrial economies. For example,
radio telephone equipment and transistorised airways beacons
are made here. 4e have developed some unique and complex systems
like the Jindivik pilotless jet, the Ikara anti-submarine
missile and the 1! alkara anti-tank guided weapon, products
which have been produced not only for our own use but for
export to overseas markets including the United Kingdom and
the United States.
In one of the most advanced fields of technology
space exploration we are making a contribution. At ioomera
Australia has one of the largest land rocket ranges in the
world 1,200 miles long over practically uninhabited country.
Currently we are engaged, in conjunction with the United States
and B~ ritain, in investigating problems of re-entry from heights
exceeding 500 miles.
New Opportunities for Trade
If I may re-enter the early post-war period I would
like to say a few words about exports of manufactured goods.
In this field also there has been notable growth flowing from
manufacturing industry. I mentioned a few moments ago some
items which we export to the United States and Britain but
these were only a few of many items which we now manufacture
and export to countries from which wie once imported the same
types of goods. But we cannot rest upon our laurels, we must
continually be on the lookout for new markets for the products
of all types of industry.
4e are all aware of the remarkable development of
our trade with Japan. For the three years prior to the signing
of the Trade Agreement with Japan our exports to Japan averaged
,134m. In 1966-67 we exported goods valued at .588m. to Japan,
an increase of 339% during the period of the , gAr eement.
But the importance and attraction of the Japanese
market should not be allowed to lead us into neglecting other
areas of Asia where trade prospects are bright.
Our exports to other Asian countries last financial
year exceeded .416m. or 13.7%-0 of our reported exports even
though our share of the total market available in Asia was
small. In Malaysia, for instance, wie supplied about of
the market. It is true, of course, that much of the available
market is virtually closed to us because of the nature of the
products required or other economic factors, but there is a
vast, largely untapped market for Australian products in the
Asian area. As economic development in Asia proceeds opportunities
will increasingly arise for alert Australian exporters. Taiwan
is planning an iron and steel industry and Australia will have
an opportunity to supply iron ore. In South Korea, the
extraordinary economic growth there has created a potentially
large market for Australian foodstuffs and materials, machines
and machinery. In some countries such as Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos 
trading opportunities may presently seem to be small but if
there can be stable government and peace in the region these
nations will11 progress to a stage wNh: re improved trading
possibilities will arise.
Zconomic rehabilitation in Indonesia would open up
another dimension of trading opportunities.
Tariff Policy lvuch has been written lately about tariffs and
tariff policy and some people have been demanding that the
Government should state just what is its tariff policy.
Some years ago Sir Robert Dlenzies, in his 1962
inaugural John Storey memorial lecture excellently summarised
the Government's position. I would like to quote to you the
relevant parts of his statement on that occasion:-
" The Tariff Board is a purely statutory body, created
by the discretion of P1" arliament and, indeed, subject to
the control of Parliament. In this sense, it is an
instrument of policy and in no sense its master.
It has, however, been recognised by successive governments
that, though what I have said is constitutionally true,
it is important that, for international as well as
domestic purposes, the Tariff Board should possess a
high measure of independence, that the integrity of
its advice should be preserved, and that it should not
be subject to any form of" day-to-day political
instruction.
I accept and maintain these propositions. Yet the Tariff
Board, our principal adviser on import duties, cannot
sensibly be expected to operate in a completely detached
intellectual vacuum. It must have in its mind some
standards or policies by which to teat the cases
presented to it.
For a long time it has acted on the principle that it
should recommend tariff protection only to " economic and
efficient industries'. But that principle was, and is,
itself an expression of Government policy. Of late,
indications have been given on behalf of my own. Government
that the princi-,) e needs extension, and that the Tariff
Board should have in its mind thne national economic policy,
meaning by that the national economic objectivcs, as a
whole There are certain features of national economic policy,
which I do not regard as the subject of party controversy,
which cannot be ignored by any statutory body if the
nation is to achieve a dynamic progress, growing in
resources, population, employment, industry, and
international solvency. For a Tariff Board to ignore
their existence would be to detach its work from the
great stream of Australian development. ' This, I am sure,
it would not wish to do."
The tariff policy of the Government has been clearly
stated for a long time, and I reaffirm it to be that reasonable
and adequate protection will be given to economic and efficient
industry. The Government looks to the Tariff Board for advice
on whether an industry is economic and efficient. On a few
occasions they have been comparatively few the Governmen~ t 
has seen fit to say in the terms of reference to the Tariff
Board that its policy is to give assistance to a particular
industry, for example, copper production in remote areas,
crude oil production and production of penicillin. On these
occasions the 3oard is asked to recommend in its published
report its view of the best way to carry out the policy.
But outside of these, tariff protection has been
given to industry only following a finding by the Tariff Board
that the industry is economic and e ffici ent.
The policy does not include, as some peopl? pretend
it does, that every industry that seeks protection shall be
given protection. Industry is given protection if it measures
up as being economic and efficient.
There has been some talk of there being a " high
protection" policy. In truth, our overall level of tariffs
is moderate, and we do not use the quotas and other
administrative devices that so many other countries turn to.
And an important point is that tariff prot~ ction is not given
in excess of that recommended by thc Tariff Board after an
open public inquiry and report. The Government is bound to
this under the U. K.-/ Australia Trade Agreement.
Periodically there are claims that some definition
of the termns " econom-. ic and efficient" should be laid down.
This is a matter that has been carefully considered on a
number of occasions. ? ieteran industry is economic and efficient is a
matter of judgment, and it is a judgment that must take in
all the relevant circumstances of each particular case. There
is a wide range of isaes which can affenct such a judgment and
these can vary in emphasis depending on the circumstancc-s of
each case. The Government, rather than confine the Board to
thc limits of some definition which it may or may not be
possible to lay down, prefers to leave the question to the
independent judgment of the Board, taken in the lighlt of all
the circumstances. Finally, let me turn to the quite baseless charges
sometimes made about political pressure b , ing applied to the
Tariff Board and about its ind~ ependence being undermined. I
take it that the adherents of this line don't build their case
on the few occasions when the Government does not accept the
recommendations of the Board. Afterall, responsibility for
tariff policy and tariff-making rcsts with the Government and
the Government alone. The Tariff Board's role is advisory.
On the same grounds their case could hardly be based
on the Government's desire that the Board should, in offering
its advice, have regard to the general objectives of overall
Government policy. Nor could it rest on the few occasions when
the Government considers it necessary to tell the Board in a
reference that it has a particular line of policy.
The truth is that the ' 2ariff Board has complc: te
independence in conducting its inquiries. It is expected to
exercise its independent judgment in offering advice to the
Government. If the Government wants the Loard to take note of
a particular line of policy it says so in public, in the
reference. I know of no hidden instructions, no secret messages
and no surreptitious pressures. M~ y colleague the Mviriister for
Trade has confirmed this. If the people who harp on that line
believe they have knowledge to the contrary they should bring it
out into the open and it will be investigated and answvered. 



FOR PRESS: No. 88/ 1967
VISIT OF MR. EISAKU SATO,
PRIMEV MIINISTLR OF JAPAN
Statement by the Prime Kinister, Ivr. Harold Holt
I have pleasure in announcing that the Prime Minister
of Japan, Mr. 2isaku Sato will make an official visit to
Australia in October.
Ir. 3ato is expected to arrive in Canberra on
Wednesday, the 11th October. Before leaving Australia for
New Zealand on Saturday, 14th October, he will also make
visits to Melbourne and Sydney.
' hile in Canberra, Mr. iato will have discussions
with me and other members of the Government on matters of
mutual interest to both countries.
ilr. Sato will be accompanied by his wife. His
broad itinerary will be as follows:-
W\ ednesday, 11th October
8.30 p. m.
Thursday, 12th October
All day
Friday, 13th October
Miorning Afternoon
Saturday, 14th October
11.00 a. m. Arrive Canberra from overseas
Canberra Leave Canberra for Melbourne
Arrive Melbourne
Leave Pelbourne for Sydney
Arrive Sydney
Leave Sydney for New Zealand
CANBERRA August, 1967. 



FOR PUESS: O Q
C 3 1 AUG 1967
LI B R P PIA. NO. 84/ 1967
TENTH ANNIVE~ RSARY OF MALAYSIAN INDEPENDENCE.
The Prime Minister, 1vir. H~ olt, today ( 31st August)
sent a message of congratulations to the Prime MIinister of
Malaysia, Tunku Abdul Rahman, on the tenth anniversary of
M~ alaysian independence. Mr. H-olt also recorded the message
on tape for broadcasting over Radio L.-alaysia.
Here is the text of the Prime ! h-inister's message:-
" It gives me great pleasure on this your tenth
anniversary of Independence, to convey congratulations
and good wishes from the Australian Government to the
Government and people of Malaysia.
Malaysia's achievements in the decade since August,
1957, have been a source of admiration for the world
at large, and especially for those of us who live in
the region of South E~ ast Asia. The Australian
Government has particularly a'imired the political
tolerance which marks the 1alaysian scene, and the
way in which democratic institutions have taken root
and developed.
There were those in 1957 who feared that on Independence
Malaya would face a period of political instability with
intense rivalry and conflict between the various
communities which went to make up the Federation's
population. The record, however, has proved otherwise.
The unfolding story has been one of internal peace and
communal harmony.
Over this ten year period you have also been able to
withstand the challenges of internal communist insurrection
and external pressures. This has required strong
government and the development of Malaysia's own
machinery for internal security and defence. Your
present stability is an eloquent testimony to the
energy and skill you have devoted to these tasks.
In the economic field the years of independence have
witnessed the greatest progress in your country's history.
A scientific approach to rubber planting and tin
prospecting has ensured increasing returns from these
mainstays of the Mlalaysian economy. Industrialisation
schemes have been proceeding, and significant strides
have been made in agricultural diversification. Your
land settlement scheme is widely regarded as a model
for other developing countries.
I am sure that the progress made in these last ten years
has instilled confidence and enthusiasm for tackling the
problems which lie ahead. IMalaysians and other peoples
in South -'' 0ast Asia, and that includes Australians, live
in an exciting era. Despite the conflict in Viet Nam
and the continuing pressures and tensions to be found
within the area, my colleagues and I believe that a new
Asia is emerging, in which we can all find hope for a
brighter future. f': y own feeling is that the next century
will be the century of Asia. There is, at the very least,
the encouraging prospect of spectacular advance. In this
our two countries will have a significant part ' to play.
May you continue to prosper in the years ahead, in peace
an% hapiness." 1
CANB3ER-2A9 31 ; t Augus t, 1967 



CRR PRP RES S7SEP1967 RA PMNo. 89/ 1967
BRITISH GIFT TO CANB. RRA
Three Australian and three British firms of architects have
accepted an invitation to participate in an architectural competition for the
design of the bell-tower to be built on Aspen Island in the central basin of
Lake Burley Griffin " n Canberra.
The bell-tower, which will house a carillon, to be made by
a British firm of bellfounders, is the British Government's gift to the
Australian Government to mark the Golden Jubilee of the founding of
Canberra on 12th March, 1913.
The Australam firms are
Messrs Cameron, Chisholm Nicol of Perth, W. A.
Messrs McKay, Cox of Sydney
Messrs Ancher, Mortlock, Murray Woolley of Sydney.
The British firms are
Messrs Ahrens, Burton Koralek of London
Messrs E1dred Evans Denis Gailey of London
Messrs Robert Maguire Keith Murray cf Richmond,
Surrey.
The competition assessors will be
Lord Holford, a past Fresident of the Royal Institute
of British Architects.
Mr John Overall, Chairman of the National Capital
Planning Committee in Canberra; and
Mr Eric Bedford, Chief Architect of the British Ministry
of Public Building and V. orks.
The announcement of the winning design is expected to be
made in April, 1968. As the Prime Minister stated in February this year,
the winning design will be put before the British and Australian Governments
for consideration before being adopted.
CANBERRA, 1st September, 1967 



0
OPENING OF BUILDING CLENTRE
NEWCASTLE, N. S. d. 1st September, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Holt
Mr. Pinfold, President of' the Newcastle Master
Builders' Association,
YMy Lord M1, ayor,
1-r . President of' the Senate,
Parliamentary Colleagues, I see them around me, and
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I feel it a very happy coincidence that my visit
here for the opening of' your Festival should also have
enabled me to join with you in this very significant function
here this afternoon. It is typical of' the enterprise which
has brought Niew. castle to the position of' being sixth largest
urban area in Australia, only surpassed by five of the capital
cities of the Commonwealth, that you've again demonstrated a
sign of your enterprise in this fine building and the admirable
community purpose that it will assist in serving.
Home-building for Australia is, of course, one of'
our most vital activities, not only be:-cause we are a homeloving
people but there is no community in the world which
can point to a higher percentage of home ownership than is
to be found here in Australia. Seventy per cent of the
dwelling units occupied in Australia are occupied by people
who are either owners of them or are in process of acquiring
them as they pay off what is due on them. And that puts us
in the forefront of all the countries of the world in this
connection.
0 of accommodWNae tiaolsno ofe njanoyy tchoeu nthriyg hefsotr wshtiacnhd arrde coorf dsa vacialn abbielity
ascertained and we have a rather higher rate of population
growth than most of the other industrialised communities of
the world. Indeed, if the United Stateu or the United Kingdom
were to be required to build houses on the scale that our
population rate growth makes necessary, it would be found
necessary in the United States to build another half million
homes a year and in the United Kingdom another 180,000 homes
a year. This will be an indication, I am sure, to us all that
we do require a great proportion of our national resources,
our manpower, our skills in order to carry out our home-building
programme required by our growing population.
Currently homes are being built at an annual rate
of 115,000 homes. Jow it is not merely desirable that homes
should be built, it is no less desirable that they should be
built to serve those who occupy them with comfort and
convenience in pleasant surroundings at economic cost and with
good standards of materials and construction. This, of course,
is where your own Home-Building Information Centre can make
such an imp~ rtant contribution.
I am sure that many citizens of this growing city
of Newcastle, one of the most rapidly growing urban communities
of the C." ommonwealth, will take value and assistance from the
service which this Building Centre can provide. I hope that
the achievements of the building industry already well
exemplified in this city will be added to usefully by the
service that this centre can provide. In the knowledge
that it will bring an important amenity, an important 
additional information service to the people of this city I
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your colleagues on what
you are doing in the way of a public-spirited contribution
of this kind and I hope that for many years this information
centre on building will serve the citizens of Newcastle, as
indeed it serves the larger interest of the Australian nation.
And so, Sir, it is with pleasure that I have accepted
your invitation to be here formally to declare this building
open and I hope that I shall successfully execute my formal
undertaking of unveiling the plaque and of opening the door
to the building, opening the door to the centre.
I now formally declare the building centre of
Newcastle, New South Wales, officially open and congratulate
the Raster Builders' Association on its construction. 



OPENING OF MIATTARA FESTIVAL
NEW~ CASTLE, N. S. YI. 1st September, 1967
Speech by the Prime bMinister, Mr. Harold Holt
My Lord Mvayor,
Alderman Bell,
The Princess of Mattara, 1966, my greetings, and
ly congratulations in advance to Princess of Mattara, 1967,
1Vdy greetings to all the Distinguished Visitors present, and
To you, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Boys and Girls,
This is for me quite a unique occasion because although
it is your 7th Lattara Festival it is my first and I am delighted
to have the honour of being with you, ( I understand with the duty
of formally declaring the Festival open), and I hope I do not
forget to do so by speaking too long, but also to be with you on
what represents part of what has occurred to me to be a very
balanced diet of living as one finds it here in this rapidly
developing city of Newcastle. Because you now rank as the sixth
urban area in point of size in the Commonwealth of Australia,
only surpassed in size by five of the capital cities and I suspect
that you will catch up with one or two of those before you are
O much older. . Earlier today as I flew around the city with the Lord
1ilayor, I found him very knowledgeable, pointing out to me all
the important developments which were occurring here. I could
not fail to appreciate the significance which Newcastle occupies
in the life of this great Commonwealth of ours. Not only are
you ranking sixth in numbers but in industry, significant in the
diversity of your industries both of the engineering industrial
type and on the land with a wine industry which commands a
premium price around Australia. You have here one of the most
critically important areas of the whole of the Commonwealth of
Australia. But proving that men and women do not live by bread
alone or even wine alone you have developed this happy Festival,
this Mattara Festival, the Mattara I understand signifying the
hand of friendship, and if there is one characteristic which we
regard as typical of the Australian, it is his capacity for
mateship, for feeling at one and happy with his fellow citizen,
and your Festival here tonight appears to symbolize that spirit
which we prize so much in our national character.
Now it is not my purpose to dletain you at length when
you have such greater attractions in the young ladies I have
been seeing backstage to come before you and accept the judgment
of those who have been set that difficult task.
But I do ex -press the hope that just as the years which
have gone have marked a most remark~ able development in Newcastle
that here you have deve-boped a civic and community spirit which
I believe not only puts a stamp of individuality upon your
community but marks you out as one of the great thriving
enterprising areas of the nation as a whole.
Because with that you have also developed this festive
balance to the otherwise more sombre and serious aspects of life,
I hope that this 7th Mattara Festival will prove to be the most
distinguished, the most festive, the most happy of all those which
have made up the series. And it is with good wishes to you all,
the hope that you can go on as a community from strength to. strength
cihn rno soenrxianaf uan. 1ha~ rasl o thefthatSILpoytincots
an he same time orma y ec. areesi open. 


FOR PRESS: A P. M. No. 91/ 1967
ANZAC FELLOWSHIP SCHEME
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
It gives me special pleasure to announce the establishment of an Anzac Fellowship Scheme, designed to stimulate the exchange of ideas and information between Australia and New Zealand, and generally strengthen the bonds of understanding between the two countries.
This brings to fruition a proposal I put forward when I visited New Zealand earlier this year. I suggested the provision of two scholarships each year to enable New Zealand men and women to visit Australia for study,travel and observation. The idea was warmly welcomed by the New Zealand Government and it was agreed that they would provide reciprocal opportunities.
The scheme provides for New Zealand citizens who have shown outstanding ability and achievement in such fields as primary and secondary industry, commerce, education, the arts or the public service, to be given an opportunity of furthering their professional experience or training in Australia. Australians will have similar opportunities to visit New Zealand under arrangements being announced by the New Zealand Prime Minister today.
The terms and conditions of the Anzac Award in each country have been worked out, and details of the scheme, together with application procedures, will be released shortly through the Department of Education and Science, which will administer the scheme in Australia. An Australian Committee will be set up to recommend Australian candidates for New  Zealand   awards and to make the final selection of New Zealand candidates for Australian awards.
The Anzac Fellowships will be awards carrying distinction for those selected. It is hoped that they will attract candidates of a high calibre who,in the course of their fellowships, will gain not only experience of benefit to their own careers but also a deeper understanding of the achievements and problems of their host countries.  
CANBERRA,
3rd September, 1967.


FOR PRESS: PM. No. 90/ 1967
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Following my recent announcement that the President of the Republic of Italy, Signor Giuseppe Saragat, accompanied by the Foreign Minister, the Honourable Amintore Fanfani, will make a State Visit to Australia this month, a programme of functions has been arranged in the centres he will visit.
The President is due to arrive at Fairbairn RAAF base, Canberra on the afternoon of 25th September. He will visit Melbourne from 27th to 29th September, and Sydney from 29th September to 1st October. He will leave for overseas on 1st October.
Although the visit will necessarily be restricted to only six days, every effort has been made by Commonwealth and State authorities to ensure that the President has an informative and pleasant stay in Australia.
In Canberra there will be governmental talks with the Foreign Minister, Signor Fanfani.
A summary of the President's Canberra programme is as follows:
25 September
Afternoon :
President Saragat and party arrive at RAAF Fairbairn at approximately 3. 10pm to a ceremonial welcome. After being greeted by the Governor-General, Lord Casey and the Prime Minister, the President leaves for the Hotel Canberra ( where he will stay.)
Receives a formal call from the Prime Minister.
The President leaves for Government House where he will be the guest of the Governor-General and The Lady Casey at dinner.
26th September
Morning:
The President lays a wreath at the Australian War Memorial, receives Heads of Diplomatic Missions at Government House.
Afternoon :
Attends luncheon given by the Government of Australia. At this function, the President will make a major speech in reply to addresses of welcome from Government and Opposition Leaders.
The President makes a sight-seeing tour of Canberra.
Evening :
The President receives the Leader of the Opposition, Mr E. G. Whittlam.
Dinner given by the President of Italy at the residence of the Ambassador.
27th September 
Morning:
The Fresident is farewelled at RAAF Fairbairn by the Governor-General, Lord Casey and the Frime Minister, and leaves for Melbourne.
CANBERRA,3rd September. 1967
NOTE: The programmes for Melbourne and Sydney will be released by the Premier's Departments in Victoria and New South Wales.


 4th September, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Federal President and Colleagues of the Liberal Party:I think I must first thank you, Mr Federal President, and indeed congratulate you for that splendid introductory speech which launched our proceedings here earlier today.
You have made my task a lot easier in that you have outlined the essence of our policy in relation to Viet Nam. You have spoken of what we as Liberals contributed to the growth and security of Australia and you have introduced, I think in a most valuable way, the important difference which~ exists between this organisation and that of our principal parliamentary opponent, the Australian Labor Party. I think it might be useful if I were to begin what 1 have to say to you all tonight by picking up what the President had to say in relation to this matter because, really, it is fundamental to political life in Australia.
For many years there has been a disposition on the part of the Press and quite a few other people to take the view that there is no effective opposition to the Government and therefore we are the opposition and we'll keep them on their toes and sharpen them up. But in more recent times, because there's been a change of leadership, they've been projecting our opponents as a viable alternative to the Government which I have the honour to lead as your parliamentary leader.
If that is the case, then 1 repeat tonight what I said when I spoke on the external affairs debate after my colleague the Minister for External Affairs had given us one of the most valuabl:) e and articulate presentations Of Australian foreign policy I believe has ever come before the National Parliament. I said that if people are seriously going to regard the Austral: ian Labor Party as a viable alternative to the Government I lead, then we all have an obligation, the Press, the Parliament and the public to probe the policies offered as alternative national policies as searchingly as they probe the policies of this Government and it is proper that our policies should be probed. After all, we have the destiny of a great nation in our hands and what we decide as a government affects the future course of the nation, and affects the well-being of the men, women and children of this country.
It is important not only to recognise that but to consider it when you are discussing alternatives because this is not a mere matter of an expression of resentment or pique or displeasure. When a party s voted out of office or a government is and I certainly don't expect to be if people understand the issues clearly enough before them but when a government is voted out of office and some other government replaces it, then that's more than just the changing of the guard, it's a changing of the whole course of the national life, the stream of the national life.
Arthur Calwell once said if he came into office, he would change the face of Australia and the present leader of the Australian Labor Party, although he's not quite so blunt about it, if you take the trouble to analyse his policies, has his own quite radical treatment for this country, quite different from the treatment that a Liberal-led Government has given to it. I say that, not because I feel we can't offer very much better but because I think it is vital that people realise that we offer very much better.
And so the first thing that I stress tonight is that we offersomething very much better in the way of a structure of political organisationand something very much better in the way of the principles which shouldguide a political organisation. You opened on this note, Mr President, veryproperly, and you mentioned that there had been the disposition on the partof some commentators to regard the Labor Party as being pretty much inthe same sort of organisational picture and status as ourselves at this time.Well, some of those who claim to be political analysts and even leaderwriters can err. It has become important and more significant when I amsure quite wittingly because he's much too intelligent a man to do itunwittingly the Leader of the Opposition presents the position in quite adifferent light from that which actually exists.In an interview on " Four Corners" on 5th August, Mr Whitlam,referring to and I quote his words " The first change in the Federal structureof the Labor Farty since 1915" said this: " It was a very great structuralchange and it puts us ahead in our structure of any of our competitors".Later in the same interview he said" It can never be said again that our party doesn't trust the parliamentaryleaders who have to express its policies to the people. All the leadersare now part of our Federal structure. There's no other politicalparty which supports them in this way. The Liberals, for instance,say that the Federal leader and the Senate leader can be on their topFederal body but we have four Federal leaders and the six Stateleaders. Thatand Mr Moore, interviewing him, interrupted at that point " And still the36 faceless men, Mr Whitlam?"" Well, whether they are faceless or not, the point is this that theparliamentary leaders are full partners in the process of makingpolicy on the Federal conference, and the four office bearers in theFederal Party are full partners in administering policy. This meanswe have completely removed the stumbling block. We're ahead of allAustralian parties and we are comparable to overseas parties.Well, let's just analyse that for a moment or two, Mr Chairman.Dr Cairns made a statement on 6th August at the Hiroshima Day Rally whichhe addressed " Conference decides policy not the Leader or Deputy Leaderor any other member. What makes up the Conference of the Labor Party?There's a fundamental difference between Liberal and Labor policy determination.There is a fundamental difference in approach. If you re-examine ourobjectives, you'll see set out in our official Federal platform that ourobjectives are for an Australian nation dedicated to political liberty andfreedom and dignity of man, with Parliament controlling the Executive andthe law controlling all and looking primarily to the encouragement ofindividual initiative and enterprise as the dynamic force of progress.Well, in those words you have the fundamental difference betweenthe Liberal Party approach and that of the Labor Party. After all, when youtalk about political liberty and the freedom and dignity of man, there's notmuch dignity nor political liberty about a situation in which the elected / 3
-3representatives of the people are told, most of them without having any saypersonally in the decisions taken, Just what they are to do. There' s notmuch elemnent of Parliament controlling the Executive and the law controllingall when the parliamentary representatives from the Australian Labor Partyare controlled by the Conference and It's true they've added 11 people to theso-called 36 faceless men. But it is that Conference which controls theParliament and this, of course, is where we part company in a fundamentalsense. The fundamental difference betwen the two parties is that theLiberal Party from its inception and I say this as one who has been a memberof it from the time of its foundation has recognised that the electedrepresentatives of the people decide policy. They accept responsibility forit and they are answerable to the electorate for it. That doesn't mean, ofcourse, that we don't give the weight you would wish us to give to what comesup to us through this Council or through the valuable committees of thisorganisation, our joint Committee on Policy, our Women's Committee, ourRural Committee and the other Committees which look at aspects of policy.But you have never claimed either the right nor have you eversought to impose the will of a non-elected body of people upon the electedrepresentatives of the people. And we must make this abundantly clear to thepeople of this country. It has a very practical application as I shall come totell you in a moment.in contrast, the Labor Party policy is not decided by the electedrepresentatives of the people but by a Federal Conference made up of the36 faceless men plus four ex officio members of the Federal Parliament plusthe six State parliamentary leaders and a delegate from the Northern Territory.This body has no responsibility to the electorate, it is not answerable to itand the rank and file of members of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Partyhave no direct say themselves in policy determination. But although theyhave no direct say, they are subject to expulsion if they do not accelt theConference decision as completely binding. We had an illustration of thisin the shape of Sam Benson.Sam Benson didn't defy them on policy but he wanted to belong to aDefend Australia Committee, and they didn't like this Committee because itbelieved we should be in Viet Nam, that we should have a stronger alliancewith the United States, and that we should be doing other things for thesecurity of Australia. So although he wasn't able to determine the policy ofthe party nor even have a say in it in the essence, they expelled him.Now I say this has a practical application for a significant part ofAustralia in that we have a critical by-election coming up shortly i~ nCapricornia. I had the pleasure last night of meeting our candidate, FrankRudd, and I would think I had hardly ever met a candidate who inspired meimmediately with more confidence than Frank Rudd. If there was ever a manfor the seat and a man for the job, 1 think Frank Rudd is that man and I wantthis party to know that despite all the by-election influences that operateI'm not going Into the Capricornia by-election to hold the same vote that wegot at the general election. Some people would think that was a good enoughgoal. We're going into Capricornia to win, and to win Capricornia with a manwho will give to that part of Central Queensland an effective voice not onlyon the outskirts, with no say in policy himself, but able to provide an effectivevoice himself inside our Government party. That's the kind of man I believeCapricornia needs and that's the kind of man we hope to elect in Capricornia. / 4
-4Now, his opponent Dr Everingham I have no knowledge of himand I make no comment about him other than this: That he can be no voicefor Capricornia in the sense of making policy inside the Labor Party becausehe's not one of the chosei I h., thar it', dt-td-hbr õ : andt are thesupreme masters of policy in the Australian Labor Party.Mr Piesident, you spoke today about the importance of theSenate elections and I'd like to dwell on that for a moment or two because 1,too, believe it to be a critical and important election. If the Australianpeople truly believe in democratic government and are prepared to give arecord majority to the Liberal Party and its coalition partners In the Hoqseof Representatives, then they could hardly have conceived that the will of theelectorate as so registered was going to be frustrated by the Senate. Well,you may say up until now it hasn't been frustrated. The fact of the matteris that we are in a minority in the Senate, partly and quite significantly fromthe ill-furtune of the death of former colleagues. But surely it runs againstthe common sense to give a record majority in the one House and then say," Yes, but we are going to tie your hands behind your back in the other one".And that is where this Senate election becomes of quite critical importancefor us. Now, you mentioned earlier today, Mr President, that in order tohave a working majority there, we must win five out of the six EA ates at thiscoming Senate election and I'm amazed at your moderation. We've got towin six out of six States at this coming Senate election because that is whatI believe represents the will of the Australian people on the issues for whichwe stand. The issues haven't changed since the last general election, as Ishall hope to show in a moment or two and if we are to carry out the will ofthe people as expressed to us less than a year ago, then we've got to have aneffective working majority in the Senate.I wonder how many speeches I've heard from Labor men on theother side of the House saying that the House of Representatives should bethe supreme Court of Appeal of the Australian people. They even wanted itto override the High Court in its decisions, and as for the Senate frustratingthe will of the popularly-elected majority in the House of Representatives,well, earlier Labor men that I've heard speak on the subject you'd havethought this would have poisoned them before they'd utter such a sentence.And their platform this rather handsomely produced version you'd find allyour old friends inside there if I had time to refer to them. This stillcontains a proposal for the abolition of the Senate and this presumablyremains a fundamental tenet of Labor belief.But could you, having regard to that, imagine a more cynicaluse of the Senate than is being made at the present time by the AustralianLabor Party? They're even seriously debating on Wednesday whether theSenate should virtually reject the Budget of this Government. They know theconstitutional position about the relations between the two Houses. But weget these despatches through the Press as to whether Mr Whitlam can carrythe day or not, he presumably resisting the pressure to have the Senatereject the legislation the postal legislation which is an integral partof our Budget. And it's not. ut on some great ground of principle that he'siesittng thfs:,-it's put on the grounds. that it may be a bit too early for theLacxor ' Prty to go to an election. I repeat, one could hardy imagirie ina Farty that is pledged because these men. areb all pledged to carry out theplatform of the F arty pledged -to abolish -the Senate, mrecynical disregardof principle in the use that -they are making of it. Well it's for us to
capture the Cenate and we are encouraged by the enthusiasm and thestrength of support which we have had illustrated to us here in the courseof these discussions. You have mentioned, Mr President, various pdicy items, thatwe've quickly given effect to our election undertakings and you spoke ofthe significance still of the Viet Nam issues. I'm not going to talk in anydetail tonight about the domestic items because if time permits I hope tospeak on the Budget tomorrow and I shall therefore be dealing with thedomestic economic situation in rather more particularity than is possibletonight. But ore of the difficulties as a party is that it is so long sincethere was a Labcr Government in office that a generation has grown up whichhas no mental picture of what the situation was like. '*. hen we're attackedon this aspect of policy or that aspect of policy, they don't stop and askthemselves, " But what did the Labor fellows do when they were there?"Well some of us have been there long enough to remember what happenedwith the Labor Party, and I'm only going to rattle off quite quickly to youa few figures because you're an intelligent enough audience and experiencedenough to apply these to the situations.One of the things thrown at us by our opponents is, of course,that we're a heartless bunch, concerned only with the wealthy supporters ofthe Liberal Party, and having no appealing warmth or sentiments towardsthe less privileged members of our community. So I just cite a few pertinentfacts about that. The last year of Labor Government to which I can direct yourattention is 1949 and their Budget for 1949-50. They provided in that yearfor national welfare $ 105. 6M. In our last Budget we provided 071M, roughlyto 6 times as much, and even allowing for movements in prices, a verysubstantial increase in real standards. And it's not only the amounts thatare being provided but again, because we're so often chided with neglectingthose less privileged members of the community, it's worth recalling theinnovations. Pharmaceutical benefits, well, it was hardly worth mentioningin 1949-5C. It was then an expenditure of $ 6IC, CCO, while this year it's2M. There was no provision for medical benefits in those days. Thisyear $ 45. CM. There were no pharmaceutical benefits for pensioners.WVe are often abused because vwe don't do enough fr the pensioners; theyhad no such scheme. V/ e s-ent ' 31. PM this year on pharmaceuticalbenefits for pensioners. Medical services for pensioners they had nosuch scheme. We provide $ 16.Now this is in a period when we've also had the tremendousobligation of building our defence forces and the security of this countryIn 1949-5' they provided $ 1C 4M; this year we are providing 112. _ 2M.And as another practical test, which I would just like to mention to you,although the proportion of our total Commonwealth expenditure on defence hassoared from 1949-5C from 3 per cent of the Budget to 17. 25 per cent of theBudget, the amount we provide for social welfare has not only increasedin the dimension I have mentioned, but it's a bigger percentage of a verymuch bigger Budget 18.7 per cent of the Budget in 1949-5C compared with2C. 55 per cent of the Budget this year. I will not dwell on these facts orgive an elaborate statement of our domestic policy. My colleague, the / 6
Treasurer has done that In a way which produced, I think, a more favourablereaction to the Budget than I can recall in my time in public life.At this stage of the Parliament, new policies are not expected.We announce at election time the sort of things we are proposing to do.WUe said we will do this and more and in the three years that we run ourfull term, as I expect us to do, We shall certainly be doing a great deal more.But you don't when you get. a good show running we've been thn~ re now fora considerable number of years you don't alter the basic pl ; zon whichyou have been elected and which you have gradually brought into eftect.You don't expect Broken Hill Pty. Ltd. or General Motors -Holden orColonial S11ugar or one of these big successful companies suddenly to throwout their board of directors, completely reverse their policies and hope toproduce the same satisfactory results for their shareholders. I ho'e thatthe Australian people have got enough sense to realise that this is not theway to better standards for themselves.V/! eli, Mr President, Tj did speak of the difference in fundamentalapproach to the relationship between elected representatives of a Parliamentin this organisation and in the Australian Labor Party. But since Mr Whitlammade such great claims about the outcome in Adelaide I think we might goon and look a little further as to what actually did occur there. I don'tblame the Press for giving a new leadership a favourable run. This is fairenough, but at least let's be realistic and factual about it. What is happeninginside the Labor Party and I pointed this out to you on earlier occasions isthat since the split in the party, it's been in the grip of the left wing, which inearlier periods of our political history was merely a rump of the LaborParty. Now they find Mr Thitlam a very convenient medium because he'sgot a personable front for them. But he's still in the grip of the Left Wilngof the party, as they have been at some pains to point out to us since theAdelaide Conference.I remind you that at that time they dealt with the Viet Nam situationand this, of course, for reasons which we all well understand, has tremendousimportance for this country. Tremendous importance first because Viet Namitself means so much to the kind of world in which Australia is to live, inwhich we are to co-operate, in which we are to trade. VWe are fighting toresist aggression against a small country but the issues Eke very much largerfor us in that we are fighting to preserve the security of LSouth East Asiaas a whole. And we sent troops away in two world wars to Europe notbecause we were directly threatened by the outcome there but because wekn ew that the kind of world which would exist unless we succeeded inresisting that aggression would be an unacceptable world to us.W,, e won the election virtually on the Viet Nam issue because peoplewere able to understand that not only was Viet Nam threatened but the wayof life we stand for is really threat ened by the outcome in that country.I have no doubt that we have successfully resisted the aggression and thatin the course of time we will be able to build in Viet Nam itself the sort ofco-operation that has been such a marked feature of the periphery of Asiaover recent years.These countries which formerly were in a state of economicdisability are now finding their feet. And in my last tour around thesecountries in Taiwan, Korea, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Malaysia, in allthese countries were seen the dividends that have flowed already out of theresistance to Communist expansion in South Viet Nam and we need toremember that. / 7
-7-But no less importantly for Australia is the significance of thisfor the strength of our alliance with the United States of America. And whileat some point of time Australia may hope to be completely self-reliant it'snot going to be in my lifetime and I doubt if it will be In the lifetime of anybodyin this room. For as long ahead as we can see our security is bound up withthe strength of the alliances we can make with like -minded people who havethe same view of the kindof world they want to live in as we do.Now, what does the Adelaide decision mean in this connection?Mr. Whitlam has been pretty subdued about this one because he knew the lastpolicy was an election loser and he's been trying to provide some sort of agloss to it. He was the moderate man, fighting against the forces of the leftand overcoming them successfully. That's if you haven't read what Mr. Calwellsaid about the outcome of the Adelaide conference. He claims it is completevindication for his own policy.If you read what Dr. Cairns says about it, he says that the positionwas ambiguous before the Adelaide conference but now they have a clear andconcise policy, and Dr. Cairns certainly believes it to be in principle identicalwith the policy they had at the last election. Well you may say that these arerather left-wing types but I came across an article by Allan Fraser, 23 yearsa Labor member of the Farliament and A llan wrote an article in the Sydney" Sun", 3Cth August in which he said this, " Many interpretations have beengiven of this revised version. In my view it does not differ in any essentialfrom the authorised 1966 version. What it succeeds in doing is to improvethe form of the statement to make it more explicit less easy to twist in meaningby quotation out of context. nd that's precisely also what Dr. Cairns said.He said it's now in a clear and concise form.Then we have the Victorian State Fresident of the A. L. Mr.Brown, commenting after the Adelaide conference ( Melbourne " Sun" of 14thAugust'. He says the Labor Farty throughout Australia is moving further tothe left. This had been shown at the Farty's Federal Conference at Adelaidetwo weeks ago. The trend of the Federal Conference was leftwards. Inspeaking on the 3KZ Labor hour, he said the conference had strengthenedpolicy on the Vietnam war. It had attached a meaningful set of objectives towhat basically was and remains a " troops out" policy. Possibly we could saynow that it is a policy of " troops out and the unless, of course,is in one sense even more offensive to our allies than the policy put forwardby Mr. Calwell at the last election. What the Labor Farty is now saying tothem is that unless you accept these conditions, and they are conditions whichour allies have made clear are unacceptable, then we are going to pull ourtroops out. And in the same breath they'll tell you that they believe in theAmerican alliance and this is fundamental to Australia's security.Well if you were in America. and you found that an AustralianGovernment had served you up with an ultimatum and had then pulled itstroops out while your troops were left to do the fighting you'd be scratchingyour head about this so-called ANZUS Treaty and wondering just how muchsignificance ought to be attached to that or to your obligation under it. Makeno mistake about it, fundamentally the foreign policy of the Australian LaborFarty in relation to Vietnam and the other matters we thrashed out at thelast election remains unchanged, and the gloss that the leader chooses to puton it doesn't conceal the fact that these hard-headed men I've quoted who arepillars of the Farty and have been with it for years, they've put theirinterpretation which can't be challenged as a statement of realism from theoutcome of what went on at Adelaide.
C) UI don't need to srneak at any length as to why we are in VWetnamI've already given you some of the reasons but T would like to say a word,because ' It's highly topical, about the elections in Vietnam and I'm not goingto pass judgment on the detail of the conduct of the elections.W~ e had four expert people there ourselves in addition to our ownvery capable Embassy staff who were closely watching this. The interestingthing to note from what has appeared so far and I make no commentabout the people who were elected and those who were not is theremarkable fact that in a country where, as I understand it, voting is voluntary,where they knew they were subject to threat and in personal danger, therehas been a better overall poll n these presidential elect~ ons than there waslast year in the constituent assembly elections.Last year the number registered to vote was 5, 2808, CO, thenumber who voted 4, 274, 3c0rl. G 8,7 . We thought that was a pretty remarkablevote in the circumstances. I think, Mr. President, I am correct in sayingthat it's a higher percentage of people voting than you would find in the UnitedKingdom or the United States of America and they haven't the same threats totheir person in those countries as they have in Vietnam. This time the numberregistered, 5, 853, 000 is nearly 6-00, 000 more than last year. The number whovoted. 4, 863, . again nearly 600, CUM more than last year, apercentage of 83. 7 against 0GJ0. in the last election. I think that's a veryremarkable performance.There were eleven sets of presidential candidates, and it wasn'tjust the military pair that stood for election. The civilian candidates got agood poll which doesn't suggest that the people were intimidated and unableto register their own opinions effectively. There were 4200 candidates for theSenate at the same time for 6C Senate positions. That again suggests thatthere hasn't been a bad effort in getting the basis of a democratic institutionestablished in that country despite the physical threats that were directedagainst them. I've mentioned that the number who actually voted had risen from3 to 83.7. The comment given to me is that this success is all the moreheartening in the face of the concerted Vietcong campaign of assassination,intimidation and sabotage to di-srupt the elections thus proving that they werea farce as Hanoi radio and the Front radio have been proclaiming. Now, youknow we tend to take rather too literally some of the propaganda that'sdirected to us on these matters because if you accepted what comes to youday by day in your reading through the press and the press are giving uswhat they believe to be a newsworthy comment you could get a very differentpicture of the realities.Look at the situation here in Australia. We have in the Liberaland Country Parties 109 members including the House of Representativesand the Senate members. We had 110 there were 11C0 at one stage whosupported our policy in Vietnam. There was one defection from the Senate.That left us with 109 who support our policy in Vietnam. And we retain 109who support our policy there on the Government side. If you were to takewhat you read in the press about the United States, Whitlam claimed thathal the members of the Senate were critical of the Government policy there.Well the real test of criticism is how you vote when you have to put the chipsdown, and in the United States Senate there was a proposal that they reducethe defence appropriation, which of course is very largely directed to Vietnam,by and 5% involves 34!' billion dollars. The vote was 03 to 6 against.Later the Senate voted for the total appropriation of 70 billion dollarsto 3 and I ask you to carry those figures in your mind when you read what/ 9
9-Senator Morse says or Senator Fuibright says or somebody else says. Afew vocal minority elements can make a lot of noise as we discovered inthis country. What really counts is a solid feeling of the Parliament andthe people as a whole.When I hear people say that there's been some waning of supporton the Vietnam issue I confess that since the election we perhaps have notbeen as vigorous in pressing this matter as we might have been because wethought the Australian people spoke in decisive terms. I believe they stillfeel in decisive terms but if they're fed a daily diet of the sort of stuff Ihave mentioned, well they scratch their heads and wonder really what'sgoing on. I think if we can give them the facts of the strength of supportas revealed in these Parliamentary figures in the Parliament of the UnitedStates, in the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in the strengthof electoral support given in Vietnam, war-battered Vietnam itself, thenpeople will have a fresh view of the importance and significance of what isgoing on in Vietnam. Now the final thing I comment on, Mr. President, because ithas some bearing on this, is the legislation we have been dealing withrecently about the National Liberation Front and proposals that money becollected to give aid to it. The Leader of the Opposition says that I'vebeen the best supporter of these proposals because of the publicity I gaveto these misguided people at the universities. The fact of the matter isthat I kept out of this discussion for a considerable time. I exercised greatrestraint on it because, apart from anything else, I didn't want to magnifyit and I knew this was the objective of these boys in the universities. Theywere looking for publicity, but when the Australian people indicated theirresentment and this got to the point where those young men fighting for usIn Vietnam felt that there was a strength of movement in Australia seekingto aid those against whom they were fighting, then we took a very differentview of the matter. And the first comment I made in the House was, " Idon't want to magnify this issue, but there are two factors which make itimportant. The first is and I haven't got time to elaborate on this tonightbut if you care to read what I said at the time in tho House you'll get somedetails on it I said, " The first is there is a campaign of psychologicalwarfare in this country directed against the Government's policies inVietnam. And all sorts of well-meaning people are manipulated for variouspurposes to provide a fund for these activities. I've given chapter and versein certain directions and perhaps there'll be more as time moves on. Andthe second thing is that our boys in Vietnam are entitled to know that theirGovernment is going to do whatever it can to prevent anybody giving materialaid to their enemies". Now our Labor opponents have sought to divert attention fromtwheisr eb yn oh odlidsitningc tuipo nt hbee tfwacete nth taht ew tew otr amdaet tweritsh. CTomhemreu'nsi sbt eCenh innoa asse cirfe tth eabreo* utour trade with Communist C. hina. We have made our reasons for it clearlyknown. Wle believe that it is to Australia's advantage more than the advantageof either the economy or the people of China to do so. We sincerely believethat at some point of time there has to be an accommodation with CommunistChina, and that trade is one of the most potent -elements in helping to bringabout a utuality of interest. My colleague the Minister for External Affairshas pointed out that growth in imports by China from non-communist countriesis up now I believe to of their total imports and the higher it gets the morereluctant they'll be to interfere with their own economy by adopting courseswhich run counter to the views of the non-communist countries. We havebeen entirely frank and consistent about this but it's a very different thing
to set off deliberately to give aid to those who are fighting your own peoplein the fields. And, of course, our Opposition chooses to ignore this vitaldifference. Now, we come to this by-election and the Senate election. Iapproach them with confidence because I believe that if we can get over tothe Australian people there can be no doubt about the outcome in any ofthese political contests. If we can get over to them what Liberal leadershiphas meant to Australia in terms of the survival of this nation, the freedomof our people, the opportunity for their enterprise, the national growth ofAustralia in the years since we took office in ' 49, and if we can explainclearly to them what the alternatives are as set out, not in some glossyexplanation offered by one spokesman or other, but in the platforms of theAustralian Labor Party, then the issue should be abundantly clear. It isbecause you people here from your respective States, you, Mr. President,to whose vigorous leadership the success of the last year has owed so much,my own able colleagues in the Cabinet and the rest of my Parliamentaryparty and all those branch workers who give us such loyal support in thefield, it is because we can all contribute to a better Australian understandingthat not only do I have confidence in the future of the Party but I believe wecan lead this nat ion to the greatness that we all believe to be within ourreach.



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
9PEECH 14 SEP 19J67ZBY
Le?~
The Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
09
APPROPRIATION BIll ( No. 1) 1967-68
SECOND READING
( BUDGET ' DEBATE)
rFrom t&amp; e ' Parliamentary Debates', 5 September 1967]
Mr HAROLD' HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister) [ 8.* 27)-The honourable member
for Bendigo ( Mr Beaton) is an amiable,
pleasant-mannered fellow, and he has
done his best tonight to lash himself into
a fury through the written script that he
has just given us. But I do give him full
marks for brazen effrontery because in the
earlier part of his address he told us that
the members of his Party were in a
position to amend a budget if they chose
to' do so. The honourable member knows
that not one in ten of the parliamentary
meiiib~ rs of the Australian Labor Party
has any say in the formation of policies
which are adopted and which the members
of the, Opposition are required to pursue,
like dumb, driven cattle, in this Parliament.
I would like to spend some time on
some of the extravagant things that the
hohourabli member said, but my own time
is* limited tonight. I hope that in the course
of what I have to' say I will cover several
of the matters to which the honourable
mirml~ er has directed* attention. I would like
1253/ 67 to deal particularly with some of his
references to social services and matters of
that kind.
Let me start by saying something about
those who are the spokesmen for this
regimented band who sit opposite us. First,
to do him the honour that is due to his
position of Federal President of the Australian
Labor Party, I quote Senator Keeffe.
It is only because he holds that office that
I think it desirable or appropriate to refer
to his statements, but when he happens to
head the body which decides the policies
which the elected representatives of the
people on the Opposition side of the House
have to follow he is entitled at least to
this nominal recognition. Long before my
colleague presented his Budget Senator
Keeffe said, as reported in the Melbourne
' Age' on 1st August: ' The Australian
economy is like a worn out motor vehicle.
The Government has patched it up here
and there but basically the economic
machine is no longer roadworthy'. I merely 
ask honourable members to note those
remarks and bear in mind that they come
from the head of the supreme policy
making body of the Labor Party. I then
ask honourable members to dismiss the
remarks from their minds as being completely
without entitlement to the regard
of this place, certainly as they apply to
the state of Australia as we know it at the
present time. But, of course, the Leader
of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam) had his
own comment to make. He professed to
find in the Budget no sense of purpose
or direction, no guide lines for national.
growth and no evidence that the Government
is prepared to take initiatives and
accept responsibilities in order to achieve
that growth. He asserted that the Government
is neglecting national development,
social services and the needs of the States.
Let us look at a few facts. It is not easy,
of course, to go back and compare what
a Labor government in office has done. It
is not easy to find from the professions of
policy what a Labor government would do.
If we look at Labor's printed platform we
see in its modern form a picture on the
front cover of the man of destiny. The old
car has been given a new coat of duco, but
the works are the same if we bother to
examine it. But even if we examine this
document we will find there is a gloss or
an interpretation of policy provided to suit
the audiences of the day-something which
differs very much from the precise statement
appearing in the printed document. So I
have to go back a long-way, but there have
been in this country, so far as national
politics are concerned, periods when a
Labor government has been in office, but on
those occasions the people of Australia have
quickly had cause to regret that Labor was
in power. And when the people have put
the Labor government out they have kept it
out long enough for another generation to
come along which has forgotten the kind of
government that existed earlier. So if I
want to show what a Labor government
would have done in circumstances corresponding
to those which exist now I must
go back far into the past.
Frankly, we on this side are getting a
little fed up with the humbug from honourable
gentlemen opposite who claim that they
have some monopoly of concern for the
less privileged sections of the community, who claim that only they have concern for
the pensioner, the widow, the children or
the repatriated soldier. They can make these
sweeping generalisations and these offensive
sneers, but what counts with the people are
the facts, and I have the facts. The last
Budget brought down by a Labor government
was in 1949-50. That Budget provided
a total of $ 185.6m for national welfare in
Australia. In this Budget we have provided
a total for national welfare of $ 1,071m. We
may talk about changes in the value of
money and population growth, but we still
, cannot avoid the proper conclusion that
there has been a very substantial improvement
in the real benefits conferred on those
people who are beneficiaries under the
National Welfare Fund.
We have just been chided about our
health scheme. What sort of health scheme
existed when Labor was in office? There
was a hospital benefits scheme of a sort. In
1949-50 Labor spent $ 610,000 on pharmaceutical
benefits. This year we are providing
in the Budget $ 75.2m for pharmaceutical
benefits. Under the last Labor Government
there was no medical benefits scheme. This
year we are spending in this field $ 45.8m.
Honourable members opposite weep their
crocodile tears about the pensioners. What
about the provision of pharmaceutical
benefits for pensioners? Not a cracker was
spent in this direction when Labor was last
in office, but this year we will spend
$ 38.1m on pharmaceutical benefits for pensioners.
Under Labor there was no medical
services scheme for pensioners. This year
in this area we have provided $ 16.5m.
I could talk about the aged persons
homes scheme, which is an innovation of
this Government. I could talk about the
liberalisation of the means test under this
Government. I could talk about the
improved position of the single pensioner,
whether man or woman, widowed or unmarried,
under this Government. All these
facets go to make up the whole: Labor in
1949-50 provided $ 185.6m for national
welfare, whereas we in this Budget have
provided $ 1,071m. We have been able to
do this because under our leadership the
economy has expanded and thrived. From
it, without wrecking initiative or preventing
people' from getting on with the job, we
have been able to provide an increasing
amount for the pensioners of this country. 
There is another practical test of the
Government's concern for national welfare
and that is the proportion of the Budget
devoted to social welfare. It must be borne
in mind that compared with 1949-50, we
have had to more than double the proportion
of the Budget devoted to defence. In 1949-
only 8.3% of the Budget was earmarked
for defence. That was the last Budget
presented by a Labor government. This
year's Budget provides 17.25% of total expenditure
for defence. But despite the
claims on us of defence, development, international
aid and education, in this Budget
we have provided 20.55% of total expenditure
for social welfare. This compares
with a figure of 18.7% provided for social
welfare when Labor was last in office. I
referred to our commitment in the field
of education. Relatively speaking, the
allocation for education in the last Labor
Budget was negligible. I concede immediately
that the Labor Government's last
Budget was very much smaller than today's
Budget for a variety of reasons.
But today we are making a larger percentage
of the total Budget available for
social welfare, and it is an infinitely larger
budget because we have been able to promote
the growth of the country enormously.
As the Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) has
pointed out, over the last 5 years we have
averaged, in terms of constant prices, an
increase of 5f% in our gross national product.
This figure has not been exceeded in
that period by any industrialised country
with the exception of Japan. I remind
honourable members that in the period to
which I have referred we experienced a
dreadful drought year during which the
increase in our gross national product was
of the order of only And still honourable
gentlemen opposite sneer at us and
talk about a worn out motor. Whom do
they think they are talking to? Do they
think they are addressing the fully employed
people of this country who know that no
other country has succeeded in maintaining
a level of employment so consistently
high as has this Government since it came
to office in 1949? Who has devoted such a
large proportion of the Budget to social welfare?
Who has been able to provide the
best defence set-up in the history of Australia
apart from a period of all out war?
The people are not fools. They cannot be misled by such specious nonsense as comes
from honourable gentlemen opposite.
I do not want to devote all of my time
tonight to these matters. The Leader of the
Opposition has found the Budget unsatisfactory.
He cannot find it extravagant and
unrealistic as regards promises because of
what was put to us from his side at the
last elections. He will not find in the Budget
the kind of bureaucratic plan that
gladdens his heart. He will not find a
detailed blueprint to predetermine the future
pattern of growth and structure of an
economy which can point to the kind of
record I have indicated. This Government
does not go in for that kind of thing. What
is to be found is a record of achievement
which most countries and most objective
observers applaud. He will find a continuation
of the ' sound and responsible policies
which have made our achievements possible
and which offer the best prospects of
further rapid progress in the future. He
acknowledges-we accept his acknowledgment-
that there is a fundamental difference
between the approach of this
Government and the parties that support
it towards the development of the nation
and the approach of the Labor Party. He
says that the Budget is highly doctrinaire,
expressing the old blind faith in the natural
superiority of private enterprise over public
endeavour. It is not the Government that
is doctrinaire in its approach. This is
plainly shown by our record. In the
Government's view the public sector and
the private sector each have essential and
complementary roles to play in national
growth. At times circumstances will call for
a faster expansion of public sector activities
than private sector activities and at other
times the converse will be appropriate.
Over the past few years circumstances have
made it necessary to give greater emphasis
to the public sector. The Government has
done this. Between 1962-63 and 1966-67
public sector spending as a proportion of
total spending increased from 19% to 21%.
In the past 2 years 44% of the increase in
employment has gone to the public sector.
But now, as my colleague the Treasurer
pointed out so convincingly, there is a need
to ensure that the private sector and particularly
private developmental activity is
given scope for greater growth. 
The Leader of the Opposition's speech
was directed almost wholly to decrying what
the Government has done and is doing,
and on this I have mentioned some of the
important facts. Defence is another element.
As our present defence build up began 5
years ago, we might well review briefly
what we have achieved in the economy during
this period, despite the diversion of
a very large amount of resources to
defence. The facts about the increases in
defence expenditure are well known and I
need not repeat them beyond observing
that the provision we are making for
defence this year is nearly $ 700m or 160%
greater than in 1962-63-5 years ago. What
has happened in other directions? Notwithstanding
this rapid build up in the defence
effort, the economy has kept growing at
a good rate and on sound lines and the
high rate of investment, both by the public
sector and the private sector, has been sustained.
Only one country, Japan, retains
more of its gross national income for capital
investment purposes than does Australia.
Exports have been rising strongly and our
external financial position has been kept
sound. Considerable improvements have
been made, as I pointed out, in social and
welfare services, and assistance to the States
has also been rising rapidly. I do not need
to go into all the figures because I have
a more important task tonight, and that is
to examine the alternatives which would
be presented by a government from the
other side of the House. Our aim is balanced
economic growth. We have achieved that
to an unparalleled degree in the last 5 years.
The Leader of the Opposition said that
the economy was barely rolling and had
been in a downswing in the past 2 years;
but he did not quote any figures on the
growth of the economy to support his
assertion. He did not because he could not.
I have already indicated to the House the
extent to which we have sustained the
growth in our national product over these
years in a more even way, despite a
drought, than almost any other country.
Mr Webb-Come on. Liven it up.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER ( Mr Lucock)
-Order! The honourable member for
Stirling will cease interjecting.
Mr Webb-I am trying to get the right
honourable gentleman moving. Mr HAROLD HOLT-I will get moving
all right. I am coming to the honourable
member for Stirling right now. I hope to
remind him where he stands. Honourable
members opposite sometimes chide the
Government on high prices. When we came
into office, despite all the controls that the
doctrinaire Labor leaders had been applying,
inflation was running at the rate of
just under 10% per annum.
Mr Duthie-That is an invention.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I shall give the
honourable gentleman the precise statistics.
I shall read a comment that a well respected
Labor authority, Professor Arndt, made in
the Chifley Memorial Lecture in 1956. He
said: S. it is high time Labor took the problem of
inflation as seriously as it has always taken the
problem of deflation and unemployment
Labor's record on this problem in its years of
Opposition has been lamentable
And it has remained lamentable over the
years that have elapsed since then. What is
the policy of the Opposition? It is not easily
ascertained because Labor has not been in
office for many years. The Labor Parry has
a document which purports to contain the
official platform and programme of the
Party but whenever members of the Party
are asked to explain it they give a different
interpretation. They were pinned down on
the subject of Vietnam in quite precise terms
the other day and decided on a policy of
troops out unless the United States accepts
cohditions which the Opposition knows to
be entirely unacceptable to that country.
The honourable member for Melbourne ( Mr
Calwell) claimed this decision to be a vindication
of his policy and the honourable
member for Yarra ( Dr J. F. Cairns) said it
was something that justified his position.
The decision was described by Mr Brown,
the State President of the Labor Party in
Victoria, as a ' troops out unless' policy. So
that is where the Opposition stands on that
issue. But where does it stand on its Socialist
pledge because I am dealing now with economic
issues and if Labor is the alternative
government the country is entitled to know
its economic policy. I understand the Leader
of the Opposition is unavoidably absent
tonight. I regret that because I would have
liked to say this to his face and I expect
to do so as time goes on. I will quote from
an article that he wrote. I do not think he 
will challenge its accuracy. This article was
published in the ' Australian' of 18th February
1967, after the honourable gentleman
had been appointed Leader of the Opposition.
The article is headed ' Labor and the
Future'. I would happily incorporate the
entire article in Hansard should anyone so
desire. In the course of the article the
Leader of the Opposition said:
There never was an age when socialism was so
nearly inevitable; there never was a country where
it was so necessary.
I ask the House to dwell on those two
sentences because there will be a lot of
receding from them at a later point. I will
repeat the passage:
There never was an age when socialism was so
nearly inevitable; there never was a country where
it was so necessary.
I remember the former Leader of the
Opposition, the honourable member for
Melbourne, saying publicly that he wanted
to change the face of Australia and the
present leader is reported to have said-
I think in a Chifley Memorial Addressthat
the intention of the Labor Party was
not simply to redistribute income but to remould
Australia. I do not know how many
Australians want the face of the country
changed or how many want the country remoulded.
The country is doing pretty well.
It has the high standard of progress that I
have mentioned, it has a happy people, and
it is increasing its standing in the eyes of the
rest of the world. Nobody who votes for
honourable gentlemen opposite in a desire
to remove this Government will be able to
say to us afterwards, ' We didn't know it
was loaded', because the Opposition has
shown that it is loaded. Anyone who cares
to study what the Leader of the Opposition
has been consistentlysaying over the years
will realise that it is in the tone of the
sentences I have quoted. In the same speech,
the honourable gentleman. continued:
Australia's danger is that it may acquire a sort
of ' socialism' in a fit of absence of mind, under
the uncomprehending glare of a Government whose
doctrinaire objections to what is happening become
more obsessive as they grow more irrelevant.
As units in the economy grow larger and become
more international and as society becomes more
technological and urban, so socialism becomes
more relevant and urgent. The forces which man
is unleashing in the world must be the subject of
public and not exclusively private decision and
control. Our social and political advance-the degree to
which the people, through their elected representatives,
control and fashion their own future-is
badly lagging behind scientific and technological
change. Democratic socialism is a philosophy about the
value of man.
I say Liberalism is a philosophy about the
value of man-the freedom, the opportunity,
the incentive, that can be given to
man. There is a fundamental cleavage
between the viewpoint of those who sit in
support of the Government-we cannot get
them all on this side of the House, but I
embrace those who support the Government
on these matters-and those who
support the Socialist doctrines opposite.
Public ownership and public control of the
economy are more than ever central to a
Labor programme for government. The
members of the Labor Party sometimes
plead the limitations of the Constitution.
But the Leader of the Opposition does not.
In the same article, he says:
The limitations of the Constitution are real.
They are not absolute. I have no sympathy with
an attitude which finds in the presumed limitations
of the Constitution an excuse for avoiding
the search for constructive, relevant and realistic
methods of applying our policy and attaining our
objectives. The honourable gentleman has indicated
where he stands. He will gloss it over, he
will blur it, he will fog it up, he will make
it impossible of discernment to a critical
audience. But there it is in plain black and
white. If that is not what the Opposition
stands for, what does it stand for? I would
like to have quoted from what the shadow
Treasurer said. He said that the Budget is
an engine for the redistribution of the
wealth of the community, which is only a
polite way of saying: We are going to take
from him and give to him or to her. Up
to a point, that is so. Up to a point, that
is what we do. I do not know any free
country in the world where what is produced
by the community is more fairly
and evenly distributed amongst the community
than it is in Australia. If anyone
opposite can point to a country where it
is, then let him point to it. What honourable
members opposite would do would be
to kill the productive forces of the community.
We realise the good sense of keeping
incentive alive, of encouraging people
with a willingness to take risks to put their
effort into the job, to hazard their savings 
in order to do something better for themselves.
We realise the importance of encouraging
capital, not just of domestic
capital, although 90% of our own investment
in Australia comes from our own resources,
but the capital of others who come here
and take the risks with us. Honourable
members opposite chide us about northern
development. I wonder whether they know
that at this moment projects are going on
in the north of Australia to the value of
S2,000m. Do they know that the rate of
population growth in the north of Australia
has been greater than in the south of Australia
over the last significant period of
years-I think it is the last 5 years-for
which I have statistics? They chide us that
there is not this development going on and
they say that private investment will not
undertake it. But this is what is being done,
and it is being done because we have
created the kind of climate in which people
who are prepared to take risks feel tnat
there will be a reward-a return for their
risks. We are told there is no Australian
equity in this sort of investment. Why,
from every $ 100 of profit we take $ 42.50
in tax. If any of the remainder apart from
what is ploughed back into further development
in the business is remitted overseas,
then we take 15%, or 30% o, according to
the relevant rate of tax, of what is remitted.
So we have. a very real practical potential
interest in the profitability of investment in
Australia. I repeat that the investment made
by our own people represents from 85%
to 90% of the total of the investment which
others from overseas are prepared to make.
It is because of that that we have had the
enormous growth in our national income
which has not merely enabled us to more
than double the defence provision of this
country over the last 5 years but which
has enabled us to go on steadily improving
the provision for development, the provision
-for social welfare and the provision for
international aid.
I feel that my colleague the Treasurer
is to be congratulated on bringing down a
Budget which has enjoyed a more favour-,
able national reception than any Budget
that I can recall in my public lifetime. He
has done that with a full consciousness that he is keeping alive the spirit of enterprise,
that he is giving encouragement to
incentive, and that he is building up a
national income from which our standards
are improved and from which our defence
effort can be strengthened and because of
which confidence in the future of Aus
tralia will be strongly sustained.
When the people of Australia know
these things, when they consider in far
more detail than I can give tonight, but
in the kind of detail which I hope honourable
members on this side of the House
will be giving in the period ahead, what
alternative is offered in terms of policy
by honourable gentlemen opposite, then I
do not think they will have any doubt as
to where they should turn. I can recall a
very respected Labor leader in this House
telling us years ago of Labor's attitude to
employment. We have sustained full
employment. I refer to the late Mr Chifley.
Mlr Curtin-The Prime Minister called
him a Communist.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I have never
called him a Communist in my life, but I
know people in the honourable member's
Party who helped to bring him to an untimely
end. The honourable member should
not stir up these old embers. I have
been in this place a long time and I know
the factors which operated on some former
Labour leaders. The late Mr Chifley,
dedicated as he was to full employment,
made it clear that Labor's view on full
employment was not the voluntary movement
of people from job to job. He pointed
out that there might have to be transfers
of whole communities. I can remember his
saying something to this effect-and
honourable members opposite will not
challenge it: ' You need not think you are
going to sleep in the same bed every night
or look at the same Town Hall clock. You
will go where a job is provided for you.'
We have sustained full employment in this
country on a voluntary basis. We have
enabled people to take the jobs of their
own choosing and -the economic climate
has been so right that not only have they
had the jobs but the great mass of new
settlers who have come to us have been
quickly placed in employment and added
to our strength.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR~, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T, 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
ABORIGINALS-GOVERNMENT POLICY
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 7 September 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister)-by leave-Mr Speaker, I wish
to inform the House of certain decisions
that -the Commonwealth Government has
taken in respect of Aboriginals following
the referendum in May of this year and
subsequent discussions with the States.
Before doing so, may I briefly remind
honourable members of the two changes
that have been made in the Constitution
and the reasons for them?
Section 127 of the Constitution has been
repealed. This section provided that, in
reckoning the numbers of the people of
the Commonwealth or of a State or other
part of the Commonwealth, Aboriginal
natives should not be counted. The framers
of the Constitution had, as their principal
reason for including this section in the
Constitution, the practical difficulty of
counting the Aboriginal population at that
time. In 1900 this was a very substantial
problem. Today, however, the facilities for
including Aboriginals in a census are
greater and the need for the section no
longer exists. This was -the first change.
12695/ 67 The second change has been the deletion
of the words ' other than the aboriginal
race in any State' from paragraph xxvi of
section 51. Section 51 ( xxvi) of the Constitution
formerly read:
' The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution;
have power to make laws for the peace,
order and good government of the Commonwealth
with respect to:
( XXvi) The people of any race, other than the
Aboriginal race in any State, for whom
it is deemed necessary to make special
laws.'
This part of the Constitution had been
framed as a protection for Aboriginals but
a belief had developed that it was discriminatory
and, while the Government considered
this to be erroneous, the belief persisted.
It was felt therefore that the words in
question should be removed and this has
now been done. One effect of omitting the
words has been to confer upon the Commonwealth
a power to make special laws
for the people of the Aboriginal race in
any State if the Parliament considers it
desirable or necessary. This is what we call 
a concurrent legislative power. In other
words, it is now possible for the Commonwealth
Parliament to legislate, but it does
not mean that the States automatically lose
their existing powers. There has been, and
there is, no intention on the part of the
Commonwealth that authority should be.
as it were, wrested from the States.
The public voted overwhelmingly in
support of these changes and the Government
took steps to recognise the implica-
. tions of that vote. In my second reading
speech on the Constitution Alteration
( Aboriginals) Bill 1967 on 1st March of
this year, I said that, if proposals relating
to Aboriginals were approved, the Government
' would regard it as desirable to hold
discussions with the States to secure the
widest measure of agreement with respect
of Aboriginal advancement'.
Commonwealth and State Ministers
directly concerned with Aboriginal affairs
met in Perth on 21st July for their normal
biennial meeting. My colleague, the Minister
for Territories ( Mr Barnes), represented
the Commonwealth Government. A wide
ranging discussion took place on policy and
administrative matters relating to Aboriginals.
There was a general agreement
among the States on their relationship with
the Commonwealth in these matters and
there will be, of course, further consultations
in the future. A report on the meeting
recently held will be made to the House
by my colleague, the Minister for Territories,
I believe at the conclusion of what
I now have to say.
I would stress at this point that, while
the Commonwealth Parliament is now in a
position to make laws and to prevail should
a conflict arise with the States, the Commonwealth
does not seek to intrude unnecessarily
in this field, or into areas of
activity currently being dealt with by the
States. There is a big variation in circumstances
and needs of Aboriginals in the
different States, as all honourable members
who have made a study of this matter,
will readily agree. For this reason, administration
has to be on a regional-or Statebasis
if it is to be effective. This is the
only practical way of ensuring that Aboriginals
receive direct attention and
assistance. The Government believes that the needs
of Aboriginals should continue to be kept in their true perspective as predominantly
social problems and not magnified or misrepresented
to suggest that the problems
are racial. The Government also believes
that it is not right to say that the Commonwealth
and the States have done little
in the past for Aboriginals. A great deal
has been done by Australian governments
in recent years and I will say more on this
point later.
The prime function of the Commonwealth,
in the light of these changes to the
Constitution, will be to carry out a policy
co-ordinating role. The Commonwealth will
not assume the responsibility for administration
which is largely with the States,
except in those areas like the Northern
Territory where we already have a direct
commitment. There will be a significant
advantage in policy co-ordination and this
should facilitate the sharing of experience
by the Commonwealth and the States in the
interests of our Aboriginal citizens. It will
also allow us to keep the Aboriginal question
properly in its perspective in our
international relationships.
To achieve this objective, the Government
proposes to establish an Office of
Aboriginal Affairs in Canberra. Its task will
be to co-ordinate policy and to provide the
machinery necessary for joint consultations
as the need arises with the States and with
relevant Commonwealth departments. The
new Office will draw on the experience of
the Department of Territories and have its
assistance in any administrative support that
miy be needed. The Office itself, however,
will come within the Prime Minister's
Department. It will thus come under my
own administration and have a central status
as the Commonwealth agency co-ordinating
policy affecting Aboriginals. This arrangement
will facilitate communication between
the Premiers of the States and myself on
Aboriginal matters, and further it will provide
a special avenue of communication
with the Government by Aboriginals themselves
or by organisations representing them.
The Commonwealth will make appropriate
financial provision required by the
policies and particular decisions adopted
in the future by the Commonwealth either
on its-own initiative or arising out of Commonwealth
and State consultation. We will
also continue the present practice of making
financial provision for Aboriginal 
advancement through its Departments of
Territories and Interior where our direct
responsibilities are concerned and to the
States in the general context of Commonwealth-
State financial arrangements.
Through the Department of Health we will
conduct special health surveys and campaigns
among Aboriginals, as we have in the
past, in co-operation with the States. We
will continue to finance the Australian
Institute of Aboriginal Studies through the
Department of Education and Science. The
Office of Aboriginal Affairs will be able to
exercise a valuable co-ordinating role in all
these matters. These Government activities,
Commonwealth and State, have been
strongly and effectively supported by church
missions and by many voluntary organisations
throughout Australia. This devoted
work, I am confident, will continue.
The Commonwealth has already done
much in its own right to advance the welfare
of the Aboriginals as members of the
Australian community. I pay tribute to the
States for what they have done in their own
fields. At the same time, I commend to your
notice the work and results achieved by our
own Department of Territories which, for a
number of years now, has accepted tasks
beyond the normal limits of its responsibilities
in Aboriginal welfare.
The Government long ago established a
policy of assimilation as the proper policy
for Aboriginals. At a conference of Ministers
in 1965, the definition of assimilation
was revised to read as follows:
The policy of assimilation seeks that all persons
of Aboriginal decent will choose-
I emphasise the words ' will choose':
to attain a similar manner and standard of living
to that of other Australians and live as members
of a single Australian community-enjoying the
same rights and privileges, accepting the same
responsibility and influenced by the same hopes
and loyalties as other Australians. Any special
measures taken are regarded as temporary
measures, not based on race, but intended to meet
their need for special care and assistance, and to
make the transition from one stage to another in
such a way as will be favourable to their social,
economic and political advantage.
The word ' assimilation' is often misunderstood.
There is nothing mandatory or
arbitrary about it and it does not mean
interbreeding with the avowed objective of
eventually eliminating the Aboriginal
physical features or Aboriginal culture. It
may be that this will happen but if it does it is a matter of individual decision and
not of policy. Assimilation means that the
Aboriginals can be similar to other citizens,
not, of course, in looks, but with regard
to all the privileges and responsibilities of
citizenship. Our aim is to help the
Aboriginals to become an integral part of
our Australian community life.
The Aboriginal population in Australia
is increasing and some forecasts suggest that
the number might double by the end of
the century. The Aboriginal population in
Australia is now a little over 130,000. It is
made up of 44,600 full blooded Aboriginals,
77,500 part Aboriginals and 8,000 Torres
Strait Islanders. There is, as honourable
members know, the widest range of social
levels in our Aboriginal population. There
are nomads-a few only now-living an
utterly primitive life remote from civilisation.
There are some living a tribal existence
and some living an urban existence. There
are others at all stages of advancement
between this and full participation in the
life of the wider Australian community as
fully assimilated citizens. It is wrong
perhaps to put a money value on what we
are doing for Aboriginals but at least some
figures will give evidence that what we are
doing is increasing in scale. Last year the
Commonwealth and the States spent S21m
specifically on Aboriginal advancement and
this year the figure will be higher. Our own
figure is significantly higher and we await
the States Budget provisions, but we know
they will be higher. In 1944 Australian Governments
were spending just under
$ 500,000, so there has been a very big
and important increase in expenditurefrom
less than $ 500,000 to $ 21m.
The Commonwealth has already provided
$ 4,500,000 for Aboriginal advancement this
year-a 27% increase on expenditure last
year. There are other less visible areas of
Government assistance to Aboriginals
because, as citizens, they benefit in the
normal way like other Australians from the
services provided by various Government
Departments. In the last few years the Commonwealth,
State and Northern Territory legislatures
have been active in progressively removing
all discriminatory legislation from the relevant
acts of Commonwealth and State
Parliaments and, therefore, direct benefits
are not as readily identifiable as they were
in the past. 
It is sometimes thought that the bulk
of the problems arising in connection with
Aboriginals will disappear provided money
is made available on a large scale. This
approach does not sufficiently recognise the
fact that many of the problems are psychological
and social in character and that the
expenditure of money that is not directed
to solutions based on assured practical
foundations will not resolve, but may
accentuate, some of the problems.
Assimilation as we have defined it is
two-way, requiring adjustment in outlook
and a sympathetic understanding on the
part of citizens both of European and
Aboriginal race in the community. In the
legal and formal sense none of the opportunities open to Australians generally are
closed to Aboriginals. What is needed in
many cases is help which will equip the
Aboriginal, by education and in every
possible way, and in their outlook, to avail
themselves of these opportunities. To attain
our goal, patience, persistence and understanding
are essential. What we are doing
will not mean that Aboriginals, as citizens,
will lose their identity, their pride of race
and their culture. It will mean that, through
successive generations, cultural adjustments
will take place-as they do in every society
the world over-and that our Aboriginals
will grow, without any enforced transition,
into the national environment in which they
live.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 


10 September, 1967
Your Excellency, Sir Irving Benson; My dear wife who has rightly been credited for doing so much to keep me in a proper state of body and soul; Ladies and gentlemen; and a special greeting if I may to Squadron-Leader Hicks and his men who met with me in Montreal and performed so notably for Australia on that occasion.
And while you, Sir Irving, were not able to single out all those faces you would like to shake hands with, may I be permitted to single out one very old and dear friend whom I am delighted to see in the audience here this afternoon in the person of Mrs. Tottie Embling, because before I had a wife Mrs. Embling used to do what she could to keep me on the path of rectitude and when I mentioned this to Sir Irving he said that she looked after him when he had his first charge in Toorak when he started in his service.
Now this is a very happy occasion for a variety of reasons, it's a birthday festival in several senses. It is, as I gather from the records, the 109th anniversary of -Wesley Church in this present building; it's the 74th anniversary of the Central Mission and we all join in wishing many happy returns on this auspicious occasion.
Sometimes happiness is alloyed with a little sadness and one could bring a note of sadness to this occasion if one were to think of Sir Irving's impending retirement as marking an end to that wonderful life of service and all that he has meant not only to this community of .Melbourne and of Victoria, but to Australia as a nation. It is a remarkable record. He has, I understand, had 40 years of association with Wesley, with the Mission, 37 years as its Superintendent. In other words his own life of service has extended over more than one third of the life of the Wesley Mission here in Victoria. I say there would be a touch of sadness if I were not convinced in my own mind, and looking at him today has confirmed this, that his active mind will go on through voice and through pen for many, many years, enriching our own thoughts by what he contributes to them. But I say on behalf of all of you here and indeed of the Australian people whom I am honoured to lead at this time, thank you to Sir Irving Benson for this wonderful life of service that he has given to our community.
He mentioned that at times he felt that it was his task to listen to everybody in trouble. I have sometimes, felt, Sir Irving, that that was my prerogative in my own post as Head of Government, but in our own way we each have a task to perform in relation to those who have a proper claim upon the services and goodwill of the community. It is a triteness to say-that we live in a restless age, an age in which the winds of change are blowing strongly about us as they are about the peoples in every other part of the world. In some countries we see this expressed in degrees of turbulence that lead to riot and revolution, a challenge to established concepts, and even we in this favoured island continent of Australia are not immune altogether from those influences although, fortunately for us, they do not take usually any violent forms. But around the world there has been the cry for improved conditions for a defeat of those age-old enemies of mankind illness, illiteracy, poverty, lack of nourishment, lack of adequate housing, and people who have suffered these things through the centuries have now decided that the world can give a better order for mankind.
And this in Australia which, of course, is much more favourably placed, represents a demand on the part of the electorate for more and better things in just about every imaginable direction. The electorate demands more by way of education, more by way of development, ' more adequate provision for the defence of the nation, more in the form of social welfare and a better deal for people of the aborigine race just to mention one other item. And they are impatient that these things shall be done and governments who must try to give expression to the will of the electorate go about as best they can this task of providing more of these things in the directions that are sought.
But we cannot ever afford to overlook the fact that it is you, the people, who provide these things.. Governments cannot conjure them up out of nothing. They provide them by producing if they can a greater output from the nation as a whole what we call our gross national product and out of that increased provision make more adequate provision for these things that people want. But in the final analysis it is the body of citizens who provide these things and even governments who are determined to do their best to supply them have to carry in their minds the fact that if they load on to the productive mechanism too many burdens then they will not in the long run be able to supply at the same level of advance that they would hope to make.
We, in Australia, have been singularly successful in encouraging greater productivity in our nation, an enlargement of our gross national product and out of that averaging 521, of growth a year over the last five years which included one dreadful drought year, we rank second only among the nations, the industrialised nations of the world, we rank second only to Japan. No other country exceeds the rate of improvement in the gross national product of Australia. N~ ow I mention these things because naturally each time that a government comes to the people with its Budget or with some other piece of legislation, there is a disposition to look at that against what is felt to be the need of the time. And we sometimes, I think, tend to overlook the tremendous advances that we have made as a people over this last generation and it is more comfort perhaps to those who feel the pressure of need immediately and whose need relatively to others more favoured than they seems a very great one to them. But we progress, Sir Irving says we have not got to the point yet where despite his earnest pleadings to me we have completely abolished the means test, but what we have done has been to make spectacular advance over the years since I have seen the achievements of a period of office which we have enjoyed. Could I just put a figure to that to illustrate it?
I have seen the total provision grow in our Budget for the aged and invalid on the pension payment from $88m. to $509m. this year. I have seen the proportion of people eligible for benefit grow from about 39% of those within the age group to 53%, I think the figure is at this time. I have seen innovations which were unheard of when we first had to face up to these responsibilities and I think I will be credited, Sir Irving, with having launched at least one of these major reforms as far back in 1941 with the introduction for the first time into the National Parliament of a child endowment programme. But in those days we had no scheme of pharmaceutical benefits worth mentioning actually there was a total expenditure of $0.6m. This year we budgeted $75m. There was no scheme at all of medical benefits; this year we provided $46m. There was no scheme of pharmaceutical benefits for pensioners; this year that will cost us $31.8m. There was no scheme of' medical services to pensioners and this, of course, is quite apart from the figure I mentioned earlier of total pension provision, but this year the medical services to pensioners are estimated to cost There was no such thing as an aged persons home scheme and you may be interested to know that the genesis of this is attributed by Sir Robert Menzies he brought it in in 1954 to Dame Pattie Menzies who told him what a wonderful thing it would be if the Government would work out a scheme whereby through its contribution, doubling those of others, we could steadily go ahead with the process of erecting homes for our aged people.
And I had myself a hand in arranging for two very senior, former members of the Public Service, Sir Giles Chippindall and Mr. Norman Watt Sir Giles had been Head of Postmaster-General's Department and Mr. Norman 41att Head of the Treasury to bring their good offices behind the work of the National Old People's Welfare Council because if we are to concern ourselves with the problem of the aged and we all know what a problem that can be then this is not a matter to be left simply to governments, simply to some cash payment by a government to the person concerned. They have a life to live as a human being and they want to feel that they are needed, that they are cared for, that people want to have company with them and there is much more to this than the main provision of a money payment. And through this National Old People's ' Welfare Council working in association with similar bodies around the rest of the Commonwealth and in various States, we felt that we could make a contribution not purely of a material kind but a psychological contribution, a social contribution to this need that is felt.
Now, in mentioning the provision that is now made some people might imagine that because we have found it necessary over recent years to engage on a very large programme of defence that the proportion of the Budget available for social welfare has been significantly reduced but on the contrary. When we came to office the defence provision was, of course, a very much smaller one both in money terms and as a percentage of the Budget. It was actually 8.3% o of the Budget of those days whereas in this last Budget it has occupied and is a very much bigger Budget of course than was the case in those earlier times it occupied 17% of the Budget. Social welfare which in those days occupied 18.7% of the Budget was 20.5% of the Budget on this last occasion. And so we have sustained, and indeed improved upon, the proportion of our total revenue allocations into social welfare compared with that which existed in these earlier years and I could sum up the social welfare provision by saying that I have seen it grow from .$185m. to $1,07m in this last Budget. Now, so much for social welfare but that, of course, is only part of the story of the actual financial provision which governments find themselves able to make.
I mention the demand the electorate makes upon us for education and this year, although when I first had to face these matters as a Minister in the Government in the period after 1949 there was virtually no provision, a very small provision for education in the Commonwealth Budget. This year it is  $194m. and that itself is an increase of 35% over what was provided in the previous year. When we look at the general state of the community, we can take, I think, some comfort from other stages we have reached.
We have maintained through all this period a fully employed society. No country in the world can point to a longer better-sustained level of employment than has been the case in Australia and that means quite apart from the well-being of those directly employed that they, too, are in a better position to make their contribution to the family needs, particularly the family needs of older members or disabled members of the family. As to the social problem of the future, I think we are going to see that quite transformed by the developments which have been occurring.
And when I say that, I have in mind that no country in the world had a higher percentage of home ownership than has Australia and that percentage of home ownership is rising year by year. As I think most of you know when we come to assess the limitations for pension we do not include the home as part of the means of the person concerned, and now the percentage of those who occupy homes, in process of acquiring them or actually owning them is in the neighbourhood of 70% and it is a rising percentage year by year. We do not take into account the car, and Australia, you will be perhaps rather surprised to learn, in terms of motor vehicles now rank second only to the United States of America. There is one motor vehicle to every 3.3 persons in the community as most of you who travel around our roads on the weekends no doubt will confirm.
Insurances………….. people have been making much more provision for their old age and for their family needs than they ever did in the past. I have seen the sum, the total sum, for which people in Australia are insured rise from a") 280m. to $ 2,700m.as the last figure which I have been able to check on.
Now I do not say these things in any spirit of complacency because the electorate rightly demands of us and good friends like Sir Irving keep prodding us that we have got to do more, and of course we want to do more. I only wanted to put this broad picture before you because so often it is assumed that little is being done or that we hard-headed old politicians in Canberra are also a hard-hearted lot who do not have much regard for the welfare of our fellow men. Well, I hope that what I have said will indicate that the spirit of this Church in a changing world, the old values of the good neighbour and of that good neighbour spirit which has made of our immigration programme the most successful constructive achievement of the Australian people, the spirit of the good neighbour, the spirit of fellowship which is such an essential mark of the Wesley Mission has been carried through, I hope you will agree, in the processes of national government over this last 20 years or more.
Now, Sir, when we speak of need we do not think only of the need that exists inside our own community, and indeed for others what wo would think of as poverty in our own community is to them a very relative term. If I mention India for example, which has 42 times our population, it has only double our gross national product. Pakistan and Indonesia have 9 times our population but they have only half, about half the gross national product of this small country of Australia. And so there is a deeper need in many other parts of the world than anything that we experience here and while our good work should very properly begin at home we have not been blind to the needs which are felt by others. And over these years I have seen our total contribution to external aid grow from $ 33m. to o .142m. in this last Budget. And it may interest you to know that that figure I have just given -$142m. -  represents .75% of the gross national product of the country and at that percentage it ranks second in the world. Although Australia is a developing country and a capital-importing country we have still found ourselves able to make a provision which ranks second only in terms of percentage of gross national product to France. So in many ways we are demonstrating that the good neighbour spirit still inspires us.
Now I would hope that as we in our larger national sphere have found ourselves able to do these things that we have merely been reflecting a spirit which has been kept shining brightly through the 109 years in which this Mission has existed. And because the spirit of Wesley and the Wesley Mission has radiated out through the community I hope Sir Irving you feel it has had some influence on one of your own friends your old friend who stands before you here today. M~ ay the good work that Sir Irving has exemplified through so many years be carried on by this ' vision and in congratulating you on this notable birthday and in paying this public tribute to the work of the man who has presided over its destinies for so many years, I wish you many more happy birthdays, and I wish Sir Irving in the retirement that comes to him a long, healthy, active membership of this Australian community which he has done so much to serve.


11 September 1967
The Chancellor ( Sir Robert Blackwood), Vice-Chancellor ( Dr. Matheson), the Dean of the Faculty of Economics ( Professor Cochrane), Members of Council, Distinguished Guests and Gentlemen:
Thank you very much for your welcome. I am happy to have this opportunity of launching the first of the Annual Economic Lectures at this University. The project is commendable and this series of lectures should add a great deal to the sum of knowledge on many aspects of the national economy.
In your short history as a university you have shown growth, in numbers, in buildings and in stature. You have the problems of growth you know your own better than I do but you cannot escape these in any forward-looking and forward-moving enterprise. Your years of growth are only at their beginning and I am sure you will meet them with the same energy, enthusiasm and vision that you put into your establishments. I wish Monash well for its future.
I have titled my address "Advance Australia" and it is on the subject of GROWTH, particularly, that I shall talk to you. Growth is our watchword as a government on behalf of the people of Australia. It is also the password for the sentry at the gate to our security and our prosperity.
 It would do us all good to take time out occasionally to look at the whole landscape of our national 2 development; to let our minds stir to the huge excitement of it all. For we have a fabulous prospect I use the word deliberately and we have great adventures to share. It is also tremendously important that we seek to understand the problems of growth that this prospect invites. It is important that we ponder how they can best be solved. Growth with all its benefits can be at times as we remember from our youth an uncomfortable and disturbing process. But what is easily won is seldom worthwhile. Usually the greatest rewards are those that flow from the honest industry of a nation and its people. We need faith in ourselves for success; without a readiness to roll up our sleeves and get on with the job we cannot prosper nor grow strong,
When commenting recently on our needs of defence and development, I spoke of a lotus land mentality found in some. There were critics who jeered at this as though it was beyond the franchise of a Prime Minister to jog a few dreamers from their dozing in the sun and urge them to get up and go, Most of us like to include some leisure and enjoyment in the balanced diet of a vigorous healthy life. But they should not be final goals nor can we at this stage of our history afford the luxury of over-indulgence in them. We are a well favoured people few outside ranks of our fighting services are called on for great sacrifices. But we all have an obligation of citizenship in this young democracy to play our part in the challenging tasks of growth so that we are not only secure at home, but secure abroad, and proud to speak, and be heard, as a nation with a voice of our own,
We have been accepted by the diverse communities of Asia among whom we live as a free people. They see our hands outstretched in friendship. We give aid in growing volume. We exchange trade increasingly. We have helped and are helping to preserve the freedom of independent nations. We must continue on these paths.
This past decade has seen a new dimension come to our progress. In that period we have discovered mineral wealth beyond our dreams and we have, for the first time in our history, tapped oil and gas in commercial quantities. No one imagines this to be the end, for what we have found is, I am certain, only a part of the hidden treasure that this old continent holds for this young nation if we have the initiative to go after it and the energy and will to exploit our discoveries.
There are new wonders of science and technology to serve us. The use of nuclear power for peaceful purposes is an intriguing prospect for the future and already we can see it coming within the range of economic possibility. I am confident too that we will in time be able to water thirsty land and take light, power, people and industry into areas that have slept undisturbed for centuries.
The challenge of growth is deep rooted and directly affects both our domestic and our foreign policies as well as your fortunes and my own as individuals in this community. It is national in character but it is also a highly personal matter.
I think of growth as having two tangible, measurable components PEOPLE and MATERIAL RESOURCES, operating in an environment of two intangible components SECURITY and INITIATIVE. These, to my mind, are four essential elements to "Advance Australia" and to give us the growth rate we need.
Let us look at PEOPLE and MATERIAL RESOURCES first. People are human capital and they make up our population which, small though it is, is our greatest asset. The very smallness of our population makes its quality the more important. Our human capital is increasing at the rate of nearly 2 per cent a year but we are even now only a nation of less than 12 million people, living in a continent of three million square miles. Our rate of increase is high by Western standards but it is maintained only by a steady net migration rate. At the- present time this is a little below 1 per cent a year Yet since the war migration has contributed more than half of our population increase when we take births to settler parents into account.,
Just on a million children have been born to migrants in this country in the twenty years that have elapsed since our post-war migration scheme. This was launched under the energetic direction of the then Minister for Immigration in the Labor Government of that day, Mr Arthur Calwell. It has been successfully and enthusiastically sustained by governments, of which I have been a member since the end of 1949. It has brought incalculable benefits to our nation. It has enriched it, diversified its industries and cultures, and strengthened its security.
Our population, by natural increase and migration, has increased by 50 per cent in twenty years. There is no other country in the world, except Canada, which has sustained such a high migrant intake. We have done so more consistently and successfully than any other country and this goes also for the successful absorption of the new settlers into our community life. This has been Australia's greatest and most constructive peace-time achievement. It is the more remarkable when you take into account the pressures on our national economy, and the calls made on us to do more in so many directions.
A corollary of rapid population building, through largescale immigration, is its effect on demographic structure. We are getting younger as a people. The median age of the population is being lowered.
In 1947, less than one-third of the population was under 20 years of age. Now the proportion is just on twofifths. Had there been no immigration after the war, the numbers in the 20-34 years age group would have dropped by some 132,000. But immigration changed a fall into a rise of 5 about twice as much.
This has many implications. Let me mention three. First, more people of working age means that the per capita cost of improved social services has not risen; second, the shortage of males of marriageable age immediately after the war became a surplus. This led to a marriage boom, and an increased demand for housing and consumer durables. And third, more in the younger age groups have been a source of strategic strength, and are now assisting us to play a more honourable and confident part in the defence commitments of the nation.
There are more than forty different nationalities being assimilated into the Australian community, and we have gained much from their industrious contribution to nation building.
The relentless demands for more skilled workers and higher level of skills are reflected in the work force. In the past five years the proportion of skilled male workers among settler arrivals has grown to 42 per cent. One in every three settler workers is a skilled person, compared with one in four of the locally-born work force. This is a noteworthy percentage to sustain when there is a world-wide shortage of skilled workers. It is an essential factor for broadening the base of our economy by enabling us to increase industrialisation.
The mobility of a large part of the work force drawn from migrants has already had a signal effect on industrial development. More than half the work force on the Snowy Mountains scheme is made up of workers born overseas and the same pattern exists in the motor vehicle industry and to a disproportionate extent in other key industries. We are depending heavily on the mobility of new settlers for the exploitation of our newly-discovered mineral resources. As new towns and new ports are built our population will spread to distant outposts on the continent.
This wide brown land of ours owes much already to the new Australian, I would sum it up this way. The economic advantage of a regular annual intake of migrants is a rapid population increase which
underwrites the future growth of consumption demand for a wide range of products and acts as an insurance against under-employment;
enlarges the domestic market by allowing economies of larger-scale production.
speeds up technical progress and an increased supply of skilled workers to manufacturing industry on which the onus rests to help bridge the gap between import spending and export income.
stimulates a high rate of capital formation and a widening capital base.
assists the supply of labour in areas and industries to which native born Australians are least attracted.
We depend more than we realise on migration. Our birth rate has fallen since 1961, because of a whole complex of social factors and this situation may remain with us for a little time to come. Take this comparison: In 1961 migration provided 29 per cent of our total population growth. Last year, because of the lower birth rate, it rose to a record 45 per cent.
There has been some tendency for the flow of new migrants to fall off, and the familiar sources are no longer yielding the same numbers. However, the Government has not been idle. The Minister for Immigration has recently travelled widely in Europe in search of new sources. From this visit and from our continued efforts, we think it may yet be possible to maintain a satisfactory balance.
Our long standing target has been to have a population growth round 21 per cent per year with natural increase providing about 11 per cent and net migration about 1 per cent. But at present the natural increase is only about 1.08 per cent and the average annual migrant intake over the last few years has been about 0.74 per cent.
Our population age structure is such that, except for the period in the early 1970' s when the post-war babies and early migrant children grow up, there is no indication in sight of any significant upward trend. But whatever rate of increase we achieve, we as a government will see it as our responsibility to ensure that satisfactory levels of demand are maintained. We will approach the problem not in any defeatist way, but recognising that different rates of population increase will provide different opportunities for productive effort. More children mean more expenditure on schools and home appliances. A slower rate of increase will mean that we can direct productive resources to other objectives perhaps the exploitation of new natural resources, or the development of new lines of production. Whatever the future may hold, we as a government will remain sensitive to the play of the many forces and will do what we can to keep them in productive balance.
One point is often overlooked when the role of migration in Australian development is under discussion. It is that when migrants are brought to adulthood in their home countries, we reap the value of their services throughout most of their working life without having to educate and train them,
If it costs, for example, an average of about $ 5,000 to rear a child to productive age then the arrival of every adult worker since the war represents a saving of that much per head to the Australian economy in terms of human capital.
On the other hand, while migrants do not need to be trained, they tend to come in at marriageable age, and therefore need to be housed. This means in the first place homes with all they imply of roads, water and electricity supplies, sewerage and so on. Before long schools and other social amenities also become necessary. Over the past three years our fixed capital expenditure on dwellings has increased by 35 per cent, while capital expenditure by all public authorities on education, health, power, water supply and sewerage and so on has increased by nearly 40 per cent. Our expenditure on dwellings and social capital facilities represents about 14 per cent of our gross national product a higher proportion than in either the United States or Britain. Yet many are the calls we hear that insufficient is being spent on these vital amenities!
Let me illustrate this by some references to the United States and Britain. Calculations made by the Treasury suggest that the annual investment needed in Australia to provide dwellings and social capital facilities for our migrants represents 3-4 per cent of gross national product. If the United States and Britain were to look for a similar rate of population increase from migration as Australia, they too would need to undertake additional investment. For example the United States would need to build perhaps 500,000 additional new dwellings each year, and Britain some 140,000 additional new dwellings a year. Taking schools as another example, the United States would need to provide some 400,000 new places annually for the children of migrants and Britain some 100,000 new places. We ourselves are providing about 25,000 additional school places for the children of our migrants.
This is not to complain. But it is to say that the sustaining of our long-term migration programme has a significant bearing on the direction of our own internal investment programmes private and public. People are, as I have said, our most valuable asset and we cannot afford to skimp in our provision for them. It is a necessary consequence that those who are wanting to increase the rate of growth in fields of particular concern to them will find that, with our economy fully employed as it is, they run up against the limits of our resources.
So much for human capital. Now let me say something about the other major component in our growth our material resources. Over the past five years our annual growth rate measured in terms of gross national product in constant prices has reached the notable average level of 51 per cent. We have also been ploughing back as investment a great deal of what we have earned as a nation. Something like 27 per cent of our national income is going into fixed capital development compared with figures of 16 per cent to 17 per cent for such countries as Britain and the United States. The only major country with a higher rate is Japan.
This high rate of investment is not less than we need if we are to meet the challenge of developing our natural resources. Let me mention some of them:
We continue to be the world's leading wool producer and one of the largest wheat producers.
We are the world's largest producer of lead and the third largest producer of zinc.
We have 35 per cent of the world's known reserves of bauxite and enough to support the free world's needs for more than 100 years.
We are the world's largest producer of strategic rutile and zircon
We have increased our known reserves of iron ore twelve-fold in less than a decade. There are 15,000 million tons of new iron ore discoveries in Western Australia alone.
We have doubled our known coal reserves since 1960 and trebled our coal exports. Our known resources of bitumen coal are around 20,000 million tons.
We have silver, copper, nickel, tin, manganese, tungsten and uranium.
We have oil and gas.
The total output of our mining and metal industries has a value now of $ 900 million and it should reach $ 1,700 million by 1975.
Some of the most spectacular developments are occurring in the west and north-west of Western Australia which has entered an era of unprecedented mineral production. The capital investment for planned developments and the expansion of major projects in northern and North-Western Australia exceeds $ 1,300 million. In Western Australia alone iron ore exports contracts could be worth more than $ 2,400 million over the next twenty years. These are tongue-twisting figures I know, but I give them to indicate to you the magnitude of what we now see at hand.
At this point I want to refer to the question of the extent of foreign capital coming into Australia and its influence over some of our major developing industries.
Despite the attention which has been directed towards the assistance we are receiving from outside capital, it is worth emphasising at the outset that 85-90 per cent of the capital we employ is generated internally. It is the final 10-15 per cent which comes from abroad. It is, of course, very welcome because it is this extra percentage which, spread particularly over the growth areas of our economy, gives that growth a cutting edge and at the same time gives us sources of overseas funds that prevent our balance of payments situation from exercising a restricting influence on our rate of development.
If we want to maintain anything like the rate of growth we have achieved in recent years we are likely to remain a net capital importer for many years to come. We need the finance and the technological knowledge that comes with it.
Our growth over the past decade has been unprecedented and there are indications that we are learning the technique of maintaining that ideal condition steady growth within a state of equilibrium.
Although continually widening, the base for our foreign earnings is still narrow. Three-quarters of our export earnings come from our primary industries, but they now contribute only 15 per cent of that national product and employ 11 per cent of the labour force. An encouraging feature of last year's trading results was the 25 per cent increase in the value of our exports to Asia.
One of the main new sources of foreign earnings opening up to us is coming from the export of our newly-found resources of minerals. These give at the same time both a lift to the forward movement of manufacturing industries in general and to our earnings of foreign exchange. Yet it is in minerals and large-scale manufacturing that foreign investment has played a most significant part.
There are now some fifty new mineral projects involving capital of over $ 2,400 million throughout the whole of Australia and there are about ninety foreign companies of substance searching for minerals in Australia. Half of them are from the United States, and about 65 per cent of the capital for the mining projects is from overseas, mainly America and Britain.
It would be foolish to say it would not be best if we owned them all, absolutely, but it would be much more foolish to suggest, that if we have not the money to do that, then the deposits should be left undeveloped.
At the same time, let us be realistic about the picture. $ 5,000 million of total foreign investment over the last twenty years sounds very large. But we see it in its proper setting when we remember that total domestic investment ( including that foreign investment) amounted to nearly $ 60,000 million over the same period.
There is another point to be remembered. Britain has provided us with just over half of our total capital inflow since the war. North American investments have over the same period provided something over 37 per cent with the proportion now not much less than half. In themselves, neither of these two countries can be regarded as anything but of friendly disposition and we have ample evidence for believing that, if there is any further concern on our part, it would be possible to achieve mutually acceptable solutions to any particular problems that might arise. It is in this context that we should take note of the Treasury estimate that about a quarter of the assets of corporations in Australia has come from foreign investment either directly or in the form of reinvested collateral, or in depreciation reserves. These have been concentrated mostly in the small group of industries which includes motor vehicles, chemical oil refining, petroleum distribution, metals and minerals.
One of the most encouraging features of contemporary development is that we are ourselves beginning to marshal our own capital to good effect. The idea of consortiums and partnerships to meet very heavy capital needs for development has taken root. It is also gratifying to see the interest that life offices and provident funds are taking in investment for development. There are examples of consortiums and partnerships in the Northern Territory, at Gove; in the Hamersley Ranges in Western Australia, and in the natural gas field in Bass Strait off the Victorian coast. But for obvious reasons not least of which is the fact that we are a few people in a big continent there are limits to what we can do.
There are also examples of the readiness of foreign capital to take risks when Australians cannot raise the money. You will have read recently of plans to open up a large pastoral area in the Northern Territory for intensive cultivation of grain sorghum. A well-known Australian ( Sir William Gunn) will be in charge and he says publicly that, after trying for 18 months without success to get Australian capital, American interests took the project up. Development of this kind, if carried out successfully, can be a big thing for that part of the north.
Can it be said realistically that this foreign participation in the development of our natural resources is a bad thing? Of course it is not a bad thing, and I am unimpressed by the argument that we are letting our assets fall into foreign hands.
How else are we to develop our discoveries rapidly, how else can we build new towns and ports to serve them if we do not import human capital and foreign money capital to add to our own? The foreign capitalist cannot take away the things he builds.
He can take his profits after the Government has gathered a large share of them for its general revenue purposes but he, like us, knows that growth is vital and he re-invests part of those profits here to that end. He also exports his products and earns foreign exchange for us. If he wants to repatriate his capital, of course he can and we impose no conditions in advance, but if there was ever a panic flight of foreign capital from this country in sight, then the Government through Exchange Control, has the capacity to take measures to protect the economy. The foreign capitalist cannot take our towns and ports and mines away. Nor can he " containerise" the men and women who work for him or the technical skills they have acquired and ship them off to the other side of the world.
Let me give you eight good reasons why we should not be shy about foreign capital:-
1. It gives us the margins we must have for growth and for the security in our balance of payments.
2. It fills the gap that our domestic capital raising cannot fill and on some occasions is prepared to take great risks which Australian investors are not willing to accept.
3. It ensures the importation of new technology and new management skills.
4. It creates employment and special attractions for migrants. It provides revenue by way of taxation and royalties.
6. It provides profits, some of which are re-invested and contribute to further growth
7. It gives us new towns, ports and sources of power
8. It helps us diversify our exports.
I have spoken in some detail on this because I believe it to be important and because we should not take for granted an inflow of foreign capital at anything like recent levels. The trend of our balance of payments has been down and capital inflow helps very much to keep the movement within acceptable limits.
There is more to foreign investment here than " Come on in, the water's fine". We are not "selling-out", and in any case are dealing with the 10 per cent plus segment of our total capital investment. But we must take care not to discourage the foreign investor who is sensitive enough to the hazards and uncertainties of enterprise beyond his national boundaries. We prefer to use "guide-lines" and get a response in a voluntary way. Not every investor wants to come here, and those with capital for export are finding it harder to venture and less rewarding when they do because of the recent restraints imposed by their own Governments. This may, or may not last, but the fact that it is happening has done two things. It has reduced our capital inflow, with the inevitable effect on our balance of payments, and it has injected question marks into our forward planning because we do not know how long it will last, or whether it will vary in degree. It makes good sense to me to keep on saying we want it and can make valuable use of it.
We have done a great deal to ensure that Australians are able to share in the new growth that is with us. They certainly participate largely in the benefits and activities generated by foreign enterprise. It is important, I think, not to build up a national resentment to the entry of foreign capital but rather to see how much more we can do ourselves and how we can develop the idea of partnership if we cannot " go it alone",
I do not believe we should limit our interest to the traditional capital sources America and Britain, I do not need to remind you that the big leap forward of our iron ore exports rests heavily with Japan where some contracts have been arranged for substantial quantities for 25 years ahead. You will also be aware that Japan, this past year, displaced Britain from her traditional position as our best customer. It would seem natural that we should develop a capital importing interest with Japan in the years ahead and also with Western Europe,
With the development of our trade with Asia will come a corresponding influence on the pattern of developments in this part of the world. From being a relatively small country supplying the needs of the industrial west, we are becoming an increasingly industrialised country with a growing trade with the countries of Asia.
Although our population is small beside those of our neighbours, our productive capacity is relatively high. There are difficulties in making comparisons between countries which differ greatly in terms of living standards and economic structure, but there is still some validity in comparing the gross national products of the various countries, and I think you will find the comparisons interesting.
Taking gross national product as a basis, we find that Pakistan and Indonesia, with nine times our population, have a GNP only half that of ours, India, a country with a population 42 times that of ours, has little more than twice our GNP. It is well known that we rank as the twelfth largest exporter in the world. What is not so often recognised is that our exports are greater than that of any Asian country except Japan with India in third place.
We recognise the responsibility which our position imposes upon us, both as a government and as a people. It is a continuing challenge to us all that we discharge those responsibilities with a proper sense of the rights and needs of our neighbours. We as a government have recognised our responsibility by our increasing activities in the aid field. As givers of aid, we now rank second in the world after France. By way of example, let me mention the initiative we took in the early 1950' s in the pioneering stages of the Colombo Plan; the major contribution we are making to the welfare and development of Papua and New Guinea; our participation in the Mekong River development project and other co-operative international ventures; and our recent provision of special emergency aid to Indonesia through the bonus export scheme. It is for all of us to see that this area of the world, at present facing such difficulties but with so much to look forward to, is the better for our membership.
The development of our material resources is, then, the other half of our growth table our human resources being the first. I believe that it is possible to achieve a high rate of development of our resources; to absorb in the process and to use effectively a substantial amount of foreign capital; and to maintain at the same time a proper balance between our monetary resources and the level of demand. It is the firm intention of the Government to maintain as far as is humanly possible this state of high activity, and to take action as appropriate where developments threaten it. Our increasingly close economic, financial and trade relations with not only the Western Countries, but with Japan and our other neighbours in Asia, and our membership of the relevant international agencies, provide further guarantees that we can face the future with confidence.
If we can maintain pretty much the same relative position on overseas investment and keep our population increase going, our order of growth will be both high and steady. The more we grow, the more our capacity to generate more capital grows. And this is as it should be,
May I now take the two intangible components of the growth proposition I have put before you tonight. I take them together STABILITY and INITIATIVE and they make up the environment in which PEOPLE and MATERIAL RESOURCES can flourish. And what comes out at the end, of course, is GROWTH.
We need security to have stability and that is why we have treaty arrangements with powerful friends and why we are expanding our defence forces and our strength to discharge our international obligations. The defence programme, in the context of this lecture, is costing us 5 per cent of our gross national product, and 17 per cent of the planned expenditure in this year's Budget. We are now paying more for defence, as a percentage of GNP, than any other Western European country except America, Britain and France. Ours is rising while others are steady or decreasing.
Our defence programme therefore looms large in our economy and this I do not want to minimise. Our defence spending has more than doubled in five years from $ 428 million to $ 1100 million This has put, and will continue to put, heavy strains on the economy, but it is a matter for real satisfaction that we have been able to digest this fast moving programme without fracturing the economy at any one point. The rate of increased spending is such, however, that it has to have some limits and this we are constantly watching.
It is what we have to pay abroad for defence that hits us hardest and at present this is taking about 12 per cent of our total export earnings, mainly because we have to buy large sophisticated items that we cannot manufacture economically or within a desired timetable here. These include guided-missile destroyers, aircraft and submarines. These purchases produce a balance of payments commitment for us from which, incidentally, America and to a large extent Britain, are free. In the past year, for instance, with our exports going at a good pace and a trade surplus of some $ 95 million, we finished up " in the red" because of a net deficit on invisible payments. The bogeymen were defence spending and restraints imposed by capital-exporting countries.
Perhaps I should add a reference to the external aid we are giving to needy countries. This year, our aid bill will amount to about 0.75 per cent of our national income. Other donor nations are either holding a level or are reducing it. We are still going up by 14 per cent above last year. So it, too, adds its measure of pressure to our foreign exchange reserves.
Our balance of payments, and all its ingredients are therefore critical and we can control only part of the forces at work. Over the whole range of a nation's economy we, as a government, cannot finally determine the course of events, but we can influence pace and direction and help to create the right climate. We can also, to a certain extent, cushion the severity of the seasons.
The Government has so to order its fiscal policy that it helps to establish a reasonable balance between the demands of the public and private sectors of the economy. Supply and demand have to be on an approximate level and this has to be accepted as a habit of our national life, like bringing in the milk or having a birthday once a year. If we attempt too much, so that total spending exceeds the value at steady prices of domestic outputs, plus the resources available from abroad, then we have internal inflation, a balance of payments deficit, or both.
For stable growth, therefore, the level of demand is important. This is a problem of resources allocation. The Treasurer dealt with this in his Budget speech last month and I will not retrace the ground, Public spending is bound to continue rising because it represents the foundations of so much of our economic growth, but we have to give full recognition and proper weight to the private sector, which provides three-fourths of our employment, nearly all our export income, and is the other half of the national economic contract. And we must constantly watch the balance. This calls for fine tuning and not for spectacular adventures into " Stop" and " Go."
There is ample scope for initiative in a free enterprise economy such as ours, I take at random a few examples of Government initiative. Education is primarily a responsibility of the States and it is the State systems that have to provide the geologists, the engineers, the administrators, for our surging mineral industries and all the other fields of human endeavour in this country. Yet the Commonwealth has entered the field of higher education to the tune of $ 194 mil] lion this year an increase of 35 per cent on last year and about four times the figure of a few years ago, It has given a tremendous stimulus to tertiary education and research and over the years the feed-back of this into the economy will be considerable.
It has taken a lead in the development of export markets, sponsoring missions to new areas, telling the Australian story through its publicity channels, giving insurance protection to exporters in uncertain markets and providing taxation concessions.
On the home front, through its banking systems, it is giving help to primary and secondary industries needing capital for development. It is also co-operating with the private banks in the formation of a Bankers' Re-finance Corporation to help in the mobilisation of Australian capital for large-scale developmental enterprises. It has recently made provision for grants to companies to assist in research and the improvement of their technological skills. The Government seeks to open gates, but not to provide a free ride from the cradle to the grave for private enterprise, or to substitute public for private enterprise.
The Vice-Chancellor suggested to me that I might discuss the future trends of the economy. Prophecy is a dangerous exercise for the politician,
But there are some predictions I can make with a full measure of confidence:-
I see Australia as a nation with an assured future if we are given peace and a continuing partnership between Government and industry in a free enterprise system.
I see us as a nation of 15 million people in 10 to 12 years' time, with a growth rate and a productivity level ranking among the best of the developed nations of the Western world.
I see a nation without too many eggs in the one basket a nation with a much broader economic base, a greater variety of exports and more diversified markets.
I see quite spectacular rural development, with vast additional acreage responding to the application of the results of scientific research and improved pastures, water supply, and availability of greatly increased fertilizer production.
I see a spectacular development of our mineral industries, with new communities and new factories arising around them and I sense the thrill of new discoveries yet to be made.
I see a broader energy base for power in the continent. This will flow from our recent discoveries of oil and natural gas and the possibility of nuclear power for peaceful purposes on an economic basis.
I see Australia as a continent of stability in Asia, demonstrating to the emerging nations the happiness and practical virtues to be found by a fiee people in a Parliamentary democracy stimulated by incentives matching their energies and enterprise.
 I see a new intimacy developing with Japan and Indonesia and the other free nations of Asia and a still closer relationship with New Zealand as we share common tasks in this area.
 I see growth at work as something that cannot be guaranteed by edict or by magic formula but by the efforts of all our people.
The challenge and opportunities rest squarely on us. No man is an island and we cannot live in splendid isolation on our island continent any more than can man himself.
 



3 COCT 1967
CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES AND CHAMBER OF
COMMl~ ERCE JOINT LUNCHEON, PERTH, W. A.
13th SEPTEMBER, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Hughes; Mr. Henderson; Mr. Premier; Ministerial
and Parliamentary Colleagues of the Commonwealth and State
2arliaments; Members of the Chambers of Commerce and of
Manufactures; Distinguished Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am glad to learn from you, Mr. ' Hughes, that such is
the relative state of prosperity of the members of the two
Chambers, that you have been inundated with requests to attend
this function. That is a symptom of the buoyancy of this State
and of the remarkable development which is occurring here and
indeed occurring in abundant degrees through the Commonwealth
as a whole and I want to say something to you, Sir, on the
subject of growth today. But before doing so may I thank you
for your welcome, the kind things you have said about my
election to office. It is one thing to be greeted with a
resounding win at your first election. It is a more satisfying
thing to be able to repeat the performance,. and we hope that we
will give you satisfaction in what we attempt over the period
which lies ahead before we come to our accounting with you
again. And I think we can claim that at least in the state of
Australia-and in particular the condition of the state of
' ivestern Australia we can point with some satisfaction to
effective organisation of what are the principle elements of
growth. Our human resources, our material resources, functioning
in an atmosphere of stability, economic stability and political
stability in a state of national security and with an environment,
an economic climate which is encouraging to incentive to
enterprise and to initiative. And if the results which you are
manifesting in this state of W; estern Australia can be taken as
reflecting the effectiveness of governments, Commonwealth and
State, and their partners in these enterprises, those who
hazard their skills and their fortunes, the entrepreneurs so
strongly represented here today then, Sir, that partnership I
believe has demonstrated its effectiveness and it is our goal
to see that it continues effectively over the period ahead.
I had the pleasure of making wvhat I understand is a
little State and Australian history today by attending a meeting
with the Premier and mem'bers of his Cabinet. I learned that
this was the first time an Australian Prime Minister had performed
this function and it only stressed to me the need for a closer
relationship than perhaps we have had in the past, if we are to
make the Federation function effectively and if we are to secure
the degree of partnership with each other as Governments and
with you who contribute so much to our resources, our revenues
and to the advancement of the nation by your own efforts. I
hope that at least our meeting here today where we have been
able to go over some mutual items of interest is a symptom of
the desire we have for that closer co-operation in the future.
Sir, I mentioned that we had in a country of some
3,000 square miles and with less than 12 million people that we
had no, I am sorry it is 3 million square miles that is a
pretty big percentage of error, I thought there was a catch to
it still there are less than 12 million of people and so my
point stands in that direction. qVe have, if wie take a comparisonand
I do not employ this critically of the countries concerned
but as a mark of what we have ourselves achieved the gross
national product of this country of less than 12 million people,
and compare it with some of our neighbours, we find that India 
with a population 42 times our size generates in money value
just on double our gross national product. Pakistan and
Indonesia with populations 9 times our size that can point to
only one half the value of gross national product and so we
have been at least making advances ourselves in the way in which
we have managed our affairs inside this country. And we are
looking to greater things ahead for us, and in order to achieve
these greater things we have to build up our resources, our
human resources, which we are trying to do through an active
programme of immigration and the material resources largely
generated inside our own country. Eighty-five to 90% of our
fixed capital investment in Australia is generated from our
own resources but it is the remaining 10 to 15'/ which has been
so helpful in stimulating growth over these recent years. We
must do what we can to encourage that at the same time taking
such action as we can to make it possible for our fellow
Australians to participate appropriately in the development of
the resources of this country.
Thanks to this programme of population building we
have added 50% to our population over the last 20 years. Canada
is probably the only country that can point to a similar volume
of growth although I do not overlook the quite phenomenal
performance in a smaller population which Israel has carried
out but comparably Australia and Canada would rank outstandingly
amongst the industrialised countries of the world in the degree
of population growth they have attained through immigration.
And what th'is has meant to us is that whereas without
immigration we would have had about one-third of our population
under the age of 20, we have been able to lower the median age
of the population with all that that means in terms of work
force effort, the addition to the consumer requirements of the
community and the other advantages that a smaller average age
of the community brings to us. This has, as a result of
immigration, moved now from less than one-third under 20 to
something of the order of 407o under 20. If we had not had this
programme there would have been a drop in the number of people
in the 20 to 34 age group of about 132,000. Thanks to it we
have an increase more than double that dimension rather than a
fall of that size. 9hen we look to the skills which have been
brought to us as a consequence of this process, 42% 14 of those,
the males, coming to settle with us are skilled, against about
one in three of our own proportion of the work force. And so
the reliance we have come to place and I stress it to
members of two Chambers which have given us strong support in
this programme, I stress it to emphasise its importance for our
growth as a nation is that whereas even as recently as 1961,
immigration contributed 29% of our population growth, last year
it actually contributed because of our own declining birthrate
for a variety of social factors, it contributed 4%%
Now looking at this from another aspect, if it costs
about 5,000 to rear a child to productive age, then each
migrant who comes to us represents a considerable financial
asset. But as my friend, the Premier, realises only too well,
while you have that advantage of a saving in the cost of
bringing a child up to working capacity, you have the claims
on the community in the social and capital facilities of the
community which bear very heavily on governments and require
about 3 to 4% for migrants alone of our gross national product.
But with all this we have managed to succeed over the past five
years in maintaining a growth rate in Australia of an average
of 5-and this is only exceededso far as we can ascertain, by
one industrialised country, Japan and that high average growth
rate has been achieved despite a year of very serious drought
just a few years ago, serious, ccrtdinly, in relation to
Queensland and New South viales. doe are doing much to help 
ourselves although we have turned to foreign investment to a
degree as I mentioned earlier but no country with the exception
of Japan ploughs more of its national income back into investment
than Australia roughly 27% of our gross national product
compared with 16 to 17% in the United Kingdom and in the United
States. Now all this has been a background to what have been
the quite spectacular and remarkable developments of recent
years, notably in the mineral field and no State has shown up
more spectacularly in this connection than has your State of
Western Australia. I am informed that the value of output from
our mining industries currently is of' the order of $ 900M. and
this should reach about " W1,700M. by 1975. Mr. Court would be
more familiar with these figures that I now mention than I am,
but my colleague, the Minister for National Development who is
with us, will have advised me that we have in sight iron ore
contracts, I think for this State alone, of an order of $ 39000M.
over the next 20 years. Somie 50 new mineral projects involving
a capital of 42,400M. are currently in progress in Australia,
and of course prospecting is going on actively for a great many
more. Now having mentioned something of what is occurring
inside the country, those of you who are here as representatives
of commerce will be well aware of the notable increase which is
occurring in our trade with Asia. In the early ' 50' s 15% of our
exports went East of Suez. Now more than 30% of our exports are
going East of Suez and with the percentage tending to rise.
Japan has, of course, become our largest customer, outstripping
the United Kingdom, and again, the trade there is on a rising
curve. As I went recently through some of the countries of Asia
I was struck with the potentialities which exist for the trade
of this country in the future, particularly in places such as
Taiwan and Korea. In both of those, Mr. Premier, they were
talking to me of the steel industries that they were setting up
there with a consortium already established in each of the two
countries and both said that they would be looking to Australia
for the iron ore they would be needing for that industry. And
this is just typical of the sort of growth which lies ahead for
us. Now if I may move from that broad economic picture to
a topic which may at first seem a little remote but does bear
quite intimately on our future prospects, the kind of stability,
security, the economic climate to which I referred in general
terms a little earlier, and that is the issue which has faced
us in Vietnam. I stress this because in recent times there has
been perhaps a disposition either to allow to recede into the
background the vital considerations which moved us to accept an
involvement in Vietnam and which at the ti; ne persuaded us that
not only was security involved but the kind of future of the
area in which we live that we want to see developed.
Now, of course, there are various important reasons
why we took the decision to participate. We have fought in two
world wars very far from Australian shores to support those who
were trying to resist aggression, small countries, themselves
under attack by larger powers and in this instance, of course,
the geographical factor is a very much more proximate one than
was the case in thnose two world wars. Darwin is closer to Saigon
than Perth is to Brisbane and so there is a security factor
involved there which was not apparent to us even in the same
degree in the two world wars. But in principle we were resisting
much the same thing a small nation under aggression from
others and we joined in the task of resisting it.
Secondly, of course, we ourselves being a small nation,
if we regard others as expendable and not worthy of support when
they come under attack can have no real assurance that we, should 
4.
that situation ever arise, be ourselves able to rely on others
to come to our aid. In this connection, the realities of' our
present circumstances are that the most important pillar of
security for the Australian nation is the alliance we have with
the United States of' America and we are joined in the ANZLJS
Treaty, and for our part we have seen in the American action,
first in resisting aggression in Korea, secondly in coming to
the aid of South Vietnam, the same sort of principle of aid to
a weaker country that is wrapped up in the American obligation
in ANZUS there set out in more precise terms and perhaps more
reliably stated, but nonetheless the willingness of the United
States to join in resisting aggression there has been a matter
which we have had to properly take into account in our own
decision in relation to our participation in Vietnam.
And I mentioned the bearing it has on the kind of
world in which we wish to live, to trade, to co-operate and to
join in the activities of the region and what is far too often
overlooked, is the benefit that we have received and the countries
of the area have received. While we are conscious of all the
problems and agonies that are going on in Vietnam itself, there
is far less disposition on the part of the critics to look at
what has been achieved on the positive side in such countries
as Korea, and Taiwan, around the whole periphery of Asia in
Thailand, the Philippines, in South Vietnam itself' with some
prospect that this thing can be sorted out, of a secure and
prospering life in the future, and Australia and New Zealand
themselves made the more secure because of' the guarantees we
have against aggression if' that were ever to be directed against
us. So there have been these benefits immediately discernible,
currently discernible as a result of the resistance to aggression
in this area. Now, I lead from that to the query which I know arises
in the minds of many people, " Well why if' you feel this way
about Vietnam do you continue to trade with China?" And,
properly understood, there is no inconsistency in these two
courses of action.
We demonstrated in the case of Indonesia, when the
confrontation policy was in force there, that it was possible
on the one hand to resist the processes of confrontation but at
the same time maintain a channel which enabled a relationship
of friendship and of mutual interest to build up when circumstances
made this propitious. And we all know that there must come a
time when the free world will, with China, have to find an
accommodation, a process of' peaceful co-existence.
' te are not at war with China. We are engaging in
international trade on items which can be procured by that
country from a vaiiety of' countries. The products we sell,
wheat, wool, even steel, are readily procurable by China from
other parts of' the world. The steel sales, about which so much
of' public criticism was directed against us, represent less than
one-third of' 1% of' the steel availability from sources which
China has either internally or which it produces from overseas.
So, what we sell is itself marginal. Our total trade with China
represents less than 2% of the imports of that country from
other parts of' the world. And so they can dispense with their
trade with us far more with far less inconvenience and damage
to their economy than Australia can. Vie can put to better and
more effective use nationally what we secure from our trade than
the effect would be if it were to be cut off by China altogether,
and the bearing it would have on their trade.
But on the other hand just as trade does build up some
mutuality of' interest, some prospect of a capacity to live more
securely and in greater friendship with a country so we find that 
this trade that China has with the free world has more than
doubled over the past five yeara. It has moved from 35-/ 0 of
total imports to 70% of total imports and that, one would
imagine, would in the long run have a bearing upon the policies
which finally emerge from China in relation to the rest of the
free world. Now, Sir, I know that you like to keep to a fairly
tight schedule in functions such as this, so could I just by
way of conclusion offer a few broad predictions as I, Head of
Australian Government, see the future course unfolding over the
years ahead. Surely if we can maintain a situation of peace
and peace is relative these days, we regard ourselves as being
at peace in one sense even when we have military forces engaged
as they are in Vietnam but the effect on the national economy
as a whole is still that of a peacetime economy, and providing
that a situation of' peace can be continued, Australia must be
able to look to an assured future and a continuance of effective
pcrtnership in a free enterprise system with Governments
co-operating in our Federation.
We can foresee a nation of 15 million people in 10 to
12 years' time with a growth rate and a productivity level
ranking among the best of the developed nations of the Western
world. As a nation with a diversification of our industry we
should be able to carry on without putting too many eggs into
one basket a nation with a much broader economic base a
greater variety of exports and more diversified markets. We
can look, with the application of methods of science and increased
fertiliser production, to spectacular rural development with
very large additional acreages responding to this scientific
knowledge and the application of scientific methods. We have
already witnessed a spectacular development of our mineral
industries with new communities, new factories arising around
them, and no-one imagines that we are at the end of discoveries
in this direction. We have a broader energy base for power
developing in the continent. This will flow from our recent
discoveries of oil and natural gas and the possibility of nuclear
power for peaceful purposes on an economic basis. We see our
own country as a continent of stability in Asia demonstrating
to the emerging nations there the happiness and practical virtues
to be found by a free people in a parliamentary democracy
stimulated by incentives matching their energies and enterprise.
WVe find a new intimacy developing with Japan, with Indonesia,
and the other free nations of Asia and a still closer relationship
likely to develop with New Zealand as we share some common
tasks in the area.
So we find in all these directions growth at work not
as something that can be guaranteed by edict but growth which
responds to the efforts of governments and peoples co-operating
freely together. And in that process I pay a tribute to the
Government of this State which itself has given so much by way
of leadership and effort to the prosperous growth of the State.
I hope I can be pardoned for including my able colleagues from
destern Australia, of my own MVinistry and of my own Parliament,
Senators and M~ embers from this State. They are of a high calibre
and I am indebted to them for all the assistance they bring to
the processes of Government.
Finally, it is through the work of responsible bodies
like your two Chambers that the partnership which the Premier and
I, and the Mlembers of our Governments so fervently desire, can be
given the most valuable practical expression by having responsible
voices with responsible membership conferring with us and able
to work out with us the policies which serve the national interest
best. It is in that spirit that I look confidently to a continuation
of the progress which in Western Australia and in Queensland, 
6.
another great State of tremendous potential now stirring perhaps
for the first time in its long history into great activity. It
is through developments such as these that we look confidently
to the greater Australia of the future and to see ahead a
stronger, more prosperous and happier nation to which we can
all usefully contribute. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 7 P. M.
FRIDAY, 15 1967
S1E96P7 -4PM No. 92/ 1967
FOR PRESS* AUSTRALIAN LOAN-IN LONDON
Statement by the Prime Minlister and Chairman
of the Australian Loan Council? Mr-Harold Holt~
A new Australian cash loan is to be issued in London
next week. This will be the first Australian loan issued on
the London market since October 1963.
The new loan will be for an amount of œ CStg 14 million
35 million) and will have an interest coupon of 7 per cent.
The loan will finally mature in September 1981 and will have an
issue price of 99, offering the investor a yield of 7.11 per cent.
While this will be the highest yield ever offered in a
Commonwealth loan raised overseas, underwriting and other charges
are considerably lower in London than in other oversea capital
markets. From the point of view of the borrower, this offsets
to a large extent the difference between the interest coupon
now being offered by major borrowers in London and the slightly
lower interest coupons which are possible in other markets.
The approval of the British authorities was originally
obtained for a conversion loan of œ-Stg 14+ million to refinance
State Government maturities of œ Stg 14+. 6 million 36.6 million)
which fell due on 1 July 1967, but the market conditions at the
time made this impracticable. The new cash loan is in effect a
deferred refinancing operation for the securities which were
repaid on maturity on 1 July. Funds for this purpose were
provided partly from the National Debt Sinking Fund and partly
from a special internal loan subscribed to by the Commonwealth
on 1 July out of the cash balances of the Loan Consolidation and
Investment Reserve. 
In accordance with the undertaking given to the
States last year to arrange for the refinancing of their
oversea maturities at Australian rates of interest until
June 1969, the new loan will be issued in the name of the
Commonwealth. Since October 1963, four Australian loans totalling
œ Stg 59 million have been paid off in London on reaching
their final maturity dates. After allowing for market
purchases by the National Debt Sinking Fund, Australian
debt in London has been reduced by approximately œ Stg
million 200 million) since July 1964. A further œ Stg 100
million 250 million) Australian securities mature in
London before the end of 1972, mostly resulting initially
from State Government loans raised 20 or more years ago.
It is against this background that the Commonwealth
has decided, with the approval of the Loan Council, to re-enter
the London market on this occasion after a break of four years.
oOo
NOTE: During the absence of the Treasurer ( Mr. McMahon)
overseas, Mr. Holt is Chairman of the Australian
Loan Council. This follows normal procedures
adopted when the Treasurer, whom the Prime Minister
customarily nominates as Chairman, is overseas.
CANBERRA September 1967 



44 OCT 1967 -4
OF'NING OF E: UvIOUTH TO--INSHIP,
r-' S AUTSETPRLANL IA G) RA
16th S1"* EPTEMBER, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Colonel Murdochi Mr. Premier and Mrs. Brand; Mr. Ambassador;
Fellow M. 1inisters of the Commonwealth Government and State
lvinisters; Eembers of the Par-.-liaments of the Commonwealth
and of the 6tate.; Distinguished Forces representatives of
the Australian and United States Forces and so very many
Distinguished Guests around me; Ladies and Gentlemen; Boys
and Girls: I really, despite that rather imposing introduction,
have a relatively minor part to play in this particular ceremony,
because very properly this is the occasion in which the 1Premier
of the State is the star both attraction and personality.
But having come so many miles and speaking for so many of our
fellow Australians, I know the Premier will allow me to indulge
myself for a few minutes with you, the more particularly as I
think that what I feel or have to say is not without some
continuing advantage for the State which he so ably represents.
It is not very often that I have the opportunity to
come to an official opening in the North WJest of Australia.
This is only my second visit in a long public lifetime. I
hope that thanks to the facilities which an improving V. I. P.
fleet provide for me I'll be here more often. But it has been
several years in between visits and in ' 60 or ' 61 I made my
first, and there was nothing, of course, of this development
here then, nothing of the development which I have been witnessing
in the last few days at Xambalda, at 14' ount Tom Price, at Dampier,
even Port Hedland was in those days not a very exciting port
for one to visit. Eut over these few days of this week I have
developed a new feeling of encouragement and inspiration about
the future of this country, and it is to people like yourselves,
to a Government such as that led by Mr. Brand with his team of
able Ministers, that the rest of Australia which depends so
largely upon the efforts of people who live more remotely from
the great capital cities, who accept their remoteness cheerfully,
who put up with hardships and conditions which would not be
accepted in many instances by those in the capital cities, that
so much of our prosperity and growing national strength have
become due. And so I say first a word of appreciation to you
all. There is a disposition, perhaps, to think of Australia's
pioneering stage as an era of the past. But anybody who has
been around the areas of this State that I have visited in
recent days, is made very conscious that there is a new pioneering
spirit abroad and one which is enriching the nation, strengthening
its capacity to grow in so many different directions. I only
wish that those who are critical of the participation of people
from other countries and after all when you dwell on it
most of that participation comes from the United Kingdom and
the United States, two countries with which we have a great
feeling, of warmth, of kinship and a friendship and whose
ability to merge successfully with us has become a matter of
experience beyond challenge. But if they could sense, as I
have sensed, the growing national strength arising from these
developments, the way in which Australian industry, Australian
enterprise, the technical skills of our country have been
promoted as a result of this process of development, stimulated
by people with, in some instances, a larger vision and a larger
courage in the developmental field thian we have shown ourselves
and contributing from their knowledge and experience to what
we can put to good advantage here in Australia. 
2.
Now, in this particular tow,, n of Exmouth, you have a
quite unusual combination. I have been speaking of development
whera we are dealing in matters that come to us from a primaeval
past, the mineral resources which have been down for untold
centuries of time but here in Lxmouth you are reaching out to
the modernity of an outer space era and yet combining it in
circumstances in which you have had to do a pioneering job in
this township itself. For 1Vr. Premier it is no novel experience
to attend an opening of some new area of significance in his
State. To me it is a quite exciting and comparatively rare
event, and I rejoice to be with you here today and take part
in these celebrations because dotted around the State, particularly
the northern part of this State of W.* estern Australia, are names
which were formerly unknown or non-existent but which have now
become part of Australia's story of development and from which
Australia, and an increasingly large body of admiring observers
outside this country, can derive some interest and some satisfaction.
I understand, Mr. *." remier, that my principal task
today is to plant a time capsule. Somebody gave me a list of
the items contained in this capsule. I hasten to add that I
did not make the selection myself but I've no doubt it is of
a discriminating kind ana' for those who are able to open the
capsule at some future point of time, I hope they will derive
both inspiration and interest from our quite energetic endeavours
that have been made to bring this fine township into existence.
It will spell out the history oZf the towln and of the communications
station, the plans of the town and station, it will contain a
letter of good-will from ths Commanding Offficer and from the Civil
Commissioner and to Captain Friedman and to Colonel Iiurdoch
Colonel Murdoch being of course so directly responsible for
the welfare of the town itself. We are delighted to know that
they are going to be immortalized in this way. There will be
the names of the residents I hope they have all earned a
place and will behave themselves in the future to merit it
including the schoolchildren, although we would not want to
curb their normal ebullience or exuberance. There will be
copies of today's newspapers. I suspect that mostly they
will contain leading articles criticising the Commonwealth
Government for not doing enough in one direction or another.
There will be a copy of the WVestern Australian telephone
directory and by the time this capsule is opened, we, will
probably need a battery of telephone books like they have in
New York. There will be private letters from residents to
descendants, seeds of local plants with planting directions
and some shells which will probably be rare in 100 hundred
years' time. So altogether those who open up this capsule
should find much to interest them.
But the final comment I wish to make is that here in
this township we have an embodiment of the partnership between
our two democracies the greatest democracy in size, in power
and economic strength the world has aver known, the United States,
and our own young, thrusting, thriving democracy which we in
our confidence and in our ambition believe will have a major
role to play in this area of the world and perhaps by a force
of our own example with the kind of life we can build together
as a people, provide some encouragement and example for others
who are struggling to achieve the standards which it has been
our good fortune already in Australia to attain.
This is a symbol of a friendship between two peoples
of common heritage of similar ideas in so many aspocts of life,
particularly in the great principles of human freedom, of justice
under the law, of democratic institutions, and of a desire to
live peacefully with our neii-hb ours, thrive and prosper together,
and a willingness to contribute from our own good fortune to 
3.
assist others to better standards in the future. And this
quite small township measured in terms of the capital cities
of the nation, embodies that partnership, it maintains a
spirit which I hope in times of difficulty and they will
arise even between two friendly nations will remind us that
here is a part of Australia where our countrymen have shown
they can live together in happiness and to mutual advantage.
May Exmouth long continue to symbolize the Australian/
American alliance and all that our friendship the one with the
other can stand for in relation to the peace, progress and
prosperity of the world. 



ORLNING OF THE U. S. NAVAL COM.-UNICATION
STATION AT NORTH-.' BST CAP:, W2ETLSTZRN AUSTRLIA
16th SEPTEMBER, 1967
Speech by the Prime Yinister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Premier; Your Excellencies; Admiral Johnson and
other distinguished United States Naval servicemen; the
distinguished servicemen of Australian Forces present here;
my Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues and the representative
of the Opposition in the Federal and State Parliaments; and
the very many distinguished guests, much too numerous for me
to single out although no doubt the contribution which so many
of you have made woul. d justify that; and you, Ladies and
Gentlemen and Boys and Girls:
This is a notable and indeed a historic day in the
history of our young nation. The station itself is located in
an area which has already made some contribution to Australian
history because not only do we stand at the most north-westerly
point of our continent but Learmonth in the Second World War
saw a happy comradeship of Australian and United States
servicemen as our aircraft moved in and out into action from
the Learmonth airport.
And we recall here in Australia still with gratitude
indeed we commemorate that notable occasion annually the
critical Battle of the Coral Sea which virtually spared our
country from a hostile invasion, thanks to the assistance and
the might of the forces of the United States. And from the
comradeship and partnership of that ' World * 4r pa-rticularly
in this area of the world, although of course there had been
a comradeship cemented in the First Wdorld Wdar, but it was in
the Second World bbar that we came so close to each other as
nati-ons. And we learned to value the more fully the friendship
and the help that one could bring to the other. Flowing from
this came the ANZUS treaty that alliance between the United
States, Australia and New Zealand which, in my judgment, ranks
as the greatest single contributing factor to the long-term
security of this nation in the history of the Australian Federation.
I welcomed Admiral Johnson the comment you made your first
comment when you came here showing your own realisation of
the need for us to keep closely together in matters of security
through the future history of this region of the world.
And that happy community partnership which we now
find here in Exmouth itself flowing from this project is not
of course a surprising thing because we have in both our
countries a common heritage of British freedom and of British
democratic institutions. These have influenced our own national
growth although the composition of our countries in time becomes
affected, and affected richly to our advantage we have discovered,
by the influx into our respective country yours in very much
greater numbers than ours in the United States but we in turn
with 40 nationalities now making their contribution to Australian
growth and Australian strength. But we are finding that in this
richer community we still have a basic reliance upon the principles
of freedom and the democratic institutions which were part of
our common heritage.
Now, Sir, this ' Centre is, I may clearly say, a
sensible, practical, logical extension of the ANZUS spirit,
an application of the ANZUS spirit to a particular project.
In a sense it made history, because for the first time we
found here on Australian soil a project in which there were
established on a continuing basis the forces of another
country. But we do not think in terms of a foreign country 
2.
with the United States. le have a basis of friendship, a
closeness of co-operation, an interdependence of interest
which has drawn both our countries very closely together.
Earlier this week and I say this in particular
to you, Mr. Premier I have been visiting some of the more
notable development projects in your State. It makes a rather
striking contrast to contemplate that here we have been seeing
great economic developments arising, from our extraction and
processing of minerals which have stood undisturbed through
the aeons of time and to come, as I did only yesterday, to
this project which is the modern, technical expression in
its most recent form, a matter for wonderment to laymen like
myself. Now Australians, although small in number and remote
geographically from other parts of the world, or those parts
where scientific development has proceeded most extensively,
have perhaps it may appear rather curiously to some shown
a very real interest in matters of radio physics, in astronomy,
in outer space research and items of that kind. There may be
some who think that because so many of us have experience of
vast lonely spaces and clear blue skies and more opportunity
of contemplating the constellations, the 1' ilky day than other
nationalities, that this has some bearing on it. There may
be a feeling that the very fact that we incorporate the Southern
Cross in our national flag is an expression of our interest
in these matters astronomical. Another cause, of course, which
has a very real bearing on this is that, geographically placed
as we are, Australia is able to make a contribution to space
research and to the study of the heavens which supplements
what is done in the Northern Hemisphere.
But be that as it may, we have developed our own
expertise in the tracking stations, in such places as Parkes
with a radio-telescope there and at 1doomera, where at the
present time we have a joint project with the United States,
the Sparta Project which is adding to our knowledge of matters
in which we have a mutual interest. And whether there is some
special significance in this or not, well I leave to others to
fathom. The fact is that it does exist and this, I think it
will be agreed, makes us worthy partners in this enterprise.
Perhaps it also would be not inappropriate to use in this
context the torin " wavelengths" because Australians and Americans
do seem to find it possible to get on a wavelength with each
other with far less crackling static than is usually found in
relations between one country and another.
Now the purpose of this station is to improve the
efficiency of our efforts to maintain security and peace not
only in this area of the world but as a contribution to peace
throughout the world as a whole. And I wonder how many people
pause to realise just what is the magnitude of thc American
contribution to the peace of the world at this time. Certainly
those of us who live in South-E~ ast Asia or the Asian region
have very good cause to know the magnitude of that contribution.
I wonder how many of my fellow countrymen know that if you
take the periphery of Asia running round from South Korea,
Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines, South Vietnam itself, Thailand,
Australia and New Zealand, just to mention those in particular,
there has virtually been underwritten by this mighty power the
security of free p., eoples in those countries. , e realise it in
relation to ANZUS but I wonder how many of us recognise that
this is the order of dimension of the American undertaking and
the American contribution to the peace of the area. And we
honour you, Admiral Johnson, and all associated with you in
the contribution that you and your servicemen are making to
underwrite this guarantee of freedom. 
3.
Now, here in this centre we are able by our joint
efforts to make a contribution. Frankly, I had not even through
all that I had read been led to prepare my mind for the v'qstness
of the enterprise. To think that there are those 13 towers
out there, all higher than the Eiffel Tower in Paris, all
constructed to withstand the cyclonic gales which occasionally
assail this part of the coast, and even the sight of them
leaves one unprepared for what one sees when you come close and
get inside the structures. It's almost bewildering and dazzling
to see the complexity and scale of equipment that goes into
the task that this centre will serve.
And so we express today as Australians, and I as
Head of an Australian Government, our appreciation to the
contribution this enterprise will bring to our s' uarity and
the security of other free peoples. Re also kn-. and we
will be saying perhaps something more on this at the ceremony
which follows later in -the township itself what this has
meant to this particular relatively isolated part of Australia
in terms of community development, and the happy partnership
which has been revealed under the stress of war is again
exemplified in the happy community spirit which you have
developed in this township.
I spoke earlier of the power of the United States
and we do well to reflect that this power is used for the
purposes of peace. I know of no action or policy decision
of a Government of the United States which is directed to
its own aggrandisement or the acquisition of additional
territory under its own control. It is there as a force for
freedom and peace in the world, and we in our dav and generation
have cause, as we go about our own task of developing our
nation and building up our security, to be grateful for the
security which is underwritten virtually for us by this great
power which has used its strength with so much restraint and
with such a high principle as its purpose.
This, the first United States' station on Australian
soil will, I hope, long continue as a symbol of the continuing
partnership between our two countries and al". tñ.. at this
partnership stands for in terms of happiness, security and
interdependence of free peoples in the life of the world as
it develops ahead of us. And so to me it is a particular
pleasure, as the Head of the Australian Government and people,
to be personally associated here today with a ceremony which
is both historic in itself and important in its symbolism. 



4 OCT 1967
EXTRACT FROM PRIME MINISTER'S LUNCH-TIME
STREET MEETING AT GLADSTONE,( QLD.)
21st September, ,167
Now before I conclude, I will turn quite briefly to those other
aspects I mentioned, because while we do concentrate our attention upon
our own forward progress, at the same time, we cannot ignore the hazards
that we face as a nation or the state of the world around us.
That is why the central issue in the last general election
campaign was the issue of the security of the nation and our attitudes
towards our participation in Vietnam and towards the alliance we have with
the United States of America.
No matter in my lifetime has meant more to the future
security of Austral'a than the negotiation of the ANZUS treaty. That treaty
between Australia, New Zealand and the United States, under which the
security of the other was virtually guaranteed f we came under attack at
any time nothing means more to us today for our security in a country of
this size with so few people than the knowledge that should we be threatened
at any time, the mightiest power in the world is there to come to our defence.
I am glad to say that I found no wavering at any time in the attitude of the
public men of the United States, successive Fresidents, their spokesmen,
and others. Cnly in the last few days, Admiral Johnson, Chief of the
United States Pacific Fleet, who came out for the opening of the North-V. iest
Cape Communications Station where I performed the official ceremony last
Saturday morning, reiterated their determination to remain in this area of
the world to contribute to security.
Ncw our involvement in Vietnam is wrapped up in this as it
is in other things. In the first place, we don't believe in small countries being
attacked by more powerful countries or more : owerful influences. have
gone to war twice in two world wars to resist aggression against small powers.
Secondly, we believe that if Vietnam were to go under, then the security of the
whole of South-East Aeia would come under threat, and finally the security of
Australia itself. Thirdly, as I have just pointed out to you, we believe that
unless we are willing to join with our allies in the time of need of others,
then we can place little reliance on them coming to our aid should we ever
be in that state of need.
It is not so long ago that we were troubled by what was going
on in Indonesia. There are 1CC million people there and they were pursuing
a policy of confrontation against Malaysia and Singapore. Well, matters have
quietened down there, and I hope we shall always be able to live in peace and
co-operation with the people of Indonesia.
But we cannot take any of these things for granted. And as
we build up our own defences, and we have more than doubled expenditure on
them in the last four as we build up the strength of our
services and they have never been at a higher levelof efficiency nor strength
at any period in which we have not been involved in total as we do
these things, so also must we keep our alliance strong. 
-2-
Now, does anybody in their senses imagine that you can
keep that alliance strong if the policy of the Labor Party on this matter
were ever to be given effect? And the present policy and in substance
it is the same as the policy that the Austral. an people rejected in the last
election the present policy is that unless the Americans accept conditions
which the Labor Party must know to be unacceptable to them, then we will
be pulling our troops out of Vietnam. V. e will be deserting as was the
policy put forward by Mr Calwell at the last election we will be deserting
our allies in a time of military operation. Well, I know the Australian
people would never agree to that. They did not agree to it last November
and I don't believe you are going to agree to that in the vote that you cast
this time. 



HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT BILL ( NO. 3) 1967." L'&gt; R
NOTES FOR THE MINISTER'S SECOND READING SPEECH.
This Bill will give effect to proposals outlined in the
Budget Speech. The proposal affecting most taxpayers is, of course, the
increase of $ 26 in the amounts of the concessional deductions
allowable for maintenance of dependants. The increase is to apply
over the full range of dependants for whom concessional deductions
are provided. The deductions for a spouse, a daughter-housekeeper,
an invalid relative and a parent will each be increased from $ 286 to
$ 312, for a student child under 21 years of age and one child under
16 years of age the increase will be from $ 182 to $ 208, and for each
other child under 16 years from $ 130 to " 156. The allowance for a
housekeeper is also to be increased from $ 286 to $ 312.
Another concessionaj deduction for which an increase is
proposed is the allowance for payments by a taxpayer to provide
superannuation or insu-rance cover for himself and his family. The
present limit of 8OO on the maximum deduction allowable each year
is to be increased to l, 2OO.
These increases in the concessional deductions will apply
in assessments for the 1967-68 income year and subsequent years.
For salary and wage earners, the benefits from the increased
dependants' allowances will be reflected in reduced tax instalment
deductions to become operative from 1st October next.
The remaining amendmients proposed by the Bill apply to
primary producers. In 1965 and again in 1966 the Government introduced
temporary measures to assist woolgrowers who, because of the drought,
advanced shearing dates during the 1964-65 and the 1965-66 income
years. When this occurred the proceeds of two wool clips would have
been brought to account for taxation purposes in the one year.
Provision was, therefore, made for these woolgrowers to elect to
transfer the net proceeds of the second clip to the succeeding
income year, so that the proceeds were taxed in the year in which,
in ordinary circumstances, they would have been received.
It is proposed to continue the operation of-these provisions
for the 1966-67 income year and subsequent years, and to extend them
also to advanced shearings brought about by fire or flood.
Another amendment proposed by the Bill will apply to
primary producers who, because of drought, fire or flood, are
forced to sell livestock. The present law enables a primary
producer forced to sell stock in these circumstances to elect to
have the profits of the sale taxed over a period of five years,
if he -uses the proceeds of the sale principally for the purpose
of re-stocking. 
2-
The Bill proposes an alternative m-ethod of bringing the
profits of a forced sale to accounit for income tax purposes. In
very general terms, a primary producer who uses the proceeds of
the sale principally for re-stocking may, in respect of sales made
in 1967-68 or a subsequent income year, elect to have the profit
on the sale applied to reduce the cost for income * tax purposes of
stock purchased to replace the stock sold. The effect of an
election will be to defer payment of tax on -the proceeds of the
forced sale until replacement stock purchased is sold in the normal
course of carrying on business.
In some cases stock may be replaced by breeding up a new
flock or herd, instead of buying animals. When this is the case,
a primary producer may specify an amount of the profit of the
forced sale to be included in his assessable income of the year
in which natural increase is bred.
If, by the end of the fifth year after the year in which
the forced sale occurred, any amounit of the profits of the sale has
not been applied in either of the ways I have mentioned the amount
will be included in the primary producer's assessable income of
that year. A further proposal relates to the cost of su; bdivisional
fencing constructed on land used in primary production. Atk present,
this fencing is generally subject to depreciation allowances at
the special rate of 20 per cent. It is proposed to permit the cost
of this type of fencing to be wholly deducted in the year in which
it is incurred. Boundary fences or fences around stock-yards are
not included in the scope of this proposal. These will remain
su; bject to depreciation allowances. The amendment will apply to
expenditure incurred on subdivisional fencing during the 1967-68
income year and subsequent years.
The final proposal affecting primary producers is the
continuation, without any limit as to time, of the special 20 per
cent depreciation allowances on plant and structural improvements
used wholly and exclusively for primary production purposes.
A memorandum explaining each clause of the Bill is being
circulated for the information of honourable members and I do not
propose to go into further detail at this stage.
I commend the Bill to the House. 



HOUSE OF -RE'LRESE-1ITAT IVES
INCOL-2 TAX (] PRTMERSHIPS AND TRUSTS) BILL1 1967
NOTES FOR THE MINISTER'S -SECO17D READING SPEECH.
This Bill will declare the rates of income tax for the
financial year 1967-68 on income of certain superannuation funds,
trust estates and members of partnerships.
These are special rates which have been declared in
relation to the 1965-66 and 1966-67 financial years. Yo change is
proposed for the current financial year. Honourable members will,
no doubt, recall that the special rates are imposed for the purposes
of legislation which, following the Government's consideration of the
report of the Ligertwood Committee on Taxation, was enacted in 1964
with a view to placing a curb~ on tax avoidance practices to which
the Committee drew attention.
A rate of 50 per cent is declared by the Bill for income
of a trust estate, other than a deceased estate, to which no
beneficiary is presently entitled and. which is not taxed as if it
were the income of one individual.
A rate of 50 per cent is also declared for the taxable
income of a superannuation fund that is not exempt from tax. This
rate does not, however, apply to the investment income of a fund that
is subject to tax only because of the fund's failure to comply with
the " 130/ 20" 1 rule concerning investments in public securities. The
rates on this income are proposed by the Income Tax Bill 1967 and also
remain unchanryed from th1ose that applied last year.
As to income from a share in a partnership over which a
person lacks, or is deemed to lack, real and effective control and
disposal, the Bill will impose a rate of further tax sufficient to
bring the aggregate rate on the income up) to 50 per cent. If a
taxpayer's avera-, e personal rate of tax is 50 p~ er cent or more, no
further tax is imposed under this Bill.
I commend the Bill to the House. 



HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
INCOME TAX BILL 1967
NOTES FOR THE MINISTER'S SECOND READING SPEECH.
This Bill will declare the general rates of tax for the
current financial year 1967-60'.
The rates to be declared do not differ from those that
applied for the preceding financial year. As anniounced in the
Budget Speech, however, there are to be two changes in the income
tax allowance for men aged 65 years or more, and women of 60 years
or more, who are residents of Australia.
One of these changes will increase the exemption levels
of the age allowance by $ 126. This will preserve the long-standing
relationship between the age allowance and the amount represented
by the sum of the full age pension and the maximum other income a
pensioner may receive without affecting his pension entitlement.
Honourable members will recall that the age pension means
test was increased last April by $ 156. Legislation enacted shortly
afterwards increased the amount of the age allowance for 1966/ 67 by
on a simple pro-rata time basis. For 1967/ 68 the allowance is
to be increased by the balance of $ 126. This will mean that the
exemption levels for 1967/ 68 will be $ 1,196 for a single person and
$ 2,106 for a married couple as against $ 1,070 and l, 98O, respectively,
last financial year. A measure of tax relief will continue to be
provided on a range of incomes somewhat in excess of these points.
The new limits for this purpose will be $ 1,451 for single persons and
$ 3,287 for married couples.
The other change in the age allowance will simplify the
way in which it is calculated. For many years the allowance has
been related to an aged person's net income fromall sources, as
distinguished from his taxable income. While this is justifiable
in principle, it has, without the slightest do-ubt, caused a great
deal of misunderstanding of the allowance in the minds of aged
people and complicated not only the preparation of their income tax
returns but also the general administration of the taxation law.
The Commonwealth Committee on Taxation headed by
Sir George Ligertwood recommended that the allowance be simplified
by relating it to taxable income instead of net income and this is
now being done. This change will not only simplify procedures;
it will also enhance the value of the allowance in the numerous
cases where aged persons receive income such as war pensions which
are exempt from tax, or incur medical and other expenses which are
deductible in calculating taxable income.
The technical provisions of the Bill are explained in
greater detail in a memorandum to be circulated for the information
of honourable members and . nothink I need go further into it
at this stage. I commend the Bill to the House. 



VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY THE PRESIDENT OF
ITALY, SIGNOR GIUSEPFPE SARAGAT
SPEECH OF WELCOME BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR HAROLD
HOLT AT PARLIAMENTARY LUNCHEON,
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 26TH SEPTEMBER, 1 67
President Saragat, the President of the Senate, the Speaker, Ministerial
Colleagues, Your Excellencies, Leader of the Opposition, Senators, Members
and other Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen
It gives me very great pleasure, as I am sure it does all of
you, to be able to join in this welcome here today to the President of the
Republic of Italy. This is a notable occasion in the life of this Parliament and
indeed it is an historic occasion for the Australian people. This is the first
time that we have been visited by a European Head of State. I don't, of
course, exclude Her Majesty The Queen because I ustralia is part of her
home, and so we don't regard that as an official visit of this sort. But this
is, I repeat, the first time that the Head of State of a European country has
visited us, and it is particularly felicitous that this visit should be made by
the Head of State of a country with which Australia has such warm, friendly
relations and which is of so much significance to us in relation to the building
of our nation and in the trade from the Commonwealth to the rest of the world.
President Saragat is one of the great figures of post-war Europe.
Being President of the Republic of Italy is a signif. cant and eminent
achievement in itself, but we honour him because as we study his record over
the years we find an outstanding degree of courage and of wisdom, of tolerance
and of adherence to democraic principles. Whoever holds the office of
President of the Republic of Italy has a considerable influence extending beyond
the formal limits of his political power, and the President's political record
suggests that he will use his undoubted influence for the benefit of Italian
democracy, for the cause of international co-operation, for peace and
international co-operation for economic progress.
V. e welcome also Signor Fanfani who would have achieved
distinction in his own right if he had not done anything else in the world
but be an outstanding scholar. But in the company of Parliamentarians,
perhaps what will strike us as even more impressive is that on no less than
four occasions he has held the office of Prime Minister of his country.
I question whether we could match that in the life of our Federation here in
Australia. I may say, Mr Fresident, that studying the arrangements which
apply in your Parliament, I found many things to envy, although one or two
which I am glad we have avoided. I envy the fact that you have in your
Parliament a five-year term for Members. The Australian electorate will
not give us this period of grace, and I notice in New Zealand there has
recently been a referendum which has destroyed any prospect of an extended
term in that country. But they also have a provision in Italy that you are not eligible to
/ 2 
enter the Parliament until you have attained the age of twenty-five years.
I pointed this disability out to Andrew Jones a little earlier in the day'
On the other hand I gather that the Mfiister of the Government doesn', t
merely have to explain his bills to one House of the Parliament he must
explain it in person to both Houses of the Parliament, and that is an
amendment -which we wouldn't adopt in a hurry in this country.
Our welcome extends also. Senator Oliva and other members
of the President's party.
Italy has for this country a very special significance in a
variety of directions. There is the contribution made through the
centuries to civilisation by the peoples of Italy. Eternal Rome means
eternal Rome not only in Italy itself Rome the Eternal City is Rome the
Eternal City all around the world where men and women are sufficiently
educated to know something of its significance. A~ nd it has a great
significance for us.
There were C'C people last year who visited Italy from
Australia. They weren't all Italians who had settled here returning home
for a visit to the land of their birth. Many of them were Australians,
attracted by the beauty, the cultural feritage, the richness of Rome and
of Italy itself, and we are in your debt for the contribution you have made to
civilisation, Viestern civilisation in particular and to the way of life we enjoy
in our country. But we don't speak of these things in terms of the grandeur
of the past because over modern times the people of Italy have demonstrated
vigorously a lively, inventive, enterprising, innovating spirit which still
burns brightly within them. And you have contributed in these ways in
modern times what we eat, what we wear, what we look at, what we
drive in, what we fly in so many of the asi~ ects of modern, civilised
existence. Perhaps in a parliamentary setting we should acknowledge
the very early recognition given by the Italian people to the importance of
Parliament. I think that the initial SPQR oSenatus Populus Que Romanus
the Senate and the Roman p~ eople which dates right back to the earliest
roeriod of Roman and Italian history, suggests the recognition of the
importance of democratic institutions and the place that the people played
in the life of the government.
The President will be welcome to all Australians because we
feel out own sense of gratitude for the arrival here of some 30C, CCC settlers
from your country since 1'&gt; 45, and I am glad to say that they have produced,
Mr President, between them some 16G, CA" C children since that time!
After the British inflow, Italian migration is actually the
largest migratory movement in the history of this country. It didn't begin
just after the war. It began abott 120 years ago, and many of the Italian
people came to us from the Southern part of Italy and from Sicily. They
found Australia as do the migrant settlers of today a land of opportunity,
with political and economic stability conducive to rapid national development.
They find an envIronment in which they can breathe freely, where their
freedom is assured to them and where there is ample scope for their own
initiative. 
-3-
Australia's Italian settlers and their children now number
and this may interest our Italian visitors about the same as the citizens of
Florence, Bologna or Venice, which range from Italy's seventh to ninth
cities. The Italians who have come here have settled, prospered and become
part of our way of life. They are making valuable contributions across the
entire continent to industry, trade and development the food we eat, the
clothes we wear, and to our community and cultural life.
It is evident, as you will have gathered from the warmt: h of
the welcome you received yesterday that they preserve a deep affection for
Italy, a pride in Australia and its achievements. They love the land of their
birth and they have an affection for the land of their adoption, and it is
fortunate and certainly felicitous that the new Agreement on Migration will
be announced in the course of your visit, and we are able to report the
establishment, as evidence of our growing relationship of a new consulate
in Milan. But it is not only because of the personal ties that I refer to that
we have warm links with Italy. Both countries rank high among the trading
nations of the world. You in Italy rank eighth, we in Australia twelfth.
Our exports to your country have increased rapidly over recent years. Our
purchases from Italy have trebled over the past ten years from $ 18 million
to $ 53 million. And I have already mentioned the number of Australians who
have visited you in the course of the year and who find Italy a strongly
attractive country from the point of view of their interests.
Our Governments consult at the United Nations on matters of
common interest to the free world. You are a member of the European
Launcher Development Organisation for which we have the privilege of
conducting the operations at our own range at W7oomera.
Your journey, Mr President, has taken you to three countries
already which have derived their democratic institutions from British
Parliamentary democracy, countries which nourish the principles of national
liberty and personal freedom. You will be able to assess for yourself the
value of the contribution which Canada, the United States and Australia are
making to a better world order, the cause of peace and the growth of
international trade. Our people, you will have observed, are primarily of European
extraction, but we have in A; ustralia a special significance for the free world
from our geographical position, and our growing relationships with the countries
of Acia. Even putting it in the material terms of trade, this has grown since
the 1550' s from 15 to 4L per cent. of our total trade.
But the success of our immigration programme is not to be
measured by numbers alone or the additions that are made to our country's
work force. We measure it, as I think you would wish us to measure it, by
the happiness, the prosperity, the progress that our migrants find here in
Australia, and in this as in other ways, we believe Italian settlement has
been among the most successful of all the nationalities to whom we have
given a welcome to this country, and there are more than forty countries
represented in Australia.
Your stay, Mr President, will be brief in Australia. You will
be visiting Melbourne and Sydney before you leave us on Sunday, and as you fly
over much of the country during your journey, you will be able to appreciate for
yourself the vastness of the country, the sparse population and the desirability
on our part of encouraging continuing settlement from good people such as 
those that we welcome from your own country.
It is not possible, unfortunately, for anything more than a
fraction of Australia's Italian settlers to see you for themselves, excect
on the television screen, but on behalf of them, and all Australians, all
here wish you a happy and not too strenuous visit and a safe return home.
Your visit will focus an interest on Australia amongst your
countrymen which we believe will be of mutual benefit, of value to the
relationship between us. It cannot fail to add warmth and interest to that
relationship and your presence here itself is a contribution to a deepening
of the warmth and friendliness of the ties that link our two countries.
We hope that italian/ A. ustralian friendship will long endure, and
as it persists, it will go on i. n warmth and strength to the growing mutual
benefit of our two countries.
And now I am going to ask the Leader of Her Majesty's Opposition,
Mr 7,' hitlam, to support me in these words of welcome to you, and this is
one matter at least on which we can find no room for disagreement and can
join in a common vote of sulport and applause.
i, 



4 OCT 1967 7
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE
RT. HON. HAROLD HCLT, CH, MP, IN THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
26TH SEPTEMBER, 1967
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY THE PRIME MINISTER
OF NEW ZEALAND
I ask leave of the House to make a short statement
concerning discussions between the Australian and New Zealand Governments.
I inform the House, with pleasure, that arrangements have
been completed for a brief visit to Canberra next week at my invitation
by the Right Honourable the Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr Holyoake.
( The New Zealand Minister for Defence, Mr Thompson, will accompany Mr
Holyoake). Australia and New Zealand have a great many problems
of common interest and talks between Mr Holyoake and myself between
New Zealand Ministers and Australian Ministers and between officials of our
respective Governments take place from time to time. It might be said that
we are in almost constant touch. But a visit by the New Zealand Prime Minister
to Australia, however, is an event of significance out of the ordinary run of
discussions and we welcome it wholeheartedly.
The visit will be the occasion to discuss a number of matters
but consultation on defence policies in relation to South East Asia will be a
particular purpose. The visit will be timely in that it will provide the first
opportunity that Mr Holyoake and I have had to discuss at first hand the British
Government's Defence V! hite Paper of July, with its profound implications for
British Forces in Malaysia/ Singapore.
Both Australia and New Zealand have troops in the Commonwealth
Strategic Reserve in Malaysia/ Singapore and since the British decisions,
Australia and New Zealand are both in a new situation in which foreign policy
as well as defence policy aspects come up for review. As I have already
indicated to the House, I contemolate discussions with a nurrber of Governments
before completing our re-examination of Australian defence policy. It will be
clear to the House that a major first step in this reappraisal at Government
level is talks with New Zealand.
Both Austraia and New Zealand have forces engaged and
working together in Vietnam also. By means of exchanges at diplomatic and
defence level there is at any stage a close understanding between the two
Governments about Vietnam but it will be extremely useful for us to review
together the situation there.
Perhaps I should add as a further word of explanation that I do
not expect to be making any early Government announcements as a direct / 2 
result of these discussions. The talks with Mr Holyoake ( and Mr Thompson)
will be, as I have said, part of our continuing close consultation ard we are
neither at the start nor at the end of this process.
I expect Mr Holyoake to arrive in Canberra on Monday,
2nd October. Most of Tuesday will no doubt be taken up with discussions.
The discussions will be with myself, senior colleagues and members of
the Cabinet Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence.
The Minister for External Affairs, Mr Has luck, has
deferred his departure for the United Nations General Assembly at New
York in order to be present for Mr Holyoake's visit. Mr Holyoake will
return to Wellington on Wednesday, 4th October.
My colleagues and I are looking forward to seeing Mr
Holyoake and Mr Thompson in Canberra. They will receive a warm welcome
from us. 



EMBARGO
FOR PRESS NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 7 P. Mo ( E. SoTo)
WEDNESDAY.. 2 EPTEMBER 1967
4 OCT 1967 PM No. 93/ 1967
LjBI RPV
AUSTRALIAN LOAN IN GERMANY
Statement by the Prime Minister and Chairman
of the Australian Loan Council, Mro Harold Holt
The Commonwealth is negotiating the terms of a
public loan in Germany for an amount of 100 million Deutsche
Marks 22 million).
The loan will be underwritten by an international
banking syndicate managed by the Deutsche Bank Aktiengsellschafto
It will be Australia's first public issue in Germany.
oOo
NOTE: During the absence of the Treasurer ( Mr. McMahon)
overseas, Mr. Holt is Chairman of the Australian
Loan Council. This follows normal procedures
adopted when the Treasurer, whom the Prime Minister
customarily nominates as Chairman, is overseas.
CANBERRA 27 September 1967 



4 O4CT 1967
FOR PRESS PM. No. 94/ 1167
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF LAOS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
I am pleased to announce that Frince Souvanna Phouma,
Frime Minister of Laos, has accepted the Government's invitation to
visit Australia. He will be accompanied by his daughter, Princess Moune
Souvanna Fhouma. The Prime Minister and Princess Moune will arrive in
Australia on Tuesday, 31st Cctober, and will remain until Saturday,
11th November. During his stay, Prince Souvanna Fhouma will have
discussions in Canberra and will visit Sydney, Melbourne and the Snowy
Mountains Scheme. This will be the first visit to Australia by a Laotian Prime
Minister and follows closely on my own visit to Laos, the first to that
country by an Australian Frime Minister.
I welcome this further contribution that our meeting together
will make to a closer relationship with a country which has a growing
significance for Australia, and for South-East Asia generally.
CANBERRA, 27th September, 1c, 67 


PM. No. 95/1967
Statement by the Frime Minister and Chairman of the Australian Loan Council, Mr Harold Holt
The Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt, said today that a new Commonwealth cash loan will be open for public subscription from Friday, 6 October to Friday 13 October. The loan will be the second cash loan during the current financial year, the first having been issued in July last.
An offer of conversion will be made at the same time to holders of $272 million of Commonwealth securities maturing on 15 October.
Terms for the new loan are as follows:-
4.5 per cent August, l970 securities issued at 99.75 to yield approximately 4. 59 per cent;
5 per cent July l977 securities issued at par;
5.25 per cent July 1989 securities issued at par; and
5.25 per cent July 2003 securities issued at par.
The securities being issued are the same as those offered in the July cash loan, but the issue price of the August 1970 securities has been adjusted to allow for the shorter period to maturity.
The first interest payment on the August, l970 securities will be made to the original subscriber on 15 October, 1967. The second interest payment, covering a period of four instead of the usual six months, will bemade on 15 February 1968. Full six-monthly interest payments will be made to holders of these securities on 15 August, 1968 and half-yearly thereafter.
Holders of the $272 million of maturing securities eligible for the conversion offer may convert their holdings into any of the securities offered in the cash loan. The maturing securities were issued in March and August,1954 and carried interest at 4 1/2  per cent. Special Bonds Series 0 will remain on issue for cash subscriptions and will also be available for conversion from the maturing securities.
The usual income tax rebate of 10 cents in the dollar will apply to interest received from the securities offered in the cash and conversion loans and from Special Bonds Series C.
Further details of the cash and conversion offer are set out in prospectuses which are being circulated to all banks and stockbrokers.
CANBERRA,29 September,1967
NOTE : During the absence of the Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) overseas, Mr Holt is chairman of the Australian loan Council. This follows normal procedures adopted when the Treasurer, whom the Prime Minister customarily nominatesas Chairman, is overseas.



C 01fR0,0,
4' C
FOR PRESS PM. No. -5/ 1% 7
CA PRICORNIA BY-ELECTION
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
It is not surpr. sing that the Labor Party has retained
in a by-election a seat it has held for the last six years.
No doubt it w4ll try to make much of its victory, but
a close analysis of the poll figures at Saturday's end of count gives it
little cause for encouragement. Compared with the count at the same
stage in the general election of 1c6,. the Labor vote has increased by
less than 1 per cent, that for the Government parties is up by 6 per
cent, while there was a decline of 4 per cent in the DLF vote.
The Labor vote of 53. 4 per cent is still appreciably
below the percentage of 56. 1 per cent it gained in the general elections
of 1C63, when the Liberal/ Country Party coalition secured a majority
of 26 seats. By-elections notoriously run against governments and
there can be few on record when a government has actually ga. ned a
better percentage of the vote than " t did at the preceding general election.
A 11 parties stressed the issue of development. V. hile
the circumstances of a by-election offer the Government small prospect
of success, it is to be regretted that Central Queenslanders have passed
up the opportunity to place in the National Parliament an able spokesman
in the Derson of Frank Rudd who has devoted so much of his time and
energies to furthering the objectives of development in that area.
CA NBERRA,
1st October, 7 



FOR PRESS: STATE VISIT BY THE PRESIDENT OF ITA LY
TO AUSTRALIA 25 SEPTEMBER 1 OCTOBER,
1967
JOINT COMMUNIQUE
At the invitation of the Commonwealth of Australia, the President
of the Republic of Italy, the Honourable -GiuseppeS aragat, accompanied by
the Minister of Foreign ffairs, the Honourable Amintcre Fanfan., raid a
State visit to Australia from 25 September until 1 October, 1967. staying in
Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney.
In Canberra, President Saragat was received by the Governor-
General, Lord Casey, and had meetings with the Prime Minister, Mr Harold
Holt, other members of the Australian Government, and the Leader of the
Opposition, Mr Gough V,! hitlam.
The Italian President was Guest of Honour at a dinner given by the
Governor-General and at a State function at Parliament House, at which the
President delivered an address. The President was host at a dinner at the
Italian Embassy. In Melbourne and Sydney, the President attended functions given
by the State Governors and was tendered Civic Receptions at the Town Halls
of both cities. . i'hile in Melbourne, the President visited the Royal
Agricultural Show. In both capitals, the President addressed large gatherings
of t i Italian communities, bringing them the greetings of Italy.
The Italian Foreign Minister, Mr Fanfani, had political talks
with the Australian Minister for External Affairs, Mr Hasluck, and also had
a meeting with senior members of the Australian Cabinet. Major international
problems of the moment were reviewed in an atmosphere of frank cordiality.
In the course of these conversations, the Italian and ustralian
leaders reviewed problems concerning the role of the United Nations in the
peaceful solution of international disputes in accordance with the Charter,
co-operation in economic and social fields and assistance to developing
countries. Emphasis was placed on the responsibility of the industrialized
countries to assist developing countries and to encourage a more satisfactory
balance in technological progress. Both parties reaffirmed their common
aim to continue endeavours towards the progressive realization of disarmament
and the non-proliferation of nuclear arms.
Mr Fanfani outlined general aspects of action being taken by the
Italian Government towards the maintenance of peace and security within the
framework of its alliances and towards the realization of European unity.
He also described Italian viewpoints on the process of European integration,
together with the prospects of Britain's entering into the European Economic
Community. Mr Hasluc, described the Australian Government's position in
relation to South-East Asia and the Facific, and to the tensions existing in
that area. Developments in Viet Nam were the subject of an exchange of
views, particular attention being given to the present situation ' n South Viet
Nam. The importance of early progress towards any possible negotiations
for a just and peaceful solution was also considered. It was agreed that such
a solution might be sought on the basis of the Geneva Agreements and with / 2 
-2-
the possible assistance, direct or indirect, of thb-United-Nations.
Special consideration was g. ven-to-the question of Italian m. gration
to Australia. The substantial contribution made by Italian migrants to the
development of Australia's economy and population was highly appreci. ated
by the Australian Government. Both countries indicated their desire that
co-operation in this field between Italy and Australia should continue and
develop still further . n the best possible conditions. Therefore the two
Ministers of Foreign Affairs and the Australian Minister for Immigration
signed an agreement on migration ai. d exchanged notes on an arrangemeqt
for assisted migration. The agreement, which covers a wide field, provides
a continuing basis for Italian migrants to participate in and to benefit
substantially from A ustralia's future development.
The imoortance of trade between the two countries was emphasised
in the course of the talks. It was recognised that trade exchanges between
the countries have been developing steadily and that there would be great
value in encouraging further improz-nent of trade and economic relati ons.
In this connection a Memorandum of Understanding, governing the health
requirements for the ' mportation of Australian meat into Italy, was
initialled. The possibility of co-operation in the industrial field was also
raised. It was noted with satisfaction that there is a growing interest in
Australia in the Italian language and culture, and both parties were n
agreement on the value of increased collaboration in matters of science and
culture. The proposal of the Australian Government to establish a
Consulate-General in Milan was welcomed on the Italian part.
The Italian and Australian Ministers agreed that the exchangeof
views had offered an e,, xcellent occasion to consolidate the friendshi. p and
co-operation exist-. ng between Australia and Italy, and it was felt that it
would prove of mutual benefit to increase contact at all levels between the
represenatives of the two countries.
A formal invitation to visit Italy at a mutually convenient time
was extended to the Frime Minister and the Minister for External Affairs,
and was cordially accepted.
FRIME MINISTER'S CFFICE.
CANBERRA. 3C'th September, 



6 OCT 1967
LUNCHEON IN HCNOUR OF THE PRIME MINISTER
OF NEW ZEALAND, THE RT. HCN. KEITH HOL. YOAI
AT FARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA 3RD OCTOBER, 1.67
Speech by the Prime Minister: Mr Harold Holt
Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen
WVe have become accustomed ' n Australia to an invasion
at this time of year from New Zealand to the detr'ment of our overseas
balances, and I understand that yesterday's sporting event in Sydney saw
this fulfilled in the order of 1, 2, 3. I don't quite know what the cost will
be to Australia from the visit here the very opportune. timely and happy
visit of the Prime Minister, but at least ths is something we brought upon
our own heads because he is here by invitation of the Commonwealth
Government and we welcome him very warmly indeed.
He has brought with him his Minister for Defence, Mr
Thomson, Mr Laking, the Head of his Department of External Affairs and
General Thornton, and we welcome all of these to the discussions which have
already commenced with them.
By a happy coincidence we have with us today a group of
distinguished members of the Lok Sabha, the Parliament of India, and to
you, Mr Speaker Sanjiva Reddy and your colleagues of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association, you are amongst your fellow CPA members and
it has added to the felicity of this occasion to have you here with us. nd I
am sure you welcome this opportunity of seeing the Prime Minister of New
Zealand in person. Keith Holyoake has been with us before, but he wears a
couple of hats, and he came on earlier occasions as Foreign Minister.
This is the first time, : n my recollection of him that he has made an official
visit as Prime Minister of New Zealand, and indeed, I think this is about the
second visit of an official kind by a Prime Minister of New Zealand in our
history. Mr Holland was here at one point of time it may be this is the
second time subject to Mr Holland.
Keith Holyoake has been Frime Minister of New Zealand
since December, 1967. .' hen I was over there earlier this year. and this
was the first official visit by an Australian Prime Minister for just on twelve
years he and I were described as the Anzac twins. Now you will be able to
judge for yourselves how far he has got to carry that particular label. There
are quite a few people in Australia who would feel there is an injustice being
done to you, Keith. I don't know whether it is because you and I both'
smile too often. I am often accused of doing that. Certainly we have both
been in the Parliament of our country for the same period of time. You got
away to an earlier start in 1i-32 but you hit one hurdle which kept you out for
three years, and this has enabled me to match you in length of service in the
Parliament our thirtysecond :) er in the National Parliament of our country.
W. e were both Deputy Leaders of our parties for eight years
and that is a very chastening apprenticeship, I can assure you. You have come
through that to lead your Government since 1S6C, some six years before I
came to office, and there are one or two people in this room who anticipate / 2 
r: I,
that I won't be able to match your longevity in that particular role.
In point of fact, you have now become, subject to the
length of service as head of his government of Fresident Ayub Khan, the
doyen amongst the Frime Ministers of the Commonwealth. This again is
a rather sobering thought. Our occupational hazards don't apparently lead
us to a long tenure and you are to be congratulated on being as long as you
have in your particular office.
Again there is a point of kinship in that you were returned
at the general election your held on the same day last year as we held ours
in Australia so that we can claim these points of similarity, but I believe our
thinking goes more closely In line than that. And I have been very glad in
my own discussions with you always to find an . dentify of view from you as
the Head of your Government with that held by the Head of the Australian
Government on many of the problems with which we have to deal together.
.' i. th so many things In common, and with so many common
interests, it is natural that we should communicate frequently, and now
on this occasion, consult directly with each other to the advantage, I hore,
of our two countries. Australia and New Zealand have a common cultural and
historical heritage. have a common language, a common belief in
democratic tradition, in the rule of law. differ to a degree as to the
form of our Parliamentary ' nstitutions you have the misfortune to be without
the benefit of guidance from an Upper Chamber, but we have a common
interest in our two countries in the peace, stab'lity and economic rrogress
in this area of the world.
I said a little earlier that this was your first official visit
in your capacity as Prime Iv. inister, and unfortunately in a sense it is
very brief visit and a vworking visit in which much has to be concentrated here
in Canberra in the time we have available to us. And I do hope that you will
and please accept this as a formal invitation from me on behalf of the
Government and people of Australia I do hose you will take an opportunity
to spend a longer time vw. th us on an official visit in which you can get beyond
the National Capital itsel and see sonrething of the fascination and interest of
the three million square miles of territory that we can open up for you.
You country and ours have been close toget her thrcugh
many of the crises of our times. V. e fought together in two World 7! ars to
resist aggression and to preserve the freedom of small countries, and stablished
together what we both proudly acclaim as the A. NAC tradition. . Ve are both
active members of the United Nations, and despite the smallness of your
population, you have achieved there an influence and a significance out of
all proportion to your numbers. You were recently a member of the Cecur'ty
Cbuncil. You have had one of your countrymen a Fresident of the Assemrnbly
of the United Nations. We are both active inside the Commonwealth of Nations,
and in this area of the world, by geography we are faced together with
similar problems and a similar outlook. H. e are Pacific by geography but
we are also Pacific by national intent and we share a common desire for
stability and progress in the countries of Asia and the Facif; c, V: e share a
significant treaty relationship with the United Ttates through A NZUS and ; with
our allies in the South East Asia Treaty Organisation. Vie participate in / 3 
-3-
efforts for wider regional endeavours through such institutions as ASPAC,
the Economic Commission for Aia and the Far East, the Asian Develorment
Bank, and in our work together in the Colombo Flan. And we stand together
with our allies in Vietnam.
The Frime Minister's visit reflects our desire for
continuing friendly consultation in all matters of common concern. A visit
by the Head of Government of his country would be an event of significance
at any time, certainly it is most welcome and timely now, because our main
purpose is to discuss together our shared defence policies in relation to
Scuth-East Asia and the rrplication for both our countries of the changes in
the British defence posture as outlined in the British White Faper. ' ie have
forces working together in Vietnam and we contribute together to the
Commonwealth Strategic Reserve in Malaysia and Singapore.
We have been reviewing our situation there. V'e are
not attempting to reach final decisions at this point, but the talks with you
and your Defence Minister and members of your official party are part of
continuing close consultat'ons which we have with you and with other mutually
interested governments over foreign policy and defence matters. Australia
is neither at the commencement nor the ccnclusion of that process. In come
respects there is time ahead of us. but planning is important now and we need
to know what is going on in the mind of each other.
Already '. ve have found our exchanges last night and earlier
today, and those to be continued through the day, of value to our own thinking
as we hope they will be to yours. There wil' bs naturally other matters on
which you will wish to consult with us, and I know you have had talks vith
my colleague, the Deputy Frime Minister and Minister for Trade, and this
visit is, I hope, not just a rare event to be thought back on as something which
happened in the history of our two countries. I hope it will be the beginning
of a much more frequent process of consultation which I was able to touch
off myself in January, and which I hope you, w'th your own further visits and
those of your Ministerial colleagues here will be able to promote as time
go-s on. I think I did mention to you in Newv Zealand that we had
adopted a rather enlightened policy of enabling Members of this Parliament
to travel at public e: xense to your country as they saw the necessity, so that
we should get to know each other better. are working together on our
Anzac Scholarships which I hope will also lead to a warmer and deeper
understanding of each other's problems. In these ways we hope to manifest
our conviction that so far ahead as our destiny lies, we see Australia and New
Zealand going closely hand in hand together.
I am now going to ask the Leader of the Opposition to
support me before I invite all present to join me in drinking your very good
health. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE VIP FLIGHT
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 4 October 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister)--by leave-It would have become
obvious, I think, to all members of the
Parliament that in recent times lines of
criticism have developed in certain sections
of the Press and also amongst some
members of the Parliament directed against
the conduct of the VIP flight. This criticism
has been directed in such a way as to give
quite a distorted picture to the public of
the way in which the flight operatcs and
the extent and nature of its use. I felt that
the Parliament should have an authoritative
statement before it so that any comment
that might be made in future would at
least be made against the background of
an accurate and comprehensive statement
of the recent history of this flight. I propose
in-the course of my statement to give the
House some facts showing how the flight
has developed over recent years. I use the
term ' developed' in the context of the aircraft
currently employed. There were nine
aircraft in the flight in 1958. When the
replacements have been received and the
planes that they replace have been removed
there will be nine aircraft operating again
in the flight. Recent history will fihow
that this is not a matter which has suddenly
leapt ahead in recent times and indeed it
13945/ 67 will show that for several years Cabinet
has been giving consideration to the problem
which was arising with the obsolescence
of some elements of the flight-the need to
replace some and the need to have a more
diverse range of aircraft for the changing
and varying conditions to be found around
the continent of Australia.
The VIP flight has actually been in
operation for somewhere in the neighbourhood
of 20 years, but it is over more recent
times that criticism of its use has intensified.
1, therefore, put these facts before the
Parliament. I go back to November 1962
when the Cabinet decided to appoint a
Cabinet committee to consider the replacement
of the flight with modern aircraft.
By April 1963 the committee had carried
on its own investigation and had decided
that there was a need, not only for replacement,
but for a more ready availability of
aircraft to assist Ministers and to deal with
the increasing VIP traffic coming to this
country. The committee authorised the
Minister for Air to investigate the possibility
of immediate replacement of or
additions to the existing flight pending the
introduction of pure jets. It was decided to
recommend to Cabinet that an order be
placed for three DH125 aircraft at that 
time and that civil aviation aircraft supplement
the operations of the Royal Australian
Air Force flight. In point of fact, while
Cabinet endorsed the recommendation in
June 1963 for the purchase of the three
aircraft to replace threc Dakotas and agreed
that consideration should next be given to
the replacement of the ageing Convair
Metropolitans * by aircraft of the BACIII
type, it did not go ahead with the order of
the DH125 aircraft because in January
1964 it decided in favour of Mysteres as
being more suitable for Australian circumstances.
It also at that time agreed that the
suitability of adding Viscounts to the VIP
flight be immediately investigated.
This consideration went on through 1964
when Cabinet decided to buy two Viscount
aircraft to supplement the existing Convairs
and Dakotas and to leave in abeyance the
purchase of any jet aircraft. The Minister
for Air was to keep the requirements of
the flight under review, and in November
1965 Cabinet considered the whole question
and authorised the purchase of three
Mystere aircraft and two Hawker Siddeley
748 aircraft. These five aircraft were to
replace five Dakotas which, at that point
of time, were 20 years old. Orders were
to be placed for two BACI 11 aircraft to
replace two Convair Metropolitans which,
at that time, were 9 years old.
It will be seen from this recital of the
facts that no aircraft actually has been
ordered in the life of my own Government.
I say that not because I do not accept full
responsibility for, or approve of, the decisions
which were taken earlier but because
a picture seems to have been conjured up
in the public mind that we have suddenly
leapt into some expansion of the service
here in Australia whereas, in fact, the
decisions on which orders were placed were
taken back in November 1965. 1 do not
think that anybody who had any contact
with my predecessor, Sir Robert Menzies,
would ever argue that he was a spendthrift
of the public money. I know of no public
leader in my time who had greater regard
for the careful use of public funds. I made
the point that the fleet we now have was
ordered back in November 1965. It replaced
very old aircraft. In fact, my colleague the
Minister for Air reported to Cabinet that
the Chief of the Air Staff had told him that
the Dakota aircraift had reached a point at which they were below reasonably safe
operating conditions for use as VIP aircraft
and that in a short space of time would
have had to be declared unfit for such use.
As to the capital cost of these aircraft
-again there has been an attempt to conjure
up a picture of a great splurge of
expenditure in one year-this was spread
over a period of three financial years commencing
in 1965-66. It is perhaps typical
of the kind of criticism we have had to face
that one newspaper I saw recently stated
that to increase the age pension by
would cost about $ 20m a year whereas we
were spending $ 21 .6m on these aircraft.
Not only were the payments spread over 3
years; normally one can expect these aircraft
to have an operational life of 10 to
15 years.
Mr Duthie-What was the cost?
Mr HAROLD HOLT-They cost S21.6m.
I will refer to that matter in a moment. This
was the cost of the aircraft only, the fly
away cost, and included the price of spares
and matters of that sort. I do not need to
go into too much detail about the Dakota
aircraft. They are well known to honourable
members. They were great work
horses in their time. When the time came
for them to be replaced, the Minister
pointed out that for our VIP aircraft there
were two principal requirements. In the
majority of eases the use of VIP aircraft
involves the carriage of small numbers of
passengers over the main routes of Australia.
This is their role for a good deal of the
time and for this purpose we need a small,
fast, reasonably comfortable aircraft.
Secondly, there is -a small but significant
number of operations which involve the use
of relatively undeveloped airfields of limited
length. For these operations an aircraft
equipped with turbo propeller engines was
required; an aircraft with -better takeoff and
landing performances. The Mystere met the
first requirement and the Hawker Siddeley
748 met the second requirement.
The Mystere is described customarily in
the Press and by some of our parliamentary
critics as a luxury jet. I have flown in this
aircraft several times. It has the great merit
of speed. When I heard a member from
another place talking about the chicken
and bubbly and so forth which were available
in the aircraft I wished he had been 
with me on Monday. We were flying over
the Australian Alps. He would have had
great difficulty in controlling either of those
commodities at that time. The standards of
catering are similar to those which have
always existed in the aircraft. I am sure
some could paint a pretty picture of the
services and standards provided. But as one
who has been a very regular user of the
VIP flight, I find that salad, in which the
ice has not been quite thawed out, and
lacking the flavour of a home cooked meal,
soon loses its appeal. When we were
coming back from Western Australia
recently, after attending the opening of the
North West Cape naval communication
establishment, my wife thought that, in
order to secure a change of diet for us, she
should order some pies and sausage rolls.
That was the luxury meal that we had on
that occasion.
For the replacement of the two Convair
Metropolitan' aircraft, the Minister recommended
the BAC111 which was somewhat
cheaper than the generally comparable
DC9. As I have said, the need for special
air transport available to the Commonwealth
Government has been recognised for
some 20 years and the business of Government
would be certainly less efficient if
the most senior Ministers had their work
and travel restricted to the rigid timetables
of the commercial airlines. I illustrate this
point by a look at the Canberra airline
schedules. There were no commercial flights
to Sydney today between 9.30 a. m. and
12.30 p. m. There is a 3-hour gap in the
morning and a 4-hour gap in the afternoon
on most days to Melbourne. There are no
daily flights to Sydney after 9.15 p. m. or to
Melbourne after 6 p. m. There are no daily
flights into Canberra from Sydney after
8.15 p. m. and none from Melbourne after
6.30 p. m. At weekends, when the business
of government, certainly in my own case,
and in the case of most of my other
Ministers, still goes on, the normal
schedules are even more limiting. The
schedules to other capital cities are even
more restricted.
The work of government goes on around
the clock and I think I can fairly claim to
average an 80-hour working week. Work
must continue even while we are flying to a
destination. I am sure the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam) could confirm
this from his own experience. The aircraft
serves as a flying office, with staff available.
The use of executive aircraft is common to
governments of most other countries. This
is particularly the case in the United States
of America and Canada, where industrial
development and distances provide comparable
problems with those experienced in
Australia; and the availability is certainly
no less in Great Britain and other European
countries.
I mentioned earlier that when the decision
was made in 1965 to re-equip, the VIP
flight then consisted of nine aircraft, as
indeed it has since 1958. We purchased 2
Vickers Viscounts second hand that were
built in 1959 and 1960, 2 Convair Metropolitans
and 5 Dakotas. The Convair
Metropolitans and the Vickers Viscounts
are no longer in production, so that even
had we chosen to replace the ageing aircraft
with others of the same type we would not
have been able to procure them. The VIP
flight remains a flight of nine aircraft, and
for some time still it will include the two
Vickers Viscounts, which however have
only a limited operating life to run.
I can give the House some idea of the
extent of use, and, indeed, the character
of use, of the aircraft. From January to
June of this year the aircraft were used
by the Governor-General of Australia on
41 occasions, by myself on 46 occasions,
by the Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) on
occasions and by the Minister for Trade
and Industry ( Mr McEwen) on 22 occasions.
It will be seen that apart from those
relating to the Governor-General-who is
required to make frequent journeys for
ceremonial purposes-those figures relate
to the three most senior members of
Cabinet. No other Minister reached double
figures in his use of the aircraft, and seven
Ministers did not use the flight at all. Other
users were visiting rIPs. The service is
available to, and has been used by, the
Leader of the Opposition and the Deputy
Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Barnard)
and by officials, including the Service
chiefs. It might be of some interest to the House
to have an indication of the actual VIP
use of this flight in the past 12 months.
The users included Prince Charles, the
Prime Minister of Thailand, the Queen 
Mother, the New Zealand Minister -of
Defence, the New Zealand Deputy Prime
Minister, the Canadian Secretary of State,
the British . Secretary for the Colonies,
the President of the British Board of Trade,
The Prime Minister of Malta, the Prime
Minister of South Vietnam, the Governor
of the National Bank of Cambodia, the
Malaysian Minister of Defence, the British
Secretary for Commonwealth Affairs, Princess
Alexandra, the Duke of Edinburgh,
the Foreign Minister of Israel, the Deputy
Prime Minister of Malaysia, the Secretary-
General of the Commonwealth Secretariat,
the Prime Minister of New Zealand and
the Indian and Pakistani parliamentary
delegations. Some of these visitors had
large retinues and official staff. For instance,
on one occasion it was necessary for us
to provide two Viscounts and one DC3 in
order to transport a visiting party around
Australia. For ceremonial visits there is
-always a large number of persons to be
carried and a large quantity of luggage,
and this often necessitates the provision of
more than one aircraft.
Particularly in relation to VIP users of
the service, the serviceability of the aircraft
at the time is a matter of importance. These
people are holding to tight schedules on
significant public occasions. I found, in
arranging to welcome the Prime Minister
of New Zealand, that two of the aircraft
we had sought to make available to him
were unserviceable, and a third aircraft had
to be found. Last Friday, when I had to
attend in Sydney with the President of Italy,
I found that two of the Mystere jets, one
of which I would have normally used,
were unserviceable, and a third aircraft had
to be made available. In other words, some
margin of utility has to be available if these
tight schedules are to be met. In the case
of visiting VIPs in particular we usually
have to have standby aircraft-this applies
most certainly in the cases of members of
the Royal Family and visiting Prime Ministers-
in case they would otherwise be
unable to carry out their commitments.
The use of these aircraft is strictly limited
and controlled, and only two Ministers have
authority in relation to this. Other than in
my own case and that of the Governor-
General or a member of the Royal Family,
the use of the aircraft is part of the responsibility
and exercise of ministerial authority of the Minister for Air. In cases where he
entertains some doubt as -to an application
he consults with me, so that, between us,
we exercise, on behalf of the Government,
the responsibility in relation to this service.
In simple -terms, thanks to this service,
Ministers can travel long distances quickly,
they can work on their way in reasonable
comfort and with security for classified
documents, and when they travel together
they have useful opportunities for continuing
discussions and for consultations.
The use of executive aircraft is common
these days, not only with governments but
with large companies in various parts of
the world. I know of one European company
with a turnover smaller than the
defence vote of this country which maintains
a flight of the same dimension as
ours. There would be at least half a dozen
American companies that maintain a flight
of the same dimension as our own. Proportionately,
I would say without hesitation,
the flights maintained by the governments
of the United States of America, Canada
and the United Kingdom would all be considerably
larger-even taking the difference
of population into account-than the Australian
flight.
What is often lost sight of, quite apart
from the service provided for Ministers,
officials, the Leader of the Opposition, the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition and others,
is the role that the flight plays in the training
of Air Force personnel. It provides a
valuable training medium in a variety of
directions, and many transport pilots have
received a course of training in VIP aircraft
before passing on to the work of transport
pilot in the Air Force proper. The hours
flown count towards the qualification of airmen
in various aspects of their air service.
It is this training role which makes the
problem of costing, to which I will refer in
a moment, complex if a clear and not misleading
picture is to be available to the
public. As to the use of these aircraft by VIPs
coming to Australia, it will be a matter of
common knowledge that the number of such
persons is increasing considerably as
Australia's significance and economic importance
grow throughout the world. I am
sure that all honourable members will have
been struck by the increase in interest which 
heads of government, senior political figures
and senior industrial figures from other parts
of the world are manifesting in Australia
these days. Aircraft of the VIP flight, as I
have indicated, are available to Royal Aus-
-tralian Air Force pilots from all branches.
These* aircraft provide training for pilots in
modern aircraft and a necessary opportunity
to build up their flying time to the
level required by the Service.
The test as to whether a reasonable use
is made of the flight is, I suggest to thc
House, a matter of the responsibility of
~' those directly concerned, and they are the
Minister for Air and myself. If I felt that
the Minister for Air was not behaving
. responsibly in relation to the service, I could
take action. If the public thought that I was
not behaving responsibly in the role which
I play in relation to -the service I have nio
doubt that it would -take action against
me. This has a bearing on the problem of
costs. I have looked into this matter to see
whether a dissection of costs is feasible
as between uses of the aircraft, including
training purposes for which the aircraft are
used, and to make a dissection in such a
way as to present a realistic picture. I have
no doubt that the Air Force could come
up with a figure showing the total cost of
operating the service, but if you wanted a
realistic picture there would necessarily
have to be some division between the
training role of the aircraft and its other
uses. The training costs would vary, in
respect of a particular aircraft, almost
from flight to flight, depending on which
members of the crew are undergoing training
and the duration of that training. If
there were several Ministers in one aircraft,
should the cost be spread over the
various departments which they administer?
If there were in the one aircraft three or
four senior Service officials-perhaps thc
three Chiefs of Staff-do you spread the
cost through each of the Services?
It is my understanding that the Public
Accounts Committee, having looked at this
general problem in other directions, has
come to the conclusion that it is not satisfactory
to try to spread over a number of
departments the cost carried by a particular
department for services rendered to those
other departments. But I have no wish to
deny to the public or to the Parliament information which should reasonably be
available to them. It has never been my
practice to do so. This flight operates as an
essential element in the structure of govern--
ment. If ways and means could be found
of determining costs in a realistic waynot
a misleading way which would present
a false picture to the public-I would be
only too willing to see that course pursued.
I do not know which would be the most
appropriate body to do this. I imagine that
the Treasury contains more expertise on
these matters than any other area of government
that I could point -to and I would bewilling
to have the matter examined there.
Before I conclude perhaps I could deal
with what I might term some of the
mythology that has developed around'
this subject. I have already given one or
two illustrations of how far fetched some
of the criticism has been. Seeing that I have
been. involved in one, or two of these*
criticisms perhaps I could give the facts. I
know that a picture has been conjured upin
the public mind of frequent use of these
aircraft by members of my family. T1herehas
been only one instance since I ' became
Prime Minister on which members of my
family have travelled on an aircraft which
was not an aircraft carrying me to my
destination. In that instance the ' aircraft was
proceeding to Melbourne to pick up four
Ministers for the return journey to Canberra.
That was the extent of the incident
about which criticism was raised on that
occasion. One or two of my friends opposite havebeen
making gibes about the use of an air--
craft for a fishing trip. The facts of the
matter are that being in Rockhamptonnobody
has challenged my use of the air-.
craft to go to Rockhampton-I proceeded'
in the aircraft to Townsville. It was not
necessary for me to proceed to Townsville
in that aircraft. I was picked up in Townsville
in a privately owned aircraft and taken
to my destination, which was Dunk Island.
The aircraft belonged to a friend, who had
come from Sydney earlier, and he could
just as easily have picked me up at Rockhampton
as at Townsville.
What critics overlook is that a Prime
Minister is never able to divorce himself
from his job. He is never in a real sense
absent from his duty. I had to have staff' 
with me from Rockhampton to Townsville.
Wherever I go my staff must be available.
They have to keep in touch with the
enormous machine that runs the business of
this country. They were stationed by me.
I repeat that in a very real sense a Prime
Minister is never off duty. I only wish that
sometimes I could be. That particular
weekend was the first in three on which I
had not been tied -up with official functions.
I hope that not too many honourable
members opposite will begrudge me an
opportunity to have a little recreation and
fresh air occasionally at the weekend. That
is the extent of the incident for which they
would level criticism.
The other matter about which I would
like to clear the air is what I regard as a
malicious and cruel presentation of an episode
in which my colleague, the Treasurer,
was involved when his young daughter was
seriously burned. His doctor advised that
she should be taken as speedily as possible
to a Sydney hospital in case skin grafting
had to be carried out. The allegation was
made that an aircraft was specially provided
for this purpose. An aircraft had been
previously ordered for the Treasurer, as was
his entitlement. He travels around with a mass of classified documents and normally
works while on his journeys. All that he
did on this occasion was advance the aircraft's
departure time by half an hour in
order to see that his young daughter was
given a proper opportunity to have hospital
treatment. Some of the newspaper editorials
directed towards this episode showed how
malicious and unreasonable some elements
of the Press can be when a public figure or
a politician is involved in a matter. I take
this opportunity to put the, facts before the
House. I hope that I have given honourable
members enough detailed material to enable
them to see the operation of the service in
its true perspective. If there are to be criticisms
let them be honest criticisms, not
politically motivated or designed to demean
the politician in the eyes of those who are
always too ready to accept criticisms of
those of us who sit in this place. With this
background I hope, that honourable members
will be better equipped to deal with
comments about this matter when they come
under their notice. I present the following
paper: Royal Australian Air Force VIEP Flight-Ministerial
Statement, 4 October 1967.
By Authority: A. J. Airnit, Commnonwealth Government Printer, Canberra 



FOR PRESS MEETING BETWEEN THE FRIME MINISTERS
CF NEV' ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA.
JOINT CCMMUNICUE
Mr Holyoake and Mr Holt have had several discussions
in Canberra during the past two days on matters of common interect.
The New Zealand Minister for Defence ( Mr Thomsort and Australian
Ministers participated. New Zealand and Australian officials were also
present. These talks were supplemented by separate discussions among
the officials. Both Mr Holyoake and Mr Holt had indicated ' n statements
before the meeting that they did not see the'r discussions as leading up to
any immediate decisions. The talks form part of the process of regular
and continuous consultations between the New Zealand and Australian
Governments. The talks ranged over a wide field. The major questions
discussed were in the areas of defence and foreign policy. The two
Governments are pursuing common obj ectives and the problems they face
are similar. Consequent on the Brtish Government's announcement
of a progressive reduction in forces in South East Asia, both the New
Zealand and Australian Governments are in process of reviewing their
respective defence arrangements. The discussions have been most useful.
As both Mr Holyoake and Mr Holt have previously stated, it will be
necessary to consult other interested governments.
Both countries have forces engaged and operating together
in Viet Nam. Both countries are also giving economic and other civil
assistance ' n Viet Nam. The Viet Nam situation and the prospects for
peaceful settlement there are major preoccupations of both Governments
and the opportunity to consult has been valuable.
Mr Holyoake and the Australian Deputy Frime IV nister,
Mr McEwen, discussed trade relations between Australia and New Zealand,
including the New Zealand/ A ustral'a Free Trade Agreement.
All the talks were held in a most friendly and co-operative
atmosphere. Mr Holyoake's visit to Canberra was welcomed by the
Australian Prime Minister as an opportunity for the Australian Government
to ascertain at first hand the views of the New Zealand Government on
matters which concern both countries. Mr Holyoake also saw the talks
as reflecting the close relations between the two Governments which are
resolved to continue to work closely together.
FRIME MINISTER'S CFFICE,
CANBERRA. 4TH OCTOBER, 1 ' 7.
I 


OPENING OF CUSTOMS HOUSE. 131, AMELBOURNE 6th October, 1967Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold HoltMr. Minister, Ministerial colleagues, representative ofthe Opposition, representative of the State Premier and of theLord Mayor, other distinguished gentlemen all of whom I am glad tosee here with us today.Indeed, as I look around I see not only many of myParliamentary colleagues and some of the former administratorsof this significant Department of State, but a good many of thelarger customers of the organisation perhaps customer is hardlythe word. Contributor would ' be more practical in our expressionof it, but in a sense of course we are all contributors throughthe Commonwealth to this valuable, revenue collecting Department.I am glad to say that its revenues are collected ratter lesspainfully, at least to the victim, than some other form of actionthat we have had to devise, and it has been the more popular onthat a'ccount. It is for me a pleasure to open a Commonwealth building whichis by the testimony of our own vision at the same time functional,decorative and aesthetically satisfying, and which will itselfbe an addition to the grace and dignity of this fine city ofMelbourne. I have opened quite a number of different buildingssince I took office but it so happens that this is the firstadministrative building I have opened in the capacity of PrimeMinister. Most of the other Commonw~ ealth buildings have beenassociated with an outreach of Commonwealth activity of onekind or another the Murray I ' Cower Project, the Space Stationat Honeysuckle Creek, our Army Barracks at Townsville and theCommunications Centre at the North. West Cape.I mention these by item because it helps to illustrate theramifications of Commonwealth administration in thes3 modern times.But the Customs administration is of ancient lineage and providedone of the earliest revenue levies in Australia long before therewas such an item as income tax.The Victorian Customs came into existence in 1836 and therecord shows that tobacco and spirits were at that time runningrather contrary to the form one would have expected in thesematters. They were being smuggled into New South Wales and not fromthat area and into Van Diemen's Land, also via the Port Phillipdistrict. An Officer of Customs was appointed at an annualsalary of œ 200 and a Tide Waiter at œ, 100. I saw this referencein the notes supplied to me I though t there was a misprint for a" tired waiter", but he would get just about that much in tipsin a reasonable quarter these times. In their first quarter ofoperation they collected œ, 329. Two years later ther collectionswere œ 12,000 a quarter, so -they must have been covering theirexpenses and salaries at that point of time.Today Customs and Excise revenues are running about ~ OMa quarter so at least this is one direction in which the Governmenthas shown no lack of progress, ge.-ntlemen. I sometimes ponderwhat would hap;,-en to our revenues for Commonwealth purposes, andthat includes of course State purposes, if people stopped drinkingspirituous liquor and gave up the smoking of cigarettes. 2/.
Rhatever the moralities of the matter mi;:' ht beg it is thesort of prospect which haunts a Commonwealth Treasurer. There isno sign however of any diminition in our expenditures in thesedirections and so we can rate the Customs and Excise administrationas one of the largest revenue gatherers for the Commonwealth. Ithink you get in, Senator, about 24% through this organisation ofthe total revenue of the Commonwealth.This is the 4th Customs House which has been established inMelbourne in 1837 it was a weatherboard cabin; in 1839 the firstCustoms House which could be fairly described as such was constructed,and in 1876 the old Customs House opp-site, a very graceful,historic and dignified building was established. While over theyears age may have withered them, Customs have not staled in thevariety of their exactions.And so we come to the present building of which I havespoken in such appreciative terms, and I ask you Senator to acceptand to convey to all associated with this, to you Mr. Carmody, thecongratulations of the Government for a fine building which is awelcome addition to the Commonwealth range.It's widely recognised throughout the community that theCustoms Department is a unit which operates in a very efficientway. ie often read of spectacular finds by Custons officers Ithink most members of the public get the message that there is anefficient body of investigators at work. I'm told, although Idon't have time normally to enjoy these amenities myself, thatthe television serial " Contrabandits" has given us some insightinto the exciting ways of Customs investigators, and I amadvised Mr. Carmody that you carry yourself a badge of thisparticular organisation.What is not so often recognised is that as well assafeguarding the revenue, the Customs Department plays a largepart in the welfare of the community. And I am not thinking hereso much of that area of its activities which results in theexclusion of certain forms of literature from the geneyalconsumption I think there we have a part to play with the Statesas well but it does play a major part in preventing the entryof noxious plants and animal products into Australia. We havebeen fortunat ly spared the degradation of some of' the exoticdiseases and some of the weeds which would otherwise hamperagriculture in this country. The entry of some of these couldprejudice the wellbeing of our primary industries or thce healthof our citizens.Another important aspect somewhat in this field of theDepartment's work is in prOventing the illegal introduction ofnarcotic drugs. Here is one Department where LSD really meanshard cash, but not loosely in the sky with the diamonds Ithink the popular song is running at the present time. It cameto my ears that in their desire to avoid making any souvenirpresentation to me which would involve the expenditure ofCommonwealth funds, the Minister and his Department had in mindto present me with a confiscated opiuci pipe. Well, I felt that inthe current circumstances this micht be misunderstood. It wJouldcertainly have leant itself to the cartoonist, I have no doubt, butit might have been taken as some encouragement on my part in thisunfortunate direction.But we do read much in the papers these days of the sad andharmful effects of these drugs, and the Department makes animportant contribution in ensuring that these and otherpotentially harmful drugs are kept in the hands of responsiblepeople.
3.Despite all these activities the cost of collecting Customsand Excise I've already mentione' that this amounts to 24 ofthe Commonwealth's total revenue is surprisingly small. Overthe past 5 years, at least, the total cost of operating theDepartment of Customs and Excise is well under 2% of totalCustoms and Excise collections9 and this is a tribute to theefficiency of the Departmcnt.I can personally testify to that efficiency from an experienceof my own just on nearly 30 years ago when I was for six weeksActing Minister for Customs. When Robert Menzies, es he then was,told me I was to take on t1ais task while he was looking aroundfor a permanent Minister, I must confess that my heart sank. Ihad seen all these schedules and all this esoteric languageassociated with the Customs administration, and I wondered how Icould handle this Depa: tment without exposing my ignorance in theParliament to my discredit. But I then found and I'm sure thiswould have been the experience of those of my colleagues on thisplatform who had their own period of administration of theDepartment that this, as one of the oldest CommonwealthDepartments, had built up a body of experience and know,. lede inrelation to almost every conceivable situation which could occur toharass the Ninister-in-Charge. They were able to give sound,detailed advice which made the task of administration relativelyeasy. I'm not implying, Senator, nor to you my colleague, the Leaderof the Government in the Senate who occupied this post for morethan 7 years, that you have had a cushy time, because when thingsare slack here, there's always a certain amount of activity in theSenate to keep you occupied if all else fails! But certainly onecan look to a most efficient body of men and women in thisDepartment to ease the task of the 1' inister. I think it is alsoa tribute to the co-operation which the community gives, even ifsometimes a little reluctantly, to those who have laid upon themthe duty of collecting the nation's tax revenue from thisparticular area.It may interest some of you to know that taking allCommonwealth tax revenues together, less than is spent on theircollection, which the businessmen in the audience, I am sure, wouldregard as a remarkably low figure. Although the community generallyco-operates very well in the broad with our tax collectors this hasnot always been the case as my researches into the records forthis occasion have led me to discover. The report of the BorderTariff Abolition League of 1866 a Lea-ue formed to fight againstthe Customs duties imposed on goods moving between New South Walesand the rest of Australia contained this passage " Familieshave been searched, children detained an. interrogated upon familyaffairs; the vehicles and goods seized and then restored again.It's no wonder that a spirit of resistance has sprung up amongstthe people of Moama and your Committee regrets to find thatchildren are being trained to tell falsehoods when questioned byCustoms officers".~ ell those were the bad old days we have improved on thatsince. But as the flow of goods and people into and out ofAustralia increases, so does the work of the Customs Depaitment.It is a product of this increased flow that has led to theconstruction of this large and modern building. In it, as theMinister has told you, all the administration of Customs inVictoria will be housed the first time that this has beenpossible for many years.I mention one particular matter because we are becoming 4/.
increasingly tourist-minded these days I am speaking not so muchof our own journeys abroad but in relation to the potentialitiesof revenue and stimulus to the economy from a growing touristindustry. e have set up, recently a Tourist Commission, and welook to increasingly successful promotion of our attractivecapacity abroad. But one of the problems of travellers is, as wehave discovered in our own journeying, the Customs officer. Webelieve that our own Department is not only efficient in thisdirection but has taken a realistic view of the needs oftravellers, particularly those who come to us from other countries.And one way in which the Department has contributed to our welcometo tourists has been to abolish declaration forms and by doing so,we have in this arm of Government supported the efforts of thosewho are concerned in encouraging tourists to visit us.I am glad to be able to report another measure which I donot think the Minister has yet given publicity so I have thatpleasure here today. It concerns passengers and crews of overseasvessels travelling around the Australian coast. I am happy toannounce, and I assure Senator Cohen it has no connection withimpending events in relation to the Senate, that from 1st Januarynext there will be no Customs duties or sales taxes levied ongoods consumed between Australian ports. Miost of you have been onboard a vessel at some time or another and you know what a shockto the system it is when you strike the Australian coast and findthat the prices of the commodities consumed on board these shipsreceive the full weight of sales tax and excise levies. And thisstep has been taken as a contribution to the attraction S'rttind4Ssto Australia, by making their movement to this country the moreconvenient and agreeable. It is also a recognition of the largedistances covered by overseas vessels as they move from oneAustralian port to the other, and I am sure it will be welcomedby all travellers.Before I declare this building open, and unveil thecommemorative plaque, let me recall again a piece of history. In1876 the old Customs house was completed. And the Melbourne" Argus" of the day reported on this event as follows" The people of Melbourne have for some months past become soaccustomed to the sight of unfinished public buildings, that whenone is at last completed it is looked upon almost as a new erection.Those who were unaccustomed to the dark and winding labyrinths tobe found in the interior of the building frequently lost an hourin wandering . bout the cold and dreary passages before they foundthe room they had been searching. This has all changed now, andwhere there were formerly cold damp passages and rooms ofuninviting interior there are now to be found bright and warmlookingcorridors end cosy rooms in which business can betransacted with both pleasure and comfort".I am sure you will agree that that kind of description canvery aptly be applied to the fin,. building in which we findourselves at this time. There have been no unreasonable delaysin the construction of this building, and this has been due to theeffective planning and provision of the Department of , orks and theefficient operation of the builders. I am sure that with itsmodern style, its air-conditionin throughout and attentionto the needs of efficiency in the circumstances of today, thisbuilding will represent an advance just as great over the oldhouse as was that house in its turn over the first permanentCustoms house.It is with great pleasure I now formally declare thisbuilding open and unveil the plaque.


PM. No. 98/1967 
Mr Geoffrey Blainey has been appointed to the Advisory Board of the Commonwealth Literary Fund. Mr Blainey's appointment follows the resignation of Professor A R. Chisholm.
Mr Blainey is Reader in Economic History within the University of Melbourne.
He was the winner of the Sir Ernest Scott Prize, 1955, the Gold Medal of the Australian Literature Society and the Harbison-Higinbotham Prize of 1963. His publications Include " The Peaks of Lyell" 1954, " The University of Melbourne a Centenary Portrait" 1956, " Mines in the Spinifex" 1960 and " The Tyranny of Distance".
Mr Blainey is a fine writer and a distinguished historian and will be a very welcome addition to the Board.
CANBERRA,8th October, 1967.



FOR PRESS: 30OCT 1967
L I BR P. M. No. lC16
VISIT OF THE PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAN
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
The Prim-e Minister of Japjan, Mr Eisaku Sato, will
this week begin an official visit to Australia. Mr Eisaku Sato, accompanied
by Mrs Sato and by an official party of 26 persons, will arrive at Canberra at
8. 10G p. m. on Wednesday, October 11.
Mr Sato is paying a gcodwill1 and courtesy visit to Australia
which will further the ve--y good relations that already exist between the two
countries, not only in their growing trade and commerce but through their
increasing co-operation at the political level. Mr Sato will be able to
exchange views with leaders of the Australian Government on matters
affecting the common interests of each country, particularly the situation in
South-East Asia, whose stability and peaceful development are of fundamental
importance to both countries. He wil 1 have as well an opportunity to see for
himself at first hand something of Australia's economic, social and cultural:
development. SUMMARY OF PROGRAMME The Prime Minister and Mr Sato will be welcomed at the
RAAF Base, Fairbai. rn by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt and Mrs Holt,
and by representatives of government departments and the Japanese Embassy.
Mr Sato is eXpected to make a short statement at the
airport but will not hold a press conference there.
On Thursday, October 12.1, MAr Sato will lay a wreath at
the Australian War Memorial at C.. 30 a. m. and will then call on the Governor-
General, Lord Casey at Government House at 10. 30 a. m.
At 12-. 4--5 a. in., Mr Sato calls on the Prime Minister, Mr
Holt and at 11. a. m. will begin talks with Cabinet Ministers.
A~ t 12. 4 p. in., Mr Sato will attend a Government Luncheon
at ' Parliament House. Mrs Sato will be entertained to lunch at The Lodge by
Mrs Zara Holt. In the afternoon, the Japanese Prime Minister will visit the
Australian National University where he will1 be met by the Vice -Chancellor,
Sir Leonard Huxley, the Deputy Vice -Chancellor, 2. ir John Crawford, and other
members of the professorial staff.
At 31' in., Mr Sato will give a Press Conference at
the Hotel Canberra, after which he will attend reception given by the
Ja, anese Ambassador to Australia, Mr Fumihiko Kai.
At night, Mr and Mrs Sato will dine at Government House
as the guests of the Governor-General and The Lady Casey. ./ 2 
-2-
The following day, Friday, October 13, the Prime
Minister and Mrs Sato and party will leave Fairbairn for Melbourne at
3C a. m. Their stay in Victoria will be for about five hours during
which time Mr and Mrs Sato will be greeted by the Lord Mayor of Melbourne,
Councillor R. T. A. Talbot, call on the Governor Sir Rohan Delacombe,
attend a luncheon given by the State Government and meet members of the
Japanese community. On Friday afternoon at 3.45 Mr and Mrs Sato and
party will fly to Sydney where in the evening they will attend a dinner given
by the State Government. Saturday October 14, the final day of the visit, begins
with a meeting with members of the Japanese community at the Wentworth
Hotel at 9. 30 a. m. Following a call on the Governor, Sir Roden Cutler,
Mr and Mrs Sato will leave for Sydney airport.
The Japanese Prime Minister and his party will leave for
New Zealand at 11. 0 a. m.
CANBERRA Sth October, 1967. 



C % IEA ' SD
CI 7 OCT 1967
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. S%/ 1( 367
DEATH OF LORD ATTLEE
Tribute from the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Lord Attlee had an honoured place in modern history.
He was a political leader whose statesmanship rose above any partisan
allegiance. Practical common sense and wisdom established him
firmly as a leader of the British Labor Party at a cr4tical period of his
nation's history. His wartime co-operation in the Coalition Government
enabled a concentrated national support for the nation's policies, not only
in defence of Britain, but in the cause of freedom throughout the world.
He will be widely mourned as he was widely respected.
1CANBERRA, õ . th October, 1967 


 PM. No. 102/ 1967
Statement by the Prime Minister and Chairman of the Australian Loan Council, Mr Harold Holt
Arrangements have been completed in Frankfurt for the issue of Australia's first public loan in Germany.
The new loan is for an amoutn of DM153 million ($22.3 million). The loan will have an interest coupon of 61/2 per cent and will be issued at 99 percent, to give a yield to maturity of 6.61 per cent per annum over the 15 period of the loan. The loan will finally mature in November 1982 but will be optionally redeemable by the Commonwealth at various prices from November, 1973 onwards. 
Final negotiations for the loan were completed in Frankfurt with Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft which acted on behalf of an international underwriting syndicate of 57 investment and banking firms. 
The bonds will be offered for sale in nearly every financial centre overseas except the United States.
The Australian Ambassador to Germany ( Mr F. J. Blakeney) signed the loan agreement for the Commonwealth in Frankfurt this morning.
The terms and conditions of the borrowing were settled with the approval of the Australian Loan Council. The net proceeds of the loan will be paid to the Commonwealth on 2C-October. After allowing for the discount in the issue price, and for expenses, net proceeds of approximately $ 21. 6 million will be applied towards the Commonwealth Government's share of the 1967-68 borrowing programme approved by t Ie Loan Council.
CANBERRA,12 October, 1967.
NOTE: During the absence of the Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) overseas, Mr Holt is Chairman of the Australian Loan Council. This follows normal procedures adopted when the Treasurer, whom the Prime Minister customarily nominates as Chairman, is overseas.


The Prime Minister, Mr Holt, confirmed today that arising out of a proposal he had made at a recent Council of the Liberal Party, a talk of an informal kind would be held among Commonwealth and State leaders of the Parliamentary Liberal Parties on Commonwealth/ State financial relations. 
He said that he had pointed out that it would probably not be possible to hold the meeting until the end of this year or early next year. He would be fixing a time for the meeting once dates for other outstanding commitments had become clearer.
CANBERRA12th October, 1967


_ rC17 OCT 1961718 RA OLUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF MR EISAKU SATOPRIME MINISTER OF JAPANPARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA 12TH OCTOBER, 1967Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt.Mr Prime Minister, Your Excellen cies, Gentlemen:It's a great pleasure on behalf of the Australian Governmentand people to welcome our distinguished visitor, and shortly I shall beproposing a toast to him. We welcome the Prime Minister and the verydistinguished official party which has accompanied him, and perhaps sincewe are eating in a parliamentary dining-room, I can be permitted to give aspecial welcome to Mr Nishimura, who leads the Prime Minister's partyin the Diet, and as a Prime Minister myself, I recognise the importanceof paying tribute to those who support us, Prime Minister. There are othermembers of the Diet, members of the House of Representatives andCouncillors as well as the official party. They are all very welcome indeed.This is the third visit to Australia by a Prime Minister fromJapan, and each of thEse visits has been a notable, and indeed historicoccasion. The first was by Mr Kishi who, appropriately and aptly enoughwas the Pk~ ime Minister's brother, and I am glad to see the family traditionmaintained by him. He came in 1957. We welcomed Mr Ikeda in 1963, andnow we. have Prime Minister Sato.He has been Prime Minister since 1964 but before then, he hada very distinguished public career in a variety of capacities. Both he and Ihad the dubious pleasure of being Ministers of Finance in our respectiVecountries which estaliishes a bond of sorts between us. He was Ministerin Charge of Olympic Affairs, just to show how widely his activities haveranged, and he has, of course, held many other high offices.We speak to him on this occasion which is for us another notableand historic occasion, because his visit comes at a very sigrdficant period inthe relations between our two countries. The past istbhind us; the presentis a period of mutually beneficial trade and growing co-operation in theinstitutions of Southi-East Asia and the Pacific, and the future is an excitingprospect of growing co-operation with a significant role for each of us inthe affairs of what is becoming an increasingly important and significantarea of the world. There has been almost daily awareness between our countriesof the increasing range of contacts. They range over matters of internationalaffairs, of trade, of aid, of sports, and in the cultural field, and so we dofind it especially pleasing, Prime Minister, to have another visit from theHead of Government of your country after a four-year gap. 1 hope that asthe years go on, the intervals will become briefer. I look hopefully to a timewhen it may be possible for me to return this visit, and I acknowledgepublicly with great appreciation the invitation you extended earlier to me todayand in which you indicated that the Emperor of Japan had personally joined.It is a compliment which I value and I hope to find an occasion when it willbe mutually convenient for you to receive me.I was in Tokyo myself for the International Bank and Monetary / 2
2-Fund Meetings in 1964 and I recall then the impression of great growth andactivity which was so evident in your capital city at that time.There are, of course, many reasons for the increasingly closelinks between our two countries. We have broadly similar political systemsmuch closer, when I study them than I had earlier realised.: We have aconcern that we share together for the wellbeing of the region and its economicprogress. We have ourselves increasingly important and economic trade links.We co-operate in the field of aid, particularly in this area of the world. Wehave cultural links; we are drawing increasingly ourselves upon the traditionaland distinctive cultures of Japan. Our economies are, to a remarkable. degree,complementary. We do compete in certain fields perhaps, but the notablething about the economies of our two countries is the way in which we can eachhelp the other. We are both democracies. You have an hereditary Emxperor wean hereditary monarchy. We both have written Constitutions. There are twoHouses in both the Japanese Diet and the Australian Parliament, and I haveno doubt, Prime Minister, you have your problems with each of them.Our Cabinets are formed of members from the Parliament. We share aconcern, as I have said, for the region. You lie at the north of it Australiaand New Zealand lie at the south of the Pacific Region.Inevitably, and naturally, and most desirably, we are both, as prospering andrapidly-developing countries, concerned with the wellbeing of our neighbours.By 197C you may rank as the third industrial power in the world.You are certainly on the ascendant all the time. You have, I think, the highestrate of growth of national product of any industrialised country in the world.We, for the time being at any rate, enjoy a higher per capita income and one ofthe world's highest living standards. You apply a hig her proportion of yourgross national income to investment, but we rank, we understand, about secondto you, and we are at this time devoting a higher proportion of our grossnational product to international aid an~ d to the services of defence.So all these similarities I have mentioned and our common int erestsin the past decade have brought our two countries increasingly close togetherin many ways, We are co-operating in the Asian and Pacific Council. Wefrequently discuss together in the United Nations matters in which we find weshare attitudes on many of the significant issues. We are both greatlyconcerned with the stability of Asia because for us peace in Asia is aprerequisite for our own wellbeing as indeed it is for the wellbeing of thosecountries with which we are in neighbourly condition. Any State in Asiathat regards a high degree of instability and political chaos either in the restof the world or in any of the neighbouring countries around us as advantageousto its inte rests represents a common problem for our two countries.We, like you, hope most ardently for a peaceful settlement ofthe conflict in Viet Nam, and we, like you, have regretted that a series ofpeace initiatives has not been successful. More than forty in number havebeen attempted from many and varied sources, and for our part, as I knowfrom yours, we will do what we can to promote a successful peace negotiationfor a just and enduring peace in the area. It is in the national interests of eachof our countries as it is in the interest of the wellbeing and security of thepeople most directly concerned.When the Government of North Viet Nam appreciates thedetermination of the Allied effort and understands the price to be paid from / 3
-3aggression, perhaps there will be real hope of successful negotiationsguaranteeing the independence of South Viet Nam.You can claim-to rank at this time as the world's sixth tradingnation and you are on the move up in the ladder of international trade.Last year you were Australia's best customer in terms of the value ofgoods imported from us, and as you pointed out in our discussions inCabinet this morning, if you had not been, you would soon be in that positionbecause of the incmasing part that Australian production will be playing inyour own economy.You are the largest buyer of our wool and our coal, of our ironore and concentrates, of our non-ferrous ores and concentrates, of ourunwrought copper, and our second largest market for sugar, mutton andlamb and butter. You are the largest supplier of yarns and textile fabricsto this country, cf-our iron and ste4 of fish products, and a major supplierof motor vehicles and electrical machinery.The ten-year-old trade agreement with your country, to which mycolleague, the Deputy Prime Minister made such a notable contribution, wasone of the earliest of our post-war agreements and surely the mostsuccessful. Apart from facilitating important flows of trade in eachdirection, the agreement provides for regular, and in our view, mostvaluable discussions and consultations between traders and our governments,and it is a happy circumstance that here with us today we have so manymembers of the Japan/ Australian Business Co-operation Committee who aremaking their contribution to this success.Our countries are clearly bound to continue to have close economicrelationships, and by 1970, we confidently expect you to have the thirdlargest economy in the world.Our many co-operative links in the aid field include sharedmembership of the Development Assi stance Committee, shared membershipof the International Bank and Monetary Fund, shared membership of theForeign Exchange Operations Fund for Laos; we are members of theInternational Bank's Co-ordinating Group for Aid to Malaysia and Thailandand of its Consultative Group on Ceylon. Vle both have a very considerableinterest in the wellbeing of Indonesia which you visited so recently. Weare both members of the Colombo Plan organisation, both members ofECAFE and both members of the Asian Development Bank. Your contributionwas extremely generous $ 20 million. We ferl that while this ranked withthat of the United States, Australia with a commitment of $ 85 million hasshown its goodwill with a contribution out of all proportion to our populationand national wealth.It is important that the countries in our region should evolveco-operatively. Aid is an important way of co-operating. We give aid,in the words of the late President Kennedy " because it is right not becausewe are looking for repayment or because we are looking solely to thematerial benefits that can come to our countries". It is a gesture ofinternational -goodwill, and we believe it is accepted on that basis.One of our great problems in making effective contact with you isour language. You have done much better in that respect than we have, PrimeMinister. I have been somewhat humbled to find that you can communicatewith me in my language certainly to a very much greater degree than I could
-4ever hope to communicate with you in yours. But increasingly Japaneseis being learned at Australian schools and universities, and I hope thisprocess will continue. Only today two new scholarships for Australiansto go to Japan are being announced one, the Australian/ Japan BusinessCo-operation Scholarship is being sponsored by the Business Co-operationCommittee to which I have referred, and will permit a scholar at aJapanese university to study there for one year. The Salonju-HamersleyScholarship will also provide a year's study for an Australian graduate.And I hope this process will expand and increase because It is by havingwell-trained, well-educated people from our two countries come to knowclosely the circumstances of the other that our understanding will beenriched and mellowed.We appreciate your cultural contributions in Japanese films;Japanese art and Japanese backgrounds are being used increasingly in.cultural settings in this country. Increasingly we are becoming aware ofthe richness of Japan's cultural heritage. The 1970 World Exposition isto be held in Osakca and it is a matter of particular pleasure for Australiato be represented there. We are sure that you will be able to draw onmany countries to support you, and this will be one of the notable eventsin the cultural and economic development of our region of the world.Your theme will be progress and harmony for mankind. We look forwardto participating in the exposition and we feel that the expositbn theme isa fitting statement of our common purposes.It is our firm object, and youars also, I am sure, to work togetherwith all men of goodwill towards the pr ogress and harmony of mankind.We have a special contribution, each of us, to make in this region of theworld, and let us hope our friendship, our co-operation and our collaborationwill make a notable advance in the history of mankind in the countries aroundus who are looking for the kind of leadership and assistance that we areable to contribute to them. We could work for no better aim and we couldleave ourselves no better heritage.And it is in that spirit, Mr Prime Minister that we welcome youhere. I ask my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister, who has, as youwill be so well aware personally, done so much to promote good relationsbetween our two countries, to support me in the toast I am shortly topropose, and then we will call upon the Leader of Her Majesty's Oppositionto demonstrate to you that in the sentiments that we express, we are unitedin the Parliament of this nation.


At the invitation of the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia, Mr Eisaku Sato, Prime Minister of Japan, accompanied by Mrs Sato, is visiting, Australia from October 11 to October 14, 1957.
During his stay in Australia, Prime Minister Sato is visiting Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney. Mr. Sato met Mr Holt and other Ministers, and a frank exchange of views on current international problems and other matters of common concern to Australia and Japan took place. The discussions were held in a most cordial atmosphere, contributing greatly to the deepening of mutual understanding between the two countries.
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed that the maintenance of peace and stability in Asia was the common aspiration of their two countries. In this respect the situation in Viet Nam was of deep concern to both countries. The two Prime Ministers discussed ways and means of bringing about an early and just settlement of the conflict.
The Prime .Ministers affirmed their resolve to strengthen further their support of the United Nations so as to enable this organisation to contribute more effectively to the maintenance of peace, and expressed their hope that in the field of disarmament a non-proliferation treaty of nuclear weapons will be concluded at an early date in such a form as to enable as many countries as possible to join the treaty.
The Prime Ministers, affirming that economic development in Asian countries was the basis of their political stability, emphasised the need for developed countries to assist developing Asian nations in their efforts to achieve faster rates of economic growth. In this connection, the Prime h1inisters stressed the importance of co-operation for the prosperity of the Asian and Pacific region. They agreed to continue their efforts to support the various activities of such organisations as ECAFE, (Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East) the Colombo Plan, the Asian Development Bank and ASPAC.
The Prime Ministers expressed their satisfaction at the fact that the friendly and co-operative relationship between the two countries was being further strengthened in recent years in the political, economic and cultural fields. They noted, in particular, that trade between the two countries had undergone a remarkable expansion in recent years and showed signs of further development in future. The Ministers exchanged views on a number of problems with a view to promoting.' a smooth expansion of this trade. The Prime .Ministers agreed that it would be desirable to have negotiations undertaken between Japan and Australia to arrive at a treaty for the avoidance of double taxation. They confidently expected that such negotiations could begin early 1958.
The Prime Ministers agreed that the visit of Prime Minister Sato to Australia was of great significance and felt confident that the personal contact established by this visit would be maintained and strengthened in the future. Mr  Holt expressed his warn appreciation of the wish conveyed by Prime M1inistor Sato that he should pay a visit to Japan at an early opportunity, and thanked him for this invitation.
Prime Minister Sato expressed his deep appreciation of the most cordial and warm reception extended in Australia to himself', Mrs. Sato and to the members of' his party.
Canberra13 October, 1957.


The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, has received the following message from President Johnson:-
" A quarter century ago I found out that if you had to be away from home and fighting a war, the best country to be in is Australia. I hear that the first group of our servicemen to come to you from Viet Nam has arrived at the same conclusion.
I know the  thought and care and warmth that went into the arrangements made for our men.
I thank you, and through you, the people of Australia for what you are doing.
Sincerely,LYNDON B JOHNSON "
Mr. Holt, in welcoming the message today, said: "It is good to learn that the U. S. servicemen coming here for R. and R. have formed such a favourable impression of Australia."
13 October 1967


O~ ATER's o6-,ANNUAL DINNER OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN Q. 17 NOVCHAJVMER OF MANUFACTUESADELAIDE, S. A. i:;14TH OCTOBER, 1967Speech by the Prime6 Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. President, Mr. Premier, Mr. Leader of' the Opposition, Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, so many distinguished guests whose names appear in this fine print in this very elaborate programme, and the six hundred odd remaining members of this assembly: In any other State 698 would have been rounded off to 700 but such is the innate honesty of South Australia that they state the matter pra~ cisely to us.
You have made me feel a little weary, Mr. President, with your recital of what has gone on over the last twenty-one months and this week has been running quite true to form but lest anybody reading the public print should imagine that I am a compulsive air journeyer, let me assure you that the most enjoyable part of any flight that I make is the walk down the steps from the aircraft as we land. I think that's the experience of most of us.I am honoured to be your guest tonight in my capacityas Prime Minister, and I have listened with very great interestto what the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition and you havehad to say, Mr. President. Before I make some comment myself,may I be permitted a few personal references.
First I would wish to join with you in the good wisheByou have conveyed to your Governor, who I may say, we are indebtedto from the Commonwealth for the very able way and ready mannerin which he acted as Administrator for us during the absenceoverseas of our own Governor-General. W7e join with you in wishinghim a speedy recovery.
M~ ay I also say how much I have regretted to learn todayof the passing of a very distinguished South Australian in SirGeorge Ligertwood. He was not only a very distinguished memberof your own judiciary but he servod the Commonwealth in a publicspiritedmanner on at least three occasions that I can personallyrecall as a RI'oyal Commissioner, as the Chairman of a Committeelooking into the situation of the Members of the Parliament and,more recently, in a very much more onerous role as Chairman of aCommittee on Taxation in a very complex field. We join with youin mourning him and I pay this public tribute for the service hehas rendered not only your State but the nation.
Then may I single out, if I ccn, from the many distinguishedguests here tonight one man to whom the Premier andothers have rightly paid tribute. I thought that when Tom Playfordceased to be Premier he would cease to occupy the centre of thestage. I find I was mistaken, he has stolen the show again tonight,but he has done that as he has at so many Premiers' Conferencesand Loan Council meetings without saying very much himself. Hemanages, or did manage to get the results, but I am delighted tosee him again and see him obviously in such good form. He is notonly a citizen of South Australia but an honoured citizen of theCommonwealth of Australia who has meant so much to the developmentof your State. And looking at your State, I sometimes feel thatnever has more been done by people with less to do it with, becauseyou have not enjoyed some of the rather fortuitous advantages ofother States, the rich natural resources, the great mineral discoveries and matters of that sort. But to come to this wellordered,prospering city is to realise how wall the SouthAustralian has done with the resources available to him and theprosperity, the efficiency, the success of Australian manufacturingindustry is nowhere better exemplified than it is in your Stateof South Australia and I will say a little on that in a moment ortwo. The Premier did make a reference to the absence ofladies, and like himself, I always feel a little lighter in heartif the ladies are present to give a decorative contribution to thegathering and to keep us in reasonable order in our own behaviour.But I would like to point out to him that not only have I recognisedthis in my own Ministry by having a woman in my Ministry,I think an advantage I possess over him at this point of time,but the woman happens to be a Dame and as you know there isnothing better than a Dame. Perhaps he may be encouraged bythis example. But, Mr. President, since the Second W~ orld V/, ar therehas been a tremendous surge of development in this country whichhas completely transformed the Australian economy and, as youhave said yourself, we no longer ride on the sheep's back. W~ ehave developed diversified industries, industries of strengthand variety which are capable of not merely meeting the requirementsof the home market, but in a growing number of instances,capable of going out and finding a market for themselves in otherparts of the world. There was a time when " imported" meantsomething superior. ' de have abandoned, I hope, that psychologyin this country for all time, because while we are capable ofmeeting and matching, as you have done in so many instances, themarkets of the rest of the world then there is nothing inferiorabout Australian production. And while in the early years itwas mainly the supply of the needs of the consumer foodprocessing and matters of that sort we have now got to thestage where we can produce highly sophisticated items of manufactureand where we can look to an increasing proportion of ourexport income derived from the products of our manufacturingindustries. It has become fashionable at this time for some of theacademics and theorists to address the argument that we ought tomodify quite radically the general policy which I bclieve has beensupported on both sides of politics in Australia now for many years,and that is reasonable and adequate protection for economic andefficient Australian industry. ' ve hear people arguing that nowwe are building up such a big export income with the aid of ourmineral discoveries that we could be a little more choosy, moreselective as to those industries for which we provide withreasonable tariff protection. Iell I go on public record againas saying that for as far ahead as I can see, Australia is notonly going to need its manufacturing industries, it's going toneed a steady expansion of its manufacturing industries and thatis because apart from other considerations and I will mentiontwo or three of them our industrial development is linked withone of the most important aspects of national policy and thatis population growth.We have got three million square miles of country herewith less than twelve million people in en area of the world wherethey count their population in tens or hundreds of millions, andwe have a responsibility to develop this country and to populateit, and in these modern times wvith the degree of industrialdevelopment that we have achieved and the organisational technicalefficiency we have achieved, we don't find industries throwingup, as they did in the past, the great opportunities for employment. 
Certainly our primary industries can't in an area in which more mechanisation is occurring in the primary industryfield. Even these great developments that I've been seeing inWestern Australia and Queensland in recent months, although theymean tens and hundreds of millions in their aggregate to ourexport income, they employ modern equipment, modern mechanisation,as you see in Hamersley, where in one township you will find,Dampier, the products being brought from Mt. Tom Price where ashovel will pick up twenty-five tons at one pull and load it intoa truck costing a quarter of a million dollars that will carryaway a hundred tons of material. In that situation numbers arenot great in relation to the capital expenditure, but in themanufacturing industries this is where we have found in thispost-war era that we have been able to absorb so much of theemployment which has come to us from overseas and so much of thegrowing work-force inside Australia itself. So there is in termsof national policy one powerful reason why we should be encouragingexpansion of the manufacturing industry in this country. Andthere is another. You mentioned our sister countryr of New Zealand, Mr.President. I don't think New Zealand would have been in asdifficult an economic position as it is had it been able toestablish, ( and this is no criticism of the New Zealanders becausethey haven't got the domestic market to do this), industry of avariety and scale that we have here. Then they would have beenthe better able as we have been in the past, and shall be in thefuture, to meet the fluctuations which inevitably occur for aprimary-producing country, both of price for what it can securefor its product on international markets and the production itcan secure from chancy seasonal conditions. We are the strongerand the better able to meet these variations of fortune becausewe hav.-a wider dispersed and diversified nanufacturing industryin this country. Now I would hope that these considerations will notonly be in your minds but in the minds of many of those who speakof radical reform of our policy in relation to the protection ofeconomic and efficient Australian industry. There has been nochange in the basic policy, nor the philosophy of my own Governmenton this matter, which follows closely that of my predecessor andwhich I believe represents the view of all sections of the NationalParliament on this particular topic.Now, I wanted to speak tonight not merely on manufacturingindustry in any narrow sense because you are here not merely asmanufacturers, but in this highly representative gathering asfellow citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia, and we havebefore us by our geographical situation and by the circumstanceof the growth of the economy of Asia at this time, not only greatproblems but great opportunities. I think it was Henry Kaiserwho very aptly said that problems are really opportunities in theirwork clothes. Well, Australia sees many problems around us, situatedas we are with less than twelve million people in this areawhere so many difficulties exist but where for the first time incenturies of history our countries are emerging with an independentidentity and searching for the development of their own nationalresources, and this opens up for Australia a great opportunity ofinfluence of growth in trade.In the 1950' s 15 per cent approximately of our exportincome was earned in the countries east of Suez. Currently weare earning just on 40 per cent of our export income from thatarea of the world which includes just on three-fifths of humankindand where the age-old evils, the age-old weaknesses are beingovercome in modern terms and with modern technology. / 4
-4Now that cairvt is a steadily rising wurvt,. You mentionedthe visit here this week of the Prime DMinister of' Japan. Thegrowth of' Australia's trade with Japan is itself' a matter of'historical noteworthiness and remarkable in its degree, but eventhat, we believe, is only at the threshold of' the kind of' collaborationin trade between the two countries that we can see ahead forus. The Prime Minister of' Japan told us first at our Cabinetdiscussion and I would not have voiced it here had he notrepeated it at his press conf'erence but in a matter of' a fewyears he can see Japan taking two-thirds of' its iron ore importsfor a growing steel industry from Australia and two-thirds of' itscoal imports, and that would be, I think, more than double theproportion that we are currently contracting to send to thatcountry. As Japan itself' and the growing economies which Ihave seen myself' in person in the course of' this year in Koreaand Taiwan, in Cambodia and to a lesser degree because it stillhas to face the presence of' 40,000 North Vietnam troops in itsterritory of' Laos, but as these countries can shake off themenaces which have afflicted them in recent times, then theirown economies will f'orge ahead and they are looking to Australiaas one of the principal suppliers of' their raw materials, theirfoodstuffs and even some of our manufactured items.Now this, I repeat, opens up great opportunities forthis country of ours. I know that the Prime Minister of' Japandid make some reference to the gap which exists at the presenttime between the volume of purchase or value of purchase andvolume of goods from Australia contrasted with what we take fromJapan, but you must remember, as I am sure he realises, that wearc less than twelve million people. They are closer to a hundredmillion people and per capita we take far more in value from Japanthan Japan takes from us. In any event, of course, this is hardlythe realist's view on international trade.Countries look to an overall balance if they can secureit in their international trade, but they don't, if they arerealists, attempt to balance their trade with every trade partnerwith whom they deal and this is true of Japan with us as it istrue with our trade relationship with several of the countries ofEurope who are big purchasers of our wool and some of our foodstuffs.We have a very favourable balance with them; they don't buy fromus because they love Australia and Australians. Each countrywatches its own national interest in the purchases that it makesand in these European countries they may purchase our wool theydo so because they either require it for the needs of' theirdomestic market or because they are going to process it intotextiles and clothing and export it to some other part of theworld. And so with much of' what we send to Japan.We have a very favourable balance with New Zealand butNew Zealand does not produce in the sort of quantities that wouldenable the balance, the goods that we require. They, as we, lookto an improvement in the trading position, but as realists we facethe fact that our goal is both a balance overall in our internationaltrade and a growth overall of international trade for allinternational traders. As we expand international trade, so weall have the prospect of' some improvement in our own tradingposition. We have a very unfavourable balance with the UnitedStates of America but we are able to offset that with the favourablebalance we obtain in some other direction with some othercountries. Now one other matter on which I would like to commentquite briefly is that from time to time we hear fears expressedabout the extent of overseas investment in this country and I,both as a Minister and as a Treasurer and more recently, of course,
as Prime Minister, have kept my eye closely on this matter overa great many years and I have alw"-ys been conscious of this factin my mind thvct the United States became the greatest economicpower and military power in the world through a process of importingpeople and importing capital. There were periods in whichtheir rate of immigration flow far exceeded anything that we haveattained and I don't know of any point in the history of theUnited States when they have placed any restraint upon any investmentin their country from any other part of the world, and Idon't find America dominated by foreign capital or foreigncapitalists because, as we have discovered in this country, oneinvestment stimulates another.A foreign investment stimulates a great deal of domesticinvestment. People can point to General Motors-Holden, and youare very well aware of the activities of General Motors-Holden.What I am aware of is these two or three principal factors. Firstof all that the sub-contractors and suppliers to General Motors-Holden, are in the main Australian-owned and -based industriesand they provide a great deal of employment for a great many people,and Australian industry has been able to grow because of thisstimulus, not only through General Motors-Holden I am notpromoting them tonight but Chrysler, Ford, the rest, theBritish Motor industries all these automotive industriesVolkswagen any that you care to name that have establishedthemselves here have given their own stimulus to Australianproduction. The second point I make is that Australia has a verysubstantial equity in all foreign-owned enterprise because wedrag our 42J per cent from profits anyhow by way of company taxapart from what we derive from the individual who works for theorganisation, and if they do remit dividends overseas there isnormally a 15 per cent withholding tax on the dividends remitted.Most of them plough back a fair share of the profits earned intofurther development which means more employment, and incidentally,more national revenue for the tax gatherer from their activities.Over recent years that particular company has, if my recollectionis correct, kept its overserns remittances well inside the earningsit has made of foreign exchange for Australia from the sale of itsproducts overseas. So I am not one of those who lose sleep aboutthe activities of foreign investors in tAstralia. I believe theyhave benefitted this country very greatly.Going round these mineral developments, you only haveto look at them on the spot to realise the secondary effectsgenerated from them which benefit Australian industry generally.Take the show I saw recently up at Port Hedland, the Mount Newmanproject just getting under way. It is going to put in its ownrailway line of 270 miles at its own cost. I saw one area cleared,of a mile length, which was to accommodate the sleepers and therails for the railway line. Now the sleepers came from the South-Wiest of Western Australia and I could just imagine the stimulusit had given to the timber industry of that State. The railswere to come from B. H. P. and one could imagine the valuable effectthis would have on the order books of that company and the usefulinfluence on employment and general economic effect throughoutthe community. And that is just to pick out two aspects as onelooks at all these projects together in Western Australia andyou hear the talk about you mustn't make this country just aquarry for overseas interests.I predict that within a foreseeable period of yearsthere will be a great industrial complex reaching down throughthose industries linking one up with the other, because as theydevelop and they generate income they touch off further development. / 6
-6You need engineering shops to service them, you need a varietyof' other undertakings. There is even salt works going down thereto take advantage of the proximity of' power and energy and theother facilities which these industries bring with them. Andthis is the way a country develops. This is how it gets a reallyeffective decentralisation of national activity, and we arefortunate that when the rest of' the world, the under-developedworld, is scram~ bling to attract the foreign investor thatAustralia has built up so successfully an environment of politicaland economic stability that we readily attract investment andresources and techanical know-how to this country.Now, the final thing I would like to say to you andthis is well away from the issue perhaps of industry, but we archere tonight as fellow Australians and the greatest matter whichconcerns us in external terms for this country currently iswhat is going on in Vietnam. Associated with that as part of ourgeneral security problem is the situation we face with the Britishannouncement of intention to withdraw its forces East of Suez an~ dthis creates for Australia this total complex, a situation we havenever had to face before in our national history.He are being made to stand on our own two feet to anextent that we have never known before but we are not entirelyon our own feet, and indeed at this stage of our national growthand with our limited population, it would be almost visionary toexpect a time that I can see ahead of me when we would be able tostand entirely on our own two feet in defence terms. And so wehave, and I believe it to have been a major Australian diplomaticachievement, linked ourselves for our security with the UnitedStates of America in the ANZUS pact and in the SEATO arrangement.But as a good ally, as a country which has gone out in two worldwars much further from our own shores than the situation in Vietnamto resist aggression and try to preserve -the freedom and independenceof small countries, so we have gone again as has been our historicaltradition into Vietnam.In Korea we were the first country after the UnitedStates to take up the United Nations resolution of support againstthe aggression to South Korea which was coming from the North andjoin in resisting that aggression, and as one who has been in Korearecently, I can say that this was not only right in terms of moralprinciple it was right in the results which it produced of anindependent country capable of forging ahead economically once itsindependence had become reasonably assured. Had we not moved into Korea we certainly would not have moved into Vietnam and Iquestion whether we would have held Taiwan. I question whetherIndonesia would have been held secure from Communist influenceand so we are in Vietnam at this time consistently with theprinciples we followed in the two world wars and in our interventionin Korea. Wle are there consistently with the alliance we havewith the mightiest national power in the world in the UnitedStates it has underwritten our security in the ANZUS treatyand we are there as one of the free countries of the South EastAsian and Pacific region looking to the time which has beenemerging quite realistically over recent years in which there canbe greater co-operation, and greater friendliness between thecountries of this region. What is often lost sight of by thosewho concentrate on the day-by-day episodic events in Vietnam hasbeen the achievement of economic growth, of diplomatic collaborationbetween the free countries around the periphery of Asia. Throughthe Asian and South Pacific Council, through the Asian DevelopmentBank, through various other institutions we have been able in a waynever before known in centuries to work together and to bring ourpolicies more closely in line. */ 7
-7And so, gentlemen, in the Knowledge of this, your ownGovornment has been quite firm in its policy attitudes, unwaveringin its own resolution to see this matter through. WNe have notedwhat our allies are prepared to do in order to bring as speedilyas they can this matter to a peaceful and honourable conclusionand we bow to nobody in our desire to see this matter speedilyand honourably resolved. ' 1* aer e more to be served by peace thanmost other countries of the world because with peace we can goahead with the development of this great country and the resourceswhich lie open to us and in that development I know that the manufacturingindustries of Australia have a growing and increasinglyimportant part to play and it is in that recognition that I amdelighted to be here with you tonight, Mr. Preasident, to saluteyo. u as the man of industry for the year and to salute the efficientSouth Australian industry which makes its own valuable contributionto the national effort.Thank you, gentlemen, for having me as your guesttonight and rmy best wishes to your continuing prosperity andgrowing success.



ENMOBTA GOT: O BE RELEASED BEFORE 6 P. M. ( EST) ON 16/ 10/ 67.
FOR PRESS: CL LI lR A V0 P. MV.. No. 106/ 1967
MINISTERIAL CHANGES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
The Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. Adermann, has
asked to be relieved of his duties as Minister for Primary
Industry as from today. His resignation has been accepted by
the Governor-General.
Mr. J. D. Anthony, up till now the Minister for the
Interior, has been appointed to the Primary Industry portfolio
and Mr. P. J. Nixon, the Member for Gippsland, has been appointed
to the Ministry and will take over from Mr. Anthony as Minister
for the Interior. The two Ministers were sworn in their new
offices by the Governor-General this afternoon.
It is a matter of deep regret to me and my colleagues
in the Cabinet that Mr. Adermann has felt it necessary to resign
to ease his load of work. We have all respected the able manner
in which he has discharged the duties of a difficult portfolio
for so many years. I know that this high opinion of his work is
widely held, and nowhere more strongly than in those primary
industries for whose prosperity and welfare he has worked so
devotedly. Mr. Anthony comes to the Primary Industry portfolio
with a wealth of knowledge of the land and its problems.
I have invited 1dr. Sinclair to become a member of the
Cabinet and he will continue administration of his portfolio of
Social Services in which appointment he has shown great ability.
Mr. Nixon's promotion is well earned, and he will be a
welcome addition to the Ministry.
I announce also a change in the Leadership of the
Government in the Senate.
Senator Henty, who had proviously announced his decision
to retire from the Senate at the expiry of his current term, wrote
to me recently saying that in the circumstances he thought a change
should be made in the leadership in order that the Government
Senate Leader in the forthcoming election campaign might have
continuity of office.
Senator Gorton, at my request, has agreed to assume
responsibility as Government Leader in the Senate.
I would like publicly, as I have done privately, to
thank Senator Henty for the able and devoted service he has given
the Government through his years of leadership in the Senate. I
have asked him to continue as a member of the Cabinet in his
present portfolio.
CANBERRA 16th October, 1967.
EMBARGO: 



FOR PRESS: I' " 4
rF 00CT 1967 P. M. No. 105/ 1967
1I B R vi
VICTORIA CROSS FOR GALLANTRY IN VIETNAM
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Her Majesty the Queen has bestowed posthumously the
award of the Victoria Cross upon a member of the Australian
Army Training Team in Vietnam,, the late Major Peter John Badcoe,
of Canberra. Major Badcoe, who was born in South Australia in 1934,
graduated from the Officer Cadet School, Portsea, in December,
1952. He served with the Australian Army Training Team in
Vietnam from August, 1966, until his death on 7th April, 1967.
Major Badcoe displayed outstanding heroism on three
separate occasions between February and April of this year.
On 23rd February, while acting as an advisor to a
Vietnamese Regional Force Company, Major Badcoe moved across
600 metres of fire-swept terrain to save an American officer's
life. In the subsequent successful assault on the enemy post
he personally killed the machine gunners directly in front of
him. He then personally recovered, still under enemy fire, the
body of another American officer.
His actions during this encounter gave impetus to the
Vietnamese offensive, saved the life of one officer and prevented
the Viet Cong from capturing the body of the other.
On 7th March, Major Badcoe persoanally led a Vietnamese
Company in an attack over open terrain to assault and capture a
heavily defended enemy position. His courage and leadership,
when death and heavy losses were certain, turned defeat into
victory and prevented the enemy from capturing the district
headquarters. His actions were a major contributing factor to
the defeat of a numerically superior enemy force.
On 7th April, Major Badcoe was on an operation with a
Vietnamese Reaction Company in the Huong Tra district. The
Company under heavy attack withdrew to cover leaving Major Badcoe
and his radio operator under heavy mortar fire about 50 metres
ahead of the leading elements. Major Badcoe returned and led the
Company forward again. He continued on and prepared to throw
grenades. He stood up and exposed himself as he prepared to throw.
On the first occasion he was pulled down by his radio operator
because of concentrated fire. On his second attempt to throw a
grenade he again exposed himself and was killed by machine gun
fire. Friendly artillery was then called in and the position
was captured. His gallant actions before the enemy were the motivating
force which inspired the Company to launch a third assault and
overrun an enemy force of superior strength.
The American servicemen who were witnesses of Major
Badcoe's gallant actions emphasise that he knew that almost
certain death could be expected in face of the hail of enemy fire,
and that they saw no possibility of his survival. His personal
valour and unhesitant response to the needs of his comrades-in-arms
were an inspiration for the attacking forces. His presence of
mind and demonstrated professional competence led to the defeat
of an enemy who enjoyed every tactical advantage. Statements by
the Americans all agree that Major Badcoe's actions brought great
credit upon himself and the Australian Army. 
2.
Major Badcoe's outstanding bravery and leadership and
subordination of his personal safety were in the highest traditions
of military service. His selfless 6ourage has set an example
worthy to be long remembered in the story of Australia's fighting
men. CANBERlRA 16th October, 1967
The Prime Minister today sent the following letter to
the late Major Badcoe's widow:
" Dear Mrs. Badcoe, Today I have the honour of making the announcement
that Her Majesty the Queen has given Her approval to the
award of the Victoria Cross to your late husband, Major Peter
John Badcoe, in recognition of his outstanding personal
heroism, inspired leadership and great gallantry while
serving as a member of the Australian Army Training Team
in Vietnam. I offer on behalf of the Commonwealth Government,
my colleagues and myself our warmest commendation of this
supreme honour bestowed by Her Majesty.
I would like to pay my own personal tribute to
your late husband's magnificent courage, valour and devotion
to duty. He will be a source of inspiration to all
Australians. Yours sincerely,
( HAROLD HOLT)"
Mrs. D. M. Badcoe,
159 Wattle Street,
O'CONNOR. A. C. T. 2601
BACKGROUND Major Badcoe was born in South Australia on 11th
January, 1934, and was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the
Australian Staff Corps in December, 1952. He was allotted to the
Royal Regiment of Australian Artillery and after a number of
Regimental and Staff postings transferred to the Royal Australian
Infantry Corps. He joined the Australian Army Training Team
Vietnam in August, 1966, and was posted as Sector Operations
Officer in Thua Thien Province, South Vietnam.
Major Badcoe's award is the 94th Victoria Cross awarded
to an Australian and the second since World War II.
The last award was made on 1 th December,, 1966, to the
late darraur't Officer Kevin Arthur 1hea ley œ g action in Quang Ngai
Province, bouth Vietnam on 13th November, 19b5
CANBERRA 16th October, 1967 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
VIETNAM
Ministerial Statement 1 5 NOV 1967
i BR AV,
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debate?, 17 October 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister&gt;-by leave-There have been, as
honourable members know, two major
political and military matters in South East
Asia before the Cabinet in recent months.
They are the British decision to limit its
role east of Suez and the situation in Vietnam.
The Government has had these great
and serious matters under continuous review
and has been having a close exchange
of views with our allies and friends. I have
today to inform the House of certain
decisions the Government has taken on the
most immediate and the most pressing of
these two issues; that is, the situation in
Vietnam. Before dealing with this in some detail,
may I refer briefly to the British Government's
plans to reduce in stages, Britain's
military presence in Malaysia-Singapore.
This has to be seen against the background
of our own judgment that security and
stability in South East Asia are of first
importance for Australia and we recognise
the need to act positively to maintain that
security and stability and also to assist in
the development of the region.
Consultations with our allies and friends
in South East Asia on these matters are
continuing. My colleagues and I have just
14519/ 67 had the benefit of discussions here in Canberra
with the New Zealand Prime Minister,
Mr Holyoake. I am happy to say there is
a close identity of views with New Zealand
on our common strategic interests in South
East Asia. There is much still to be done,
however, to shape a long-term programme,
in concert with friendly and interested
governments, to the changes which will
follow from the British land withdrawal
from the Malaysia-Singapore region. This
will ' take some time, because the pace is
niot set by one nation alone, ' but by several,
each with a different set of problems.
In the meantime, our immediate preoccupation
is with Vietnam. This is the
most urgent of our current extertial problems,
and it is basic to all our aspirations
for security in Asia. It is in Vietnam that
aggressive Communist pressure-the greatest
political danger in Asia today-is most
severe and direct, and it is in this area
that we must, for the time being, concentrate
much of our defence effort and
resources. There the tide of Communist
expansion is being checked and turned.
But, with no sign as yet emerging that the
North Vietnamese are ready to negotiate,
it is the view of our allies and ourselves
that the military pressure must be sustained 
and indeed increased if we are to secure
even more decisive results in the fieldresults
which might lead North Vietnam
to negotiations.
There have been recent visits by Ministers
to Vietnam and to the United States, including
my own visit to Washington last
June when I had detailed discussions with
President Johnson, Mr McNamara, Mr
Rusk and various military authorities, on
the outlook in Vietnam. The President sent
two special envoys to this country-Mr
Clifford and General Maxwell Taylor-who
gave us a valuable survey of progress being
made and of likely trends. Their's was a
range of visits to other countries allied in
Vietnam. As I said earlier, Mr Holyoake has been
here for on the spot talks. Since then, the
Minister for External Affairs ( Mr Hasluck)
has had discussions with President Johnson
and other senior members of the Administration
in Washington in the last week or
so. From all these exchanges the Government
has had the best information and the
most considered assessments to add to its
own. These have strengthened the Government's
confidence that its decisions on our
commitment in Vietnam have been soundly
based, and they have confirmed that we are
making significant progress. There can be
no question of our determination to pursue
our efforts through to the end until we have
achieved our objective-peace and security
for South Vietnam and South East Asia.
I am confident the majority of the Australian
people will continue to give their
support to this policy and will want us to
make a measured contribution which will
give effective support to the allied effort.
The public debate on Vietnam goes on in
various forms here and abroad and, because
it does, I want to re-state very briefly
why we are there and why we must continue
to honour our commitment to support
South Vietnam. Let me repeat, in simple
terms, why we are in Vietnam. We are
there because we believe in the right of
people to be free. We are there because
we responded to an appeal for aid against
aggression. We are there because security
and stability in South East Asia are vital
to our own security and stability. We are
there because we want peace, not war, and
independence, not serfdom, to be the lot
of the peoples of Asia. We are . there because we do not believe that our great Pacific
partner, the United States, should stand
alone for freedom. We will continue to be
there while the aggression persists because,
as a free and independent nation, we cannot
honourably do otherwise.
There are, from time to time, chargesall
unwarranted and quite baseless-that the
Government seeks only a military solution,
that it is determined to win in the tiringline
and that this is our only objective. I
say this: We are determined, and so are
our allies, that we will not be defeated in
-the firing-line. Fortunately there is no real
risk that we can be. The military situation
has been improving steadily, and if we
sustain our progress we are daily securing
the time and enlarging the opportunity for
a response by Hanoi to the repeated offers
to negotiate for peace, free of conditions,
with honour and regard for the rights of
the South Vietnamese people.
In Manila last year, South Vietnam and
its allies, including Australia, pledged themselves
to continue to resist aggression until
it ceased and, at the same time, to seek
earnestly, by every means, a just and lasting
peace. This has been the consistent position
of the United States, the Australian
Government and the other allies in Vietnam,
and it remains our hope that a political
rather than a military solution will be
found. We remain, as we have been at all
times, flexible so that even the faintest
prospect of peace talks can be encouraged.
We have on several occasions suggested
that the Geneva Agreement of 1954 might
provide a suitable basis. There may be
other ways. The allies are ready to talk
about them if they open up and to keep
on taking initiatives themselves.
But the North Vietnamese leaders have
turned down every approach, public and
private. They have done no more than
declare that talks ' could be' or ' might be'
held if the United States stopped bombing
North Vietnam unconditionally, unilaterally
and permanently. But having said that, the
North Vietnamese leaders have not said
that they would then enter into talks. But
they have made it clear that even if talks
did begin . they would keep up their own
military effort. So we must press on with
our action in Vietnam to ensure that the
people of South Vietnam shall not be conquered
by aggression and shall have the 
right to choose their own way of life and
their own form of government. This was
our first and only military objective; it
remains our only military objective.
It is easy to suggest that allied strategy
in this area is dominated by an exaggerated
fear of Communism, but there is no
evidence that Communist forces in South
East Asia have given up their revolutionary
drive. The South Vietnamese people could
not stand on their own against a coordinated
Communist penetration. Our
recent assessments confirm our judgment
that if South Vietnam fell to a Communist
system of government, Communist pressures
against the neighbouring States would
continue, and in all probability would
increase. North Vietnamese regular forces
have already been identified in Laos and
guerillas trained in North Vietnam are
already operating in North East Thailand.
The independence and achievements of the
countries of . this region would be at risk if
aggression succeeded in South Vietnam.
I do not think we should ever lose sight
of the fact that this war in Vietnam is a
limited war-it is not being fought on the
pattern of declared wars of the past, where
all the stops were out and a patriotic fervour
and a face to face challenge of survival
were like battalions in action on the home
front. It is far away in personal terms, but
not nearly as far as the battlefields of the
Middle East or Europe. It is ugly-what
war isn't?-and it is prolonged. Yet Australian
forces fighting there are achieving
two immediate results. They are helping to
hold the aggressor in check and they are
giving the South Vietnamese security and
specific aid for the betterment of their
country. They are also manning a front line
of freedom for all of South East Asia.
The recent elections bear witness to South
Vietnam's constitutional and political
advancement. The economic and social progress
under the South Vietnamese Government's
Revolutionary Development Programme
is good. Australia has contributed
more than $ 12m in non-military aid and
is spending $ 2.2m more this financial year.
Our civilian training programme, under
which more than 300 Vietnamese have
come to Australia, will continue. We are
assisting in other major projects in Vietnam, including water supply and technical aid for
schools. Our three surgical teams continue
to do splendid work. None of this could be
permanent if the military shield were not
wide and strong, and the wider and
stronger it is, the better the progress of the
military campaign and the civil programmes
will be.
To that end, therefore-with increasing
progress in mind-the Republic of Vietnam
and its allies have been conferring on what
the situation may require. Each government,
with the benefit of the discussions
which have taken place, will make its individual
decision. Already some of us have
decided to commit additional forces at this
time so that effort may be increased and
so that the military initiative that has been
won can be sustained and the pace of
political, economic and other development
quickened. The United States has already
announced that it will add some 45,000
men-nineteen battalions-to the total of
460,000 it has deployed in Vietnam. Today
the New Zealand Prime Minister has
announced on behalf of his Government
New Zealand's increase-in the form of an
additional infantry company. Other allied
governments are corsidering what more
they can do. For their part the South
Vietnamese are to increase their forces by
some 60,000 men.
The Australian Government has therefore
decided, after consultation with our
allies, to increase the Australian forces in
Vietnam, and I now set out for the information
of the House how this will be done.
An additional battalion group with helicopter
support will be provided from Australia
for the Task Force. This third
battalion group, which will be made available
in November/ December, will have the
effect of almost doubling the offensive capability
of the force and adding considerably
to its operational effectiveness. A tank
squadron-about 250 men of all rankswill
be made available. With their mobility
and powerful sustained fire power, our
medium Centurion tanks will provide better
support and protection for the force. Additional
helicopters with crews and servicing
personnel will be added to the Iroquois
squadron to provide the Task Force with
more tactical mobility. A small number of
Skyhawk pilots and a maintenance element 
will be made available on loan for operational
service with the United States Marines
in South Vietnam. An additional engineer
construction unit will be provided to undertake,
for a limited period, specific works
in the Task Force area. The establishments
of headquarters and units will be increased
by some 125 all ranks because of operational
needs in the area.
These additions ill raise the numbers
of the Australian force in Vietnam from
6,300 to over 8,000 men, and will make
them much more effective as a balanced
force. The Government has been able to
do this because of the steady expansion in
-the defence forces over the last few years
by increased recruiting and by national service.
Australia has now the most powerful
and effective defence forces it has ever had
short of war-time mobilisation. The
Government is able to undertake these additional
commitments in Vietnam without
detracting from the strength and readiness
of the forces deployed elsewhere in South
East Asia. Our forces already in Vietnam
have acquitted themselves superbly well. We
have units from all three Services in the
theatre and they have earned the highest
praise from our United States, South Vietnamese
and other allies.
In Phuoc Tuy province, for instance,
which has been a Vietcong stronghold for
many years, the Australian Task Force has
been confronted with a highly mobile
infantry force, well trained and equipped with good quality weapons. Since our forces
were deployed in this area in June 1966,
they have established a high degree of
security in the province, and have opened
up strategic communication routes. Altogether
this force has been in over sixty
major operations since June 1966. In addition,
our air and naval units have played
a very useful role in support of overall
allied operations.
I believe that those who have served,
and are serving, including their parents and
families, are keenly aware of the issues at
stake in Vietnam and know that Australia
has ' to be there', with the same high
courage, as Australia has been in other and
wider wars, in the cause of freedom.
The young national servicemen, who
have responded magnificently to the grave
tasks that have fallen to them, have identified
themselves so completely with our
regular soldiers that there is no discernible
difference. They have clearly shown their
recognition that they are performing a
national duty. They are Australian soldiers,
and I am sure they would not have it otherwise.
I am sure, too, that this House will be
ready to pay all our fighting men, regulars
and national servicemen alike-the soldiers,
sailors and airmen of Australia, serving in
Vietnam-the honour that is their due, and
that this House will support the additional
contribution to their strength -that I have
now announced on behalf of the Government.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 


STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT IN THEHOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES19TH OCTOBEIR, 1967APPOINTMENTS OF NATIONAL LIBRAIANAND PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARIANFrom 1st January, 1968, the two positions of NationalLibrarian and Parliamentary Librarian, which to date have beenvested in the one office, will be separated in recognition ofthe development of the two libraries and the completion of thenew National Library building next year.Mr. H. L. White, C. B. i3., who has performed the dualfunctions since 1947, will occupy the newly created statutoryoffice of National Librarian and, by virtue of this appointment,will vacate the office of Parliamentary Librarian.On the recommendation of the presiding officers ofthe Parliament, Mr. A. P. Fleming, Special CommercialAdviser, Department of Trade and Industry, who is at presentstationed in London, will be promoted as Parliamentary Librarianwith the particular responsibility of developing the recentlyestablished Legislative Research Service for the Parliament.The appointment of Mr. WVhite and the promotion ofMr. Fleming follow an amendment to the National Library Actearlier this year. This will assist the separation of thefunctions of the two libraries. NVhile it might be somewhatoverstating it to describe this separation as something of amilestone in Parliamentary and national history, there is nodoubt it is of great importance because it marks a point inour development where we have found two separate institutionsto be necessary. Perhaps the House would allow me to mention brieflythe Mr. White, who will assume the post of National Librarian,has since 1947 held with distinction both that post and thepost of Parliamentary Librarian. He has actually been in theservice of the Parliament for 45 years a longer period, Iunderstand, than anyone else. We wish him success in his newand important office.
ALLAN P. FLEMING,PARLIAME2NTARY LIBRARIAN ELECTMr. Fleming is aged 55 and is a Bachelor of Arts ofMelbourne University. Before and immediately after the war he was ajournalist with the Argus and the Courier Mail. Mr. Flemingserved in the rising from Private in 1939 to the rankof Lt. Colonel in 1943. He held several appointments, the lastbeing General Staff Officer I ( Operations, Land Headquarters).He was awarded the O. B. E. and twice mentioned in Despatches.His work with the Commonwealth Public Service sincethe war has been widely varied. It has included the planningand conduct of research as the first Director of the JointIntelligence Bureau and later Controller of Joint Serviceorganisations within the Department of Defence until 1958.It has also covered since substantial negotiationand conference for the Department of Trade first as TradeCommissioner in Paris and London, then as First AssistantSecretary in charge of the International Trade RelationsDivision, and since 1966 as Special Commercial Adviser inLondon. Mr. Fleming has been a member or leader of delegationsto G. A. T. T. and United Nations conferences on tradeand development.


P. M. No. 107/ 1967The Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, announced today that the Rt. Hon. Paul Hasluck, ( Minister for External Affairs) would lead a Special Mission to Saigon to represent Australia at the inauguration of the President of the Republic of Viet Nam on 30th October.
Sir James Plimsoll ( Secretary to the Department of External Affairs) will accompany the Minister.
CANBERRA19th October, 1967
 


Statement by the Prime Minister and Chairman of the Australian Loan Council, Mr Harold Holt
The Prime Minister ( Mr Holt) announced today that arrangements have been concluded in Washington for a loan of $ US25 million ($ A22.3 million) to the Commonwealth from the Export-Import Bank of America ( Eximbank).
The loan agreement was signed on bdhalf of the Commonwealth in Washington by the Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) following his arrival in the U. S., after attending the Annual Meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development in Rio de Janeiro.
Mr Holt said that he had discussed Australia's financing needs with President Johnson during his visit to Washington in June, 1967. Both he and Mr McMahon also went into this matter with Mr Henry H. Fowler( Secretary of the United States Treasury). They explained that Australia needed additional U. S. dollars to finance Australia's rising level of imports from the United States at a time when sinking fund and maturity payments of previous U. S. dollar loans were heavy.
These discussions opened the way for negotiation between Mr McMahon and Mr Linder, President and Chairman of the Export-Import Bank, which resulted in a loan agreement.
The purpose of the loan is to assist in financing the importation of capital equipment from the United States in the following categories power generating machinery agricultural machinery, implements and parts, metalworking machinery excavating, levelling, boring machinery, etc. electrical machinery, apparatus and equipment and transport equipment.
Since the Export-Import Bank is an agency of the United States, the loan is not subject to the U. S. interest equalization tax.
The loan from Eximbank will carry an interest rate of 6. 875 per cent and will be issued at par. It will finally mature in 1982. An annual sinking fund commencing in 1969 will reduce the average life of the loan to 10 years. Both Eximbank and the Commonwealth will have an option to shorten the final maturity date in certain circumstances.
As with other recent loans arranged with Eximbank, provision is made for Eximbank to sell the Commonwealth's obligations on the market if opportunities arise. In this case, the Commonwealth will reimburse Eximbank if the Notes are sold at a discount ( within agreed limits) and Eximbank will pay to the Commonwealth the amount of any premium in the selling price. 
Mr Holt said that this will be the third loan which the Commonwealth has arranged with Eximbank this year. The other two loans were for the purpose of financing aircraft purchased by Cantas and Trans-Australia Airlines, when Eximbank joined with the aircraft manufacturers to provide credits' of $ US 68 million and $ US 13 million respectively.
He added that the U. S. Authorities had expressed their willingness to discuss the possibility of establishing further lines of credit for the Commonwealth with Eximbank in the future to assist in the financingof imports of capital equipment from the United States.
CANBERRA,19th October, 1967



805
FOR TRESS MTINITIR TO VIIT VILTNAM
Statement by the Minister for Repatriation,
Senator the Hon. G. Colin McKellar
For the second year in succession, the I. inister for
Repatriation, Senator McKellar, will have his Christmas dinner
with the Australian troops of the task force at Nui Dat,
Vietnam. Senator McKellar made this announcement at the National
Congress of the Returned Services League in Melbourne today.
He will leave Australia on December 19 and will
visit all Australian troops stationed in South Vietnam.
After completing his to-r of South Vietnam, the Minister
will visit the R. A. AF. station at Buttcrvorth and the
3rd R. A. R. stationed at Terandek, . alacca, before returning
to Australia. Senator McKellar will be accompanied by the
Chairman of the Repatriation Commission, Brigadier F. O. Chilton.
CANBERPRA October 23 1967 P. M. 


FOR FRESS: P. M. No. 100/ 1967R. S. L. . nd National CongressMessage from the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold HoltI send best wishes for your 52nd National Congress of the ReturnedServices League. You meet at a time when Australian Forces are againengaged " n resistance of aggression and in support of the cause of freedom.Australians have, through this century, made a contribution of thiskind disrroportionate to their numbers and their resources. V/ e are not awar-like people, but this reflects our determination to help preserve aworld Jn which people can live out their lives in freedom and proceed withthe peaceful progress of their nation.Cur servicemen and women have earned a deservedly high reputationfor the quality of their courage, devotion to duty and service to their country.Through your own organ_ sation, the largest representing them, and others,they have continued as citizens of the Australian community their publicspirited services. May you go on in strength as you move further into yoursecond -Q years of existence.Because Governments know that you will always be motivated by thehigh deals you served so devotedly in time of war, we shall always welcomeand give thorough consideration to any views you put to us emerging fromyour discussions together.CANBERRA 23rd October, 19( 7.Note: This message from the Prime Minister was read at the opening of theCongress today by the Minister for Repatriaton, Senator McKellar,who represented Mr. Holt.



I 9
FOR PRESS: P. M1. 124/ 1967
SAL OF 0O. T. C. LAIfD AT APPLECROSS, PERTH
TO WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Joint statement by the Prime Minister, the Right
Honourable Harold Holt, and the Honourable
David Brand, 1I. L. A., Premier of Western Australia
" It was announced today that the Commonwealth
Government and the Western Australian Government had reached
agreement on terms for the disposal by the Commonwealth of the
Overseas Telecommunication's Radio Transmitting Station site at
Applecross, near Perth.
The O. T. C. is soon to vacate the area which
comprises some 99 acres and fronts the Canning Highway. The
area, known as Wireless Hill, is a bushland site with views
over the Swan and Canning Rivers and the State Government
had expressed the desire to have it reserved in perpetuity for
public recreation purposes.
The Commonwealth had given sympathetic consideration
to this proposal and had advised that it was prepared to make
the whole area available to the State for 600,000. This is a
concessional figure representing 50 per cent of the commercial
valuation and has regard to the State's intended public use of
the land. The Premier today advised the Prime LIinister that the
Western Australian Government was pleased to accept the offer".
CANBERRA 24th October, 1967. 



JEMBARGO: CHECK AGAIN4ST DELI VERY
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTE-R,
THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT IN4 THE
HOUSE CF REPRESENTATIVES
24RD OCTOBER, 1967
CO-,' STING OF V. I. P. FLIGHTS
The House will recall that when making a statement recently
on the V. I. P. flight, I said I would examine the feasibility of some realistic
dissection of costs so that more information could be given to the Parlianentl
and I eXiTessed the view that the Treasury would be the most appropriate
body wihi the necessary expertise and objectivity to conduct such an
examination. I immediately followed this assurance given to the House by
asking my colleagues, the Minister for' Air and the Acting Treasurer, to
have examined the possibility of establishing a realistic basis for the
assessment of costs attributable to V. 1. P. flights and the financial policy
implications of the recovery of such costs by the Department of A ir from
other Depe,-rtments. In the light of the Treasury examination I now make the following
comment. In doing so, I remind Honourable Members that No. 34 Squadron
is an integral part of the R. F. and must be there in time of war to
provide transport and communications services. Currently the flights made
are mainly for the purpose of V. I. P. transport, for training, for air tests,
for ferrying, and for Squadron support. But in a time of emergency, there
would be both a national and a defence requirement for fast, secure and
independent transport and communication, for example, for the carriage
of serv ice-chiefs, for other direct service purposes and for the carriage
of persons directly connected with the defence side of Government. This,
of course, carries with it the need for air crew trained for these services.
I t has been regarded as the function of the Air Force to provide and conduct
this Squadron. Its operations clearly would, in an emergency, be integrated
with other R. A. A. F. tra-nsport arrangements.
In other words, No. 34 Squadron has, prospectively, a full
defence role in dir ect terms and in other ways directly related to the
national defence effort. Having re-gard to this, the capital costs of the
Squadron and certain other charges may be considered pyroperly attributable
to defence appropriations. This is not to deny that V. I. P. transport
requirements have not been allowed for in the re-equipment programme
or that certain f itting out with V. I. P. transport purposes in mind has taken
place. But neither is it to deny the defence support capability. Accordingly,
the Treasury, in its findings, has based its calculations for the costing of
V. 1. P. flights on an extra cost basis.
The Treasury has agreed, with the Department of Air, that
these costs comprise aircraft flying costs, aircraft handling at civil airports
and catering. The aircraft flying costs in turn comprise fuel and oil, tyres,
o xygen, spares and servicing by controctors. / 2 
-2-
This basis means that certain items are eliminated from the
costing on the ground that they would be incurred in any event that is to
say, as a consequence of defence policy provision against a time of
emergency. These items include amortization and interest on the cost of
capital facilities, including aircraft, the pay and allowances and upkeep
of crews and other Squadron personnel, and support provided by Base
Squadron Fairbairn and other R. A. A. F. formations.
On this basis, the Treasury has been able to indicate the cost
of V. I. P. flights for the year 1967/ 68 that is the current financial year.
Its estimate is an amount of approximately $ 45C, CO.. The actual amount
could be somewhat higher this year and will certainly be higher next year
when the more modern aircraft are fully in operation. On the other hand,
there will be gains in efficiency and considerable saving of time in the air
on many flights for Ministers, their staffs and other users. The 1967/ 68
estimate provides for travel by senior service officers to be regarded as
a proper charge to the defence appropriations and not to V. I. P. flights.
Travel by the Defence and Service Ministers, however, is in this
calculation being attributed to V. I. P. flights even though their travel is
in part directly associated with defence and service assignments.
I now move to the question of charging out of costs.
As a general rule, it is not the policy for one Department to
recover from another Department costs of carrying out functions for which
it is responsible except in respect of services provided to or by business
undertakings such as the Postmaster-General. This rule has, I understand,
the general support of the joint Committee of Public Accounts. Treasury
suggests that this policy should be adhered to except in special circumstances.
It goes on to say, however, that if recovery is to be made, it would not
think that the costs should be recovered from every Department involved
but rather that they should be met from a separate appropriation item of
the Prime Minister's Department. This strikes me as being both practical
and sensible. My own Department is the most appropriate in view of
certain of its central responsibilities, and also since it is responsible for
costs relating to visits of Government guests from abroad and for the
travel costs of the Governor-General. The Government has decided to
adopt this procedure. These costs therefore will be charged to the Prime
Minister's Department. Payments from the Prime Minister's Departmert
will thereafter be credited to the relevant appropriations of the Department
of Air. This will have the effect of reducing defence expenditure by the
amount of the payments by the Prime Minister's Department. It is proposed
to institute this procedure in 1967/ 68 with funds initially provided to Prime
Minister's Department from Treasurer's advance pending additional estimates.
Except for service purposes any use of V. I. P. aircraft must be
approved by the Governor-General in respect of his own use of them and
that of his staff and myself or the Minister for Air in respect of all other
use. Similarly passengers must be approved within the same group, that
is by the Governor-General for those in aircraft occupied by him and by
myself or the Minister for Air in relation to all other passengers.
A number of questions which have been asked in the Senate are
also being answered today. This information will be available to Members
of the House of Representatives in Hansard. Some of the detail. sought was
so extensive, that it did not seem appropriate to handle it in that way.
Consequently, the details will be tabled in the Senate, and I propose to
table them here together with the questions and answers which relate to
them. / 3 
-3-
Parliament is entitled to facts, if they can be procured, which
will enable Members to-form a judgment as to the purposes served by
the flight and the manner in which it is being conducted. My concern all
along h,-s been to ensure that the Parliament was not given a misleading
picture because of the type and range of questions. This prompted me to
make my first statement to the House which I have now supplemented. I
wish to add some further comments.
I have stressed more than once that responsibility for the
conduct of the V. I. P. flight rests with the Minister for Air and myself.
I hope this has not been overlooked by its critics. I am no more sensitive
to press and public criticism than most public men. After all, I experience
it on most of the seven days each week for fifty-two weeks of the year. I
do not claim to be a modern Gulliver, but usually I manage to shrug these
criticisms off as Gulliver did the darts of the Lilliputians. But there are
some forms of criticism to which I do react quite strongly. These are
criticisms of an unfair kind which undermine the status and authority of
Parliament, and which belittle whether thoughtlessly or cruelly decent,
conscientious men who serve in the Parliament and in the Ministry.
I have flown the best part of 25C, 000 miles since I became
Prime Minister. I do not fly for the fun of it. Some of it is uncomfortable:
most of it is tiring, and altogether it can be quite exhausting. The best
part of any flight for me is the walk out of the plane down the aircraft
steps. But the V. I. P. flight has enabled me to keep many more official
commitments with organisations and people all around Australia. I have
been able to see a great deal more of the three million square miles of
this continent and of the many projects contributing so much to our
development. In the recent week of Parliamentary recess so-called
I was able to keep official commitments in four capitals. No less
importantly, it has enabled me, as it has many of my colleagues, to devote
time more efficiently to the business of Cabinet and Department.
All this has somehow been conjured up by some as something
improper, inappropriate or unreasonable. There are always to be found
those who seize on any opportunity to demean Members of this Parliament.
SThere have been attempts to paint a picture of Australian
Ministers enjoying V. I. P. flight privileges not matched anywhere else
in the world. This, of course, is absurd. I recall being flown in a
British Government aircraft from Northern Ireland to London fifteen
years ago. When I attended the Finance Ministers meeting at Accra in
Ghana in 1963, my opposite number from Canada arrived in a four-engined
aircraft provided by his Government. During my years as Treasurer, I
was flown by the then Secretary of the United States Treasury, Mr. Douglas
Dillon, in the four-engined aircraft provided for his official use. In my
travels as Prime Minister I have been provided with this courtesy several
times. This has become a matter of course in many other countries. My
colleague, the Minister for External Affairs, has told me that Mr. Paul
Martin, his opposite number in Canada, wishing to speak to him in Ottawa,
sent a jet star aircraft to collect him, and arranged for him to be returned
by the same aircraft after talks had concluded.
As I have said previously, the V. I. P. flight is an adjunct of
modern, efficient Government. Nobody questions the use by the Department
of Civil Aviation of its fleet of seventeen aircraft. The V. I. P. flight
consisted of nine aircraft in 19C5. It is still a flight of nine aircraft. / 4 
-4AV-.
hen replacements were decided upon in 19165, we acted on the best
technic~ 1 service advice available to us to get aircraft as nearly comparable
as could be obtained to thcse which had become obsolescent and to serve
the same purposes that is acan adjunct of modern Government. This
fact seems to have been overlooked by those Senators who question my
use of these aircraft in an election campaign. The business of the Australian
Government does not cease because an election is proceeding. The alrcraft
is a flying office in which my staff and I carry on our work as best we can.
It assists me to return to my Department the more speedily even while an
election campaign is in progress. I am sure that most A--ustralians will see
the uses of the flight sensibly in their proper setting, if the facts are not
distorted for them. 



FOR PRESS 27 OCT1961
L P. M. No. 110/ 1967.
DROUGHT RELIEF VICTORIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
On Monday last discussions were held between officials from
the Commonwealth and States of Victoria and South Australia about
ways in which the Commonwealth might help the two States provide
relief in those areas at present suffering from drought. I had
already indicated the Commonwealth Government's willingness to
provide such assistance and the purpose of these talks was to
examine the specific measures proposed by the two States for
drought relief.
The Commonwealth's general policy towards natural disaster
relief is that where State Governments, which have the primary
responsibility in this area, do not have sufficient financial
resources to provide the assistance required, the Commonwealth
is prepared to help meet the cost of such relief measures as
appear to be appropriate in the circumstances. Thus where the
disaster is on a large scale, as was the case in the droughts
in New South Wales and Queensland and the bush fires in Tasmania,
we are prepared to assist State Governments in financing such
expenditures. Over the past two years the Commonwealth has
provided .43 million in assistance to reimburse State for
expenditure incurred in providing relief from the effects of
natural disasters.
As regards the request made by the Governments of Victoria
and South Australia, the Commonwealth Government has agreed to
meet the total cost of the specific measures which the two States
consider to be necessary at this stage, and to make an immediate initial
advance of P'l million to each State. These measures are as
follows:-loans to enable primary producers to continue in
production where cred. it is not available through
normal commercial channels;
rebates on freight in respect of the transport of
fodder and water to drought-affected areas, the
transport of starving stock out of drought areas
and their subsequent return;
some miscellaneous items of expenditure in relation
to the drought, which may include cloud seeding and
certain emergency water supply measures.
The Commonwealth will give sy7mpathetic consideration to
extending the present ariangements as necessary.
The present arrangements will apply to expenditure on drought
relief incurred by the two States from 1st October 1967. It has
also been agred that the arrangements will be examined before the
end of the 1967/ 68 financial year so as to determine what
arrangements should apply for 1968/ 69. Assistance to the States
will take the form of loans wheie the States themselves make
loans; assistance in respect of other expenditure will take the
form of grants.
It is not possible to say at this stage what the expenditure
of the two States on relief measures will be in 1967/ 68, but
estimates have been mentioned of the order of a total of
million. CADTBERRA October, 1967. 



FOR r* R 3SOC '
FP. IME MINISTER'S CENATE CAMPAIGN MEETINGS
Following are the deta'ls of the Prime Minister's public
meetings and press conferences during the Senate Camtaign:-
Thursday 9 8.30 p. m. Opening Address T. V. and radio
in all States
Public Meetings:-
Monday 13
Tuesday 14
Wednesday 15
Friday 17
Monday 2Z
Tuesday 21
Wednesday 22
Thursday 23 8. 00 p. m.
8. 00 p. m.
1.00 p. m.
8. 00 p. m.
1. CO p. m.
8. 00 p. m.
12.0C p. m.
8.00 p. m.
8. CO p. m.
2.00 p. m.
8.00 p. m. Hornsby, N. S. W. ( War Memorial Hall)
Norwood Town Hal! A.
Perth Forrest Flace
Launceston ( Tas.) Little Theatre
Brisbane ( Qld.) Festival Hall
Townsville ( Qld.) Wintergarden Theatre
Tamworth visit S. W.
Wagga Civic Theatre
St. Kilda ( Vic.) Town Hall
Kew Civic Hall ( Vic.) Women's Rally
Ballarat ( Vic.) Civic Hall
In addition to these meetings, the Prime Minister will make a
number of appearances on television and will give National broadcasts in
all States.
Press Conferences: Mr. Holt will also hold the following press conferences:-
Friday 10 11 a. m. Prime Minister's Cffice, Treasury Place,
Melbourne
Monday 13 11.30 a. m. Sydney ( probably at Commonwealth offices.
Tuesday 14 Noon South Australian Hotel
Wednesday 15 2.45 p. m. Esplanade Hotel, Ferth
Friday 17 2.00 p. m. Launceston Airport
Monday 2C 10. 30 a. m. Brisbane ( probably at Liberal Party Offices)
Thursday 23 11.00 a. m. VWindsor Hotel, Melbourne
CANBERRA 27th Cctober, 1967 



FOR PR F. No. 11/ 1967
CLCSINc-C? EXPO C7
Ctatement by the Frime i./ inister, Mr. Harold -cit
Three and a half million people had visited the Australian
Favilion at Expo 67 when the E: position closed at the weekend.
The Australian Favilion had been open since April as part of
the international Exposition arranged by Canada to mark its Centennial
of Confederation. The number of visitors was more than 5C( 1 greater than the
most ortimistic estimates of the -lanners and the Favilion itself received
very high ratings from commentators and critics.
Cn Australia's special day at Expo 67 in June millions of people
around the world saw the special programme televised through the satellite
Telstar in outer space.
The Australian Government has offered the A utralian Favilion
building as a gift to the people of 3anada and discussions on its use are
in progress with the City of iMontreal.
The 2C kangaroos and 13 wallabies, which because of quarantine
regulations, cannot be returned to ustralia are being donated to six zoos
on the North American continent.
The coral exhibits are being given to the Montreal Aquarium.
Several enquiries have been received by the Commonwealth
Government about the popular talking chairs and plans for their future use
are being considered. I have sent the following" message to the Commissioner-General,
Sir Valston '-ancock:-
" The great Exposition commemorating the Centennial of Canadian
Confederation is now over. It has been a notable success and you
have all played your part wonderfully well. You have good cause
to be proud of the succecs of the Montreal Exrposition and particularly
of the Australian Favilion.
Many tributes to our Favilion and staff have reached Australia and
have given pleasure to the Government and your fellow countrymen.
During my visit last June I found myself delighted with the effectiveness
with which Australia's image was being presented.
Now that your work Ic done, we look forward to having you all at
home again.
I send my own warm s: ersonal appreciation and thanks to you all
for your efforts. T wcl! d to add a tape to those now famous
talking chairs in which you cculd relax a while after your labours
and hear them recite, ' Australia sends grateful thanks. V! ell done'."
HARCL. F-CLT
Frime MI'nicter.
CA NBERRA.., 1
3Ct Cc ' 1-r j 



FCR FRB-S: -NOI7V 1967
LR A P. M. No. 114/ 13 7
FUNERP L CF MR. SHIGERU YOSHIDA
Statement by the l: ime Mnister, Mr. Harold 1-7ct
The Honourable Gordon Freeth, Minister for Shiring and
Transport, w'll represent the P ustral'an Government at the funeral of
the late Mr. Shigeru Yoshida, former Prime Minister of Japan. The
funeral w411 take place in Tokyo at 2. 00 p. m. on October 31st.
VWth Mr. Yoshida's death, one of the greatest of postwar
statesmen has passed from the scene. He dealt with the problems of
restoring Japan to its place in the peaceful community of nations with
great moral and political courage. He became Prime Minister in 1946
and continued to hold this office until 1953. During that period he laid
the foundations of Japan's postwar reconstruction and the firmness with
which democracy is now rooted in Japan owes a great deal to his inspiration.
For these achievements and for his personal qualities he earned the
devotion of the Japanese people and the respect of the whole world.
The Honourable Mr. Freeth has been a Member of the Parliament
since 1c, 40 and a Member of the Australian Government since 1958. He
has been Minister of the Interior and Minister for Works and, since
December, 1963, Minister for Shipping and Transport. Mr. Freeth
has represented Australia overseas as Leader of the Australian Delegation
at a meeting of the Consultative Committee of the Colombo Plan, held in
Djakarta in 1959, and was Leader of the Parliamentary Delegation to East
Asia which visited Japan in 1965,.
CANBERRA October, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: 13NOV 1967 P. M. No. 116/ 1967
VICTORIAN BUSHFIRE ASSISTANCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I have been in touch with the Army authorities to ask
them to hold themselves in readiness in case of requests from
Victoria for assistance in fighting the bushfires.
I spoke to the Victorian Premier, Sir Henry Bolte. this
afternoon and told him that if help was needed, he would find the
Commonwealth only too willing to be of such assistance as might
be required. Sir Henry expressed appreciation for the offer. Help
has not been sought at this stage.
CANBERRA October, 1967. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY '&amp; iR
The Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
ON
WANT OF CONFIDENCE MOTION
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE VIP FLIGHT
.[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 31 October 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister) * 2.55]-Mr Speaker, the Leader
of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam) has moved
what by parliamentary practice is the most
serious motion within the capacity of any
member or section of the Parliament to
move. He has moved that the House has
no confidence in the Government. If that
motion were carried, of course, the Government
would go out of office. This is not an
unfamiliar parliamentary technique; we
have witnessed it many times over the
years. It has become almost traditional in
relation to the Budget brought down by the
Treasurer. But with the whole gamut of
Government policy to range over, with all
the varied activities of a Commonwealth
Government involved in military operations,
involved in far-reaching foreign policy
relationships, with the conduct of a great
buoyant developing economy, with the
problems of employment and social welfare
-the whole gamut of national policy to
seize on as a ground for attacking a government
in office-the Opposition has not
found an opportunity to do this until now
when it comes to us on this particular issue.
I am glad to think that the Commonwealth
of Australia is regarded by honourable
gentlemen opposite as being in such good
15240/ 67 state in its domestic, foreign and defence
situation that they have to turn to this
issue in order to attack us.
I welcome the motion. In point of fact
I had intended not to anticipate it but to
deal with what I believe were thoroughly
unjustified and cowardly allegations made
in the Senate last Friday against me and
others. It is a welcome change to find the
Leader of the Opposition, who throws out
his chest and says ' I will debate with you
in any forum of the Commonwealth',
coming into this Parliament and debating
with us here in the place where these
debates should be conducted. If he really
believed, and the Leader of the Opposition
in the Senate ( Senator Murphy) believed,
that I had lied to the Parliament and that
my colleague the Minister for Air ( MT
Howson) had. lied to the Parliament or that
the Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) had lied to
the Parliament, the proper place for him to
state that was here before me where I
could hear the charge and answer it. But
the Leader of -the Opposition let his hatchet
man in the Senate get the run on us. He
let the matter run all round Australia on
a Friday when we were not sitting, knowing
that there would be no effective opportunity
for me to deal with this matter at 
length and to have it on the record until
the Parliament met on the Tuesday.
As soon as I saw these reports I let it be
known through my own Press secretary to
the Press Gallery in a formal set of words
that I not only repudiated these charges but
also that I would be seeking an opportunity
to comment on them. The Leader of the
Opposition said that he did not know that I
was going to make a statement here today.
Mr Irwin-He is a liar.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable
member for Mitchell will withdraw that
remark. Mr Irwin-I withdraw it.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I do not know
how far the honourable gentleman consults
his colleagues. He says that he sought
information from the Leader of the House
( Mr Snedden). We were not able to ascertain
until I had returned from lunch what
the Opposition was doing. The Leader of
the Opposition could have ascertained as
soon as Cabinet rose what we were doing.
I have here not notes prepared to answer
the honourable gentleman in relation to a
motion of no confidence but notes for a
statement which I was to make to the
House in which I would have dealt with the
position which had arisen in the Senate.
Mr Daly-Make it now.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I will, and I shall
take longer to do it than the Leader of the
Opposition who went through one of the
most laboured performances on a motion
of no confidence that I have heard in this
place. The irony of it is that a motion of
no confidence on the ground of the Government's
untruthfulness is presented by a man
who, as Leader of the Opposition, has
established a record for lack of credibility
unequalled, in my experience, in the history
of Federation. He is the man who says:
' The Government cannot tell us the facts
or the truth.' There is not a man on this
side of the House who has not challenged
the credibility of statements made by the
honourable gentleman opposite. I mention
only one in passing. He told us the other
day that only one government in South
East Asia supported the bombing policy
of the United States of America. I will
not elaborate. There will be another
occasion when we can examine his statement
in more detail. But should we move a motion of no confidence in the Leader
of the Opposition because he so wilfully
misstated the facts of that situation? There
are scores of illustrations.
In the statement I proposed to make to
the House I wanted to deal with three
aspects. One was the important constitutional
issue raised in the Senate. I hope that
honourable members of this House of
Representatives who have some regard for
the authority of this chamber will allow me
to develop that, because it concerns where
we stand and where governments drawn
principally from this chamber stand in
relation to the Houses of the Parliament.
The second aspect of my intended statement-
I felt almost apologetic at having to
do this-dealt with what I can describe only
as the trivia raised in the Senate discussion.
I had made two statements to the
House on this subject. After the second I
replied to the Leader of the Opposition who
had spoken following my statement. So, had
I made another statement today, it would
have been my fourth statement-and I hope
a reasonably comprehensive statement, in
four weeks on the VIP fleet.
I think it was in my second statement
that I said: ' I hope we can avoid the pettifogging
and concentrate on the pertinent'.
The need for this comment is apparent to
anybody who takes the trouble to read the
debate in the Senate. It is true that two
issues of substance were raised. I have mentioned
the constitutional issue. I will deal
with the other later. It relates to the information
given by the Government. Much
of the rest of the debate was devoted to the
pettifogging trivial matters that had led
me to warn the Parliament, and long before
that to warn the Press, that the
answers to the questions asked of us, if
given by us in the form sought, could only
create a quite misleading impression and
give a distorted view of-what is happening.
That is why we delayed the answers to the
five questions asked by Senator Turnbull.
Unless the Parliament had a background
knowledge of how the flight is actually conducted
and an authoritative statement on
the subject, the answers would be hopelessly
misleading and in some respects, for practical
reasons that can be instanced, would be
to a degree inaccurate. What I feared would
happen did happen and I will come to some
of the detail of it in a moment. As I said,
while I apologise to the House for taking 
time to deal with matters which to fair
minded and sensible people must seem
pretty trivial, they are on the record and
while they stand uncorrected I know the use
that will be made of them by honourable
gentlemen opposite.
Mr Courtnay-You bet your boots.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I know that boots
are a weapon of offence with which you
would be familiar. We do not act in that
way. Your philosophy is boots and all. But
we do not think that is the way the Australian
people would like to have their
fighting done. Let me just deal-and I will
try to do it quite speedily-with these
aspects. Firstly, the attack on my wife and
my family. I concede that the Leader of the
Opposition and, indeed, the only other
honourable member who spoke at any length
on this matter, the honourable member for
Hindmarsh ( Mr Clyde Cameron), said that
there was a need for the VIP flight and that
it was proper that the Prime Minister, going
about his official duties, should use it. The
honourable member for Hindmarsh conceded
the same right to the Leader of the
Opposition, as indeed I have always done
myself. The honourable member said-and I
give the honourable member for Hindmarsh,
who is not usually liberal minded in these
matters, credit for saying-that he did not
see anything improper in my wife or my
family accompanying me; that he was not
churlish in these matters, if I can quote his
own phrase. In point of fact I have exercised
a good deal of care in relation to this,
bccause I have had no wish either to
embarrass my colleagues or to give the
public any impression of abuse.
When I drew on my own recollections the
other day-and I say at this point of time
quite clearly that I was drawing on my
recollections-I had no knowledge of the
papers which were subsequently produced in
the Senate chamber. I have never misled this
Parliament wilfully or wittingly in the 31
years during which I have ' been a member
of it. I have never had an attack that was
established or, for that matter, as far as I
can recall, seriously pressed against my good
faith in providing information to this Parliament.
If honourable gentlemen opposite try
to dredge through the Hansard records over
these decades, let them find the examples
where my own good faith and the information I have given to this Parliament have
come under attack. When I was speaking of
my family I said that there had been only
one occasion on which a flight had brought
them on a journey without my personally
being present. I have since had an opportunity
of checking through the records and
I find there were two other occasions, and I
will mention them.
One was an occasion on which an aircraft
had been ordered for me because I was
accompanying President Johnson to Melbourne
on his official visit to Melbourne and
as I was about to go on the aircraft-and my
family were to accompany me back to Canberra
in order to take part in official celebrations
here connected with the President's
visit-the President asked me whether I
would join him on his aircraft so that we
could have talks together. This flight appears
on the manifest as a flight for my family,
but it was a plane ordered to take me back
to Canberra. This is one of the illustrations
I have given of how, even when we present
all the documents to the Parliament, misleading
interpretations can still be brought
into a matter. It may interest the House to
know that the whole of my family returned
the following day by commercial aircraft at
their and my expense.
The only other occasion-and my wife
reminded me of this one-was on
the day which preceded a 7.30 a. m.
takeoff for Western Australia where
we were going for several days of
official visit to Perth and to developmental
projects in the west. My wife had a
speaking engagement in Sydney and she had
to be there and back in time to get ready
for this early morning takeoff the next day
and to undertake all the necessary preparation
for what looked like being a week's
absence from either Melbourne or Canberra.
As she was going to Sydney on this
occasion she invited two of her daughters-inlaw
to go with her for company. I do not
know whether she was expected to make the
flight alone and just sit and meditate, but
anyhow, if it was a crime, she committed
the crime of asking two of her daughters-inlaw
to go with her on the flight there and
back. I invite the honourable gentleman
opposite to name any other occasions. They
are the only two that I have been able to
ascertain in addition to the one which I
mentioned. I said then that no flight had
been ordered especially for members of
I 
my family. When Princess Alexandra was
here she was entertained by me at the
Lodge. I wished to have my family with
me while I provided this entertainment. The
next morning an aircraft was going to Melbourne
to pick up at least three Ministers.
Two of the boys went off by commercial
aircraft in the morning-because they wanted
to be back at their offices in time. The rest
of the family went down in the aircraft
which was going to Melbourne anyhow to
pick up the Ministers. I know of no
occasion when an aircraft was positioned
to take members of my family, other than
my wife, to any occasion whatever.
When not accompanying me, my wife
has flown far more by commercial aircraft
than she has by VIP aircraft. She does this
when she goes about her official occasions.
I think it proper that if she needs to have
a VIP aircraft to make one of these trips
it should be available to her. My wife has
made two journeys to Whyalla. The first
of these trips was made entirely by commercial
aircraft. In order to get from Canberra
to an aircraft which would pick her
up at the appropriate time to take her to
Whyalla and the function, and then wait
till the chain of connections could be established,
it took her the best part of 3 days
to do the job. She said to me what a boon
the new Mystere was because it left Canberra
at 9.30 on the one morning, arrived
at Whyalla by lunch time and returned
to Canberra by lunch time the next day. I
might add that this was an occasion when
something was made of the fact that the
passenger on the flight was the Ambassador
of the United States of America, affectionately-
or was it derisively-referred to
by one of the honourable member's party
colleagues in the other place as the ' Talking
Horse'. That was his reference to this particular
flight. Honourable members opposite
may laugh about it if they wish, but those
were the circumstances.
I will not go through all the details as
far as my colleague the Treasurer is concerned-
he will speak for himself-except
to say that he is one of the most hardworking
men who has ever held a ministerial
portfolio. He is handling a Budget of
$ 6,000m apart from all the other financial
transactions of the Treasury. He does not
travel by himself, apart from the officials.
The honourable gentleman made no mention of the fact that Ministers were frequently
with the Treasurer because it sometimes
happens that after a delayed Cabinet
meeting they go in a group together. The
Treasurer is named as the applicant for
the flight and that is why he has clocked
up such a record. He is the applicant.
Ministers go along with him. If we were
able to save an hour a day in working time
for the Treasurer, I would think that any
business organisation handling that kind
of money would regard the saving as very
well incurred.
Reference has also been made to a gentleman
who caught an aircraft that was going
to pick up my colleague the Minister for
Trade and Industry ( Mr McEwen) to bring
him back to Canberra, so that they could
talk on the trip back to Canberra. This was
presented as a flight which this man had
just managed to secure for himself. If honourable
members look through these records
which deal with people such as Hazel Craig,
members of my own personal staff and
others, they will find that in every instance
the positioning of the aircraft that was being
used for a particular flight was sought and
obtained by somebody who was entitled to
secure it. I could go through a mass of
detail in this regard. However, I am not
going to burden the House with it. I do not
know of any occasion where it can fairly
be said: ' There was an abuse in that particular
instance'. I said earlier that the
responsibility for this rests with my colleague,
the Minister for Air, and with
mygelf. Finally, I wish to refer to the point made
by the Leader of the Opposition about the
ordering of aircraft. Well, he has a point of
semantics here, and I acknowledge it. What
happened was that the aircraft for the flight
were decided upon by Cabinet in the period
of office of my predecessor. I have never run
away from that decision. I was a party to
it and I approved of it. But once the Cabinet
decision had been taken, so far as I was
concerned the matter was in the machine.
I did not care when the aircraft were
ordered. That was a job for the Minister
for Air. The decision had been taken, and
if the honourable gentleman wants this
strictly on the record, as it should be, I
make an amendment and say that no aircraft
for the VIP flight was decided upon
and added to that flight during my period 
as Prime Minister of Australia. I hope that
satisfies him.
Let me just turn to the other matter
which is, I believe, of some importance to
this country constitutionally. I refer to the
quite arrogant statement-
Mr Clyde Cameron--Can you deal with
the statement that the material was not
available? Mr HAROLD HOLT-Yes, I am coming
to that. I still have nearly 25 minutes
left, even without an extension of time.
Mr Cross-And you are uphill.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-Well, I have
been uphill most of my life and I have got
to the summit. I doubt that any honourable
member opposite will ever get to it. The
Leader of the Opposition in the Senate
in opening his speech said this:
Responsible government means that the Government
is responsible for its administration to each
House of the Parliament. For that purpose each
House has an undoubted authority to require the
Government to answer questions and to supply
records bearing upon that administration. Each
House is entitled to full and truthful disclosure by
the Government. To deny this is to repudiate
responsible government; to depart from it is to
break down responsible government.
The point I want to make is that it is
the duty of a government to give as much
information as it can which will be of
assistance to either of the two chambers.
Neither chamber has authority to require
of an executive the tabling or presentation
of documents or information which the
government feels it would be against the
public interest to table or present, or the
tabling or presentation of which would
constitute a breach of confidence which the
government should preserve. But take this
statement of the Leader of the Opposition
in the Senate-an arrogant statement, I
repeat-at its face value. He could demand
the tabling of Cabinet minutes or of Cabinet
documents. Of course he has no authority
to do this. Or he could demand the tabling
of confidential exchanges between the
Premier of any State and the Prime Minister.
Mr Odgers, the Clerk of the Senate,
who has never been laggard in presenting
the claims of that chamber, has had something
to say on this matter which I regard
of some constitutional importance. That is why I mention it. I quote from his book
' Australian Senate Practice' at page 428:
Upon a motion being agreed to for the tabling
of Papers, the Clerk transmits a copy of the
resolution to the responsible Department. The
Paper is then delivered to the Clerk of the Senate,
and by him laid on the table. The practice of
moving for the tabling of papers was more
common in the early years of the Senate.
Then some precedents are given, and Mr
Odgers continues:
The question may one day arise: What happens
if the Senate orders the production of certain
papers and the responsible Minister refuses to
table such papers? Technically, disobedience to
the orders of the Senate is a contempt of the
House. However, it is an issue yet to be resolved
as to whether the Senate would take the matter
further if, notwithstanding an order of the Senate,
a Minister claimed he was entitled to refuse to
table papers on the ground that certain documents
were of a confidential nature or that disclosures
would not be in the public interest.
I am going to quote to the Housebecause,
as a person who has been a
member of this chamber for very many
years and who is jealous of its rights and
of the rights of a democratically elected
Government I want it on the record-a
sta'ement made by the Minister for Education
in the Tasmanian House of Assembly
on 17th May 1960. This is a statement
that I think might well be adopted as sound
policy in this chamber. It is in these terms:
The particular practice which has caused the
Government to consider this matter is the practice
of requiring the return of a departmental file or
of all papers and correspondence relating to a
particular matter. If acceded to, such an order
would. bring before the House a number of papers
some , of which may be of a kind which should
not be disclosed. The Minister is entitled to oppose
an order for the tabling of papers of that kind,
and if an order is made in the same circumstances
he is entitled to refuse to comply with it.
Considerations of public policy and a due
regard for the interests of the State may require
the Minister to withhold information either sought
for or ordered to be returned. Were it otherwise,
it would be impossible to carry on the Government
with safety and honour. To disclose certain
information may endanger the interests of the
State or of individuals whose conduct or affairs
are not in question, and to disclose information
given in confidence would be dishonourable and,
moreover, would stop any more information being
given in confidence. The Minister concerned must
of necessity take responsibility for decisions on
these matters and so long as the House gives him
its confidence its confidence must extend to such
decisions. The same principles which apply to
giving information to the House apply to select
committees, which are not entitled to information
which the House cannot demand or receive.
It is possible that on some occasions a Minister
would be willing to make available in his office, 
or some other appropriate place, a file or particular
document for perusal by members of the
House, thus avoiding publishing the file or documents
by laying them on the table of the House.
I desire to make it clear to the House, however,
that the Government has no wish to withhold
from the House any information it is entitled to
and that Ministers will not, without very good
reason, refuse it any information.
Having read that, Sir, I say that I agree with
the sentiments expressed. So far as it has
been within my capacity, I have sought to
give to this House the information that it
required. That brings me to the matter on
which the Leader of the Opposition has
dwelt in relation to the answers supplied
to the question which was asked in this
place by the honourable member for
Grayndler ( Mr Daly) but which actually
followed in point of time, as I recall it, a
question asked in the other place by Senator
Gair, the Leader of the Australian Democratic
Labor Party. The interesting thing
that the House will find about this business
is that the answer given by us was not one
that somebody could interpret as an answer
protecting the position of the Government.
In point of fact, it was an answer to a question
asked by Senator Gair about use made
by the then Leader of the Opposition of
an aircraft on a flight to Western Australia
and the people whom he took with him.
The Leader of the Australian Democratic
Labor Party asked about this. I suppose
that if the Government had had the
information readily available and had
wanted to score some point off the Opposition,
it could have said: ' Here is the
information. This is what it is'. But the
answer given at the time was that
the particulars were not available.
I hope that I do not do the honourable
member for Grayndler an injustice, but he
put his question during a period when he
had ideas-not for his own advancement
for he is, perhaps, too modest for thatthat
some change in the leadership of the
Australian Labor Party might be desirable.
When he put his question on notice, rightly
or wrongly, it was freely interpreted at the
time as another attempt to give a bit of a
nudge to the then Leader of the Opposition.
Opposition members-Oh!
Mr HAROLD HOLT--The honourable
gentleman received that same comment by
way of reply. I move on from there to the answers
given to Senator Turnbull, who had put
several questions on the notice paper in
another place. I tried to make available the
detail that could be secured. I may say that
the practice, as is well known in this
House, is normally for a department to prepare
a draft of an answer, submit it the
the Minister and for the Minister then to
settle his draft which is initialled by him
and comes into the House. My own Department,
which is asked questions which feed
out into virtually every Department of
state in one form or another, has to lean
very heavily on the information supplied
by the other department concerned. When
the questions had been asked by Senator
Turnbull-and I repeat that I mentioned a
little earlier-I felt that before they were
answered in detail, because to take them as
they stood could result in the giving of misleading
information, I should make a statement
to the House. I set out, then, the way
in which the fleet operated, the background
to it and the history of it. The House will
be familiar with those circumstances.
Indeed, previously, as I told the
House only the other day, the then
Leader of the Opposition has notified
my predecessor that the then Prime
Minister would not find the then Leader
of the Opposition questioning his use of
the VIP fleet. After I had made my first
statement neither the Leader of the Opposition,
nor any of his colleagues, saw fit to
take the opportunity then presented to discuss
the matter. I believe I interpret their
attitude correctly. As of that time honourable
members opposite recognised the
operation of the fleet as a necessary adjunct
of modern government, as it is in so many
other countries of the world.
In between the time that I made that
statement and the next one the honourable
senators had been busy. They could see
some political mileage in this, particularly
with a Senate election forthcoming. Somewhat
half-heartedly, when I had made my
second statement, the Leader of the Opposition
rose and made some comment. As I
recall it, the principal ground of criticism
was the Government's purchase of the
BACllls, a matter that I dealt with by
way of reply. The honourable member for
Hindmarsh followed the Leader of the
Opposition. His principal complaint was
about the frequency of the use made of 
the aircraft by the Treasurer. The honourable
member confirmed -that this facility
should be available for the Prime Minister
and Leader of the Opposition. He believed
that it should not be used too frequently
by other Ministers, anrd in particular it
should not be used by junior Ministers
except in some abnormal circumstance.
In my first statement I had said that I
would examine the feasibility of getting
costing done on ahis. I was not looking to
conceal information; I was looking for ways
and means by which this Parliament could
be supplied with additional information on
which there could be some periodical
scrutiny of the costs of the service and some
discussion as to how it operated. That
statement was, I think I can reasonably
state, well received in the House and produced
only these two speeches of a not
very penetrating kind from the Leader of
the Opposition and his colleague. At that
time, in addition to giving the story about
dissection of costs, we dredged through the
information available, or so I was given ; to
understand, and I tabled a document which,
of its very nature, was too unwieldy to
incorporate in Hansard and said that the
House could see the details which this
statement produced.
The matter then-went to the other place.
Honourable senators were not satisfied with
the information that had been supplied.
They said: ' No. We want details about
passengers.' It was in relation to the point
about passengers that in each of the answers
we said that the details were not available.
To the best of my knowledge and understanding
they were not available. I had
always ' been given to understand that details
of passengers were not kept for any length
of time but were destroyed shortly afterwards
because they were kept mainly for
safety and recording purposes.
The official book which is preserved, and
preserved for a continuing period of years,
is what is known as the Flight Authorisation
Book. I have a copy of it here in my
hand. I saw it for the first time last night. I
did not know of the existence of this book
or of the manifests which I also have here
-manifests of a similar form if not related
to identically the same matters, were tabled
in the Senate-until my colleague, the
Leader of the Government in the Senate
( Senator Gorton), told me -that he would
be tabling this information in addition to what I had already supplied following the
request from honourable senators for
papers. I inform the House, and I think
the House will accept my statement, that
the first time I knew of the existence either
of this Flight Authorisation Book or of these
manifests was when this was mentioned to
me by the Leader of the Government in
the Senate. The first time that I actually
set eyes on them in this form was last
night when I asked the Secretary of the
Department of Air if he could make them
available to me for inspection.
Honourable members will find that this
Flight Authorisation Book sets out in considerable
detail matters such as action before
flight, action after flight, serial number of
order, date, type and number of aircraft,
pilot or pilots, navigator, crew, the duty or
practice ordered, time ordered -to start,
duration of flight, initials of flight commander
ordering flight, initials of pilot that
he understands the order, time of take off,
time landed, day or night, task training
sequence, DCO-whatever that means-and
initials of pilot as having reported -to flight
commander on landing. That book contains
no details of passengers except that where
a VIP flight is involved it mentions the
name of the Minister applying for the flight.
If the Leader of the Opposition cares to
look at this book he will see that many of
the tasks listed are not VIP tasks but tasks
associated with the operation of No. 34
Squadron-training flights, the instrument
landing system and so on.
I niow refer to the manifests. These do
set out the lists of passengers. Copies are
made so that when a flight goes from one
point to another a copy is left at the departure
point and one is retained by the
Squadron. If any amendment is necessary
because of changes in the passenger composition
then adjustments are made.
Originally I was told that these were not
kept for any great length of time and that
the time they were kept might vary. I understand
that there is an order that they
should be kept for 12 months. How far
that order is strictly observed I am in no
position to say. But I have been told by
the Secretary of the Department of Air
that because once these manifests are used
by the Squadron they are then used by
other sections of the Air Force from time
to time, it is doubtful if more than
of them can be put together in one heap 
at any one point of time. Others are
scattered right throughout the Air Force
for various purposes. They may ' be in the
possession of a person checking on the
instrument landing system, a person checking
on the hours the aircraft has flown or
a person checking for any other purpose.
I do not claim to be a technician in Air
Force matters; I am merely passing on what
the Secretary of Air informed me. He only
put the figure of 70% as a guess because
nobody could be authoritative about it. The
Secretary would not claim more than about
accuracy for the detail shown on the
manifests themselves because of sudden
changes in movement. The Leader of
the Opposition gave an example of this
himself when he said that a Mr Wyndham
was shown on a manifest. I understand
from the Leader of the Opposition that
Mr Wyndham did not travel at the time;
nevertheless he is shown on the manifest.
Mr Whitlam-He has never travelled in
VIP aircraft with me.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-I am merely
making the point that these things are not
necessarily precise and it has never been
claimed that they are precise. I am not
going to prejudge what the Minister for Air
will have to say about these allegations. We
have a good tradition in Australia that
before we find a man culpable we give him
a chance to speak in his own defence and
to make his own explanation. The Leader
of the Opposition has launched a no confidence
motion against me, against the
Minister for Air and against the Treasurer,
but the Minister for Air has not yet had
an opportunity to give his explanation. I
admit readily to the House that I am
troubled by the fact that answers were given
in a form which did not accord with
information which the Government itself
has supplied. I emphasise that point; this
was not something that was found somewhere
around the country; we supplied this
information as soon as we knew it was
available and we did it after consultation
between the Leader of the Government in
the Senate and myself. We were not trying to conceal this information from the
Parliament. Information on this matter can be misleading.
The Leader of the Opposition was
shown, as he will recall, as having had
relatively few flights compared with the
Treasurer. In point of fact if we apply the
tests of hours in the air or mileage flown
the result is not quite the same. We find
that the Leader of the Opposition flew about
60% of the mileage flown by the Treasurer
-if positioning is taken into account-and
had about 80% of the Treasurer's time in
the air. Yet on the facts which were given
the House in quite good faith-but with the
warning that they could ' be misleading
-one gets the picture of eight flights made
by the Leader of the Opposition as against
fifty-four flights made by the Treasurer. I
just make known to the House the problem
which the Minister for Air has had in
facing up to these matters. He wanted to
give accurate information. He was asked
about passengers. It may be that he felt that
because of the incompleteness and, to a
degree, the inaccuracy of these records he
could not validly say that a list of passengers
was available. I am not trying to interpret
what his -thinking was in the matter. I
merely say, for myself and for the Government,
that we have tried to keep the House
fully informed. Of course, I will seek an
opportunity to discuss with the Minister for
Air how this matter developed. As a result
of that discussion I hope to make such
further information as arises available to the
public and to members of both Houses of
this Parliament.
The Leader of the Opposition has moved
a motion of no confidence. The effect of
that motion would be, if carried, to throw
this Government out of office and to put
into Parliament and into government
honourable gentlemen opposite, whose
policies represent such a gulf of thinking
between ourselves and themselves, and
which were rejected wholeheartedly by the
Australian people, that on a sober consideration
of the facts I have no doubt about
the position this House will take.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



P UCT" LI C ,. MFOSERS
Statement by the Minister, vMr. :. arcld o lt
Sc T mentioned ' n larPamnent today, : n my statement on cultural
act'v't: ec. T have approved a recommendation of the Advisory Board for
Assistance to Australian Composers for a project designed to promote
the work of Australian composers nationally and internationally and
remedy the lack of knotedge of our music.
The Board's proposal is to compile a survey of Australian music
which can be distributed to some 200 of the most im! iortant musical
organisations and personages at home and abroad.
The survey will comprise:-
1. A short introduction reviewing the progress
of music composition in Australia.
2. A list of Australia's important composers and
their work.
3. A recorded talk concerning the compositions
of selected composers.
4. A printed pamphlet corresponding with the
recorded talks.
A recording of a work of the selected composers.
6. A miniature score of that work.
The Board has been discussing the scheme with the Australasian
Ferforming Right Association which has given the Board its wholehearted
support. AFRA will help administratively and also contribute to the
costs of the project.
The Board advising the Commonwealth Government on Assistance
to Australian Composers, comprises:-
Sir Bernard Keinze, Chairman;
Mr. John -' orpkins; and
Frofessor Frank Callaway.
CA NBE.? 7A
1st November, 1C67. iNo. 118/ 17
C, 



LTI TEMEHT ' 3Y T1E FfRI M MINIST31,
TYNE RT. HCII-. 1 CLD HCLT, M. N* t
IN THE HCUC3 CF R FRESNTATIV3'.
. ct icvernber, 1c67.
CULTURA L ACTIVITIES
I wish to inform the H! ouse of two decisions by the Government
and a n-nmber of other develo;, ments in the field of cult'. lral activities.
The Covernm:: ent, for some time, has been actively considering
ways to increase, at natona level, Commonwealth atronage of the Arts
without creating a monclithic structure which could inhibit the free play
of our cultural interests and enthusiasms at all levels.
For some years now Government encouragement for the
arts in g0e neral has been increasingLL . a nd we feel that financial aid prcperlyj
directed on the best advice is one significant area where the Commonwealth
Government can provide material assistance.
V. e need to ensure that we have a system for giving financial
assistance which takes full account of the important role played, not only
by State Governments, but by municipal governments and a host of professional
and amateur organisations throughout the country.
ith this in mind the Government, in its first decision on
cultural activities, has decided to establish an Australian Council for the
Arts to be its financial agent and adviser on the rerforning arts and other
activities connected with the jirts in general.
The Council v! f1L co-operate closely wivth the Elizabethan
Thea; tre Trust and with e: ict-ng Commonwealth Governm-ent agencies
resrcnsible for music, u. intng and literature.
At this stage the C! ouncil will be concerned primarily with the
perforr1ing arts but it should not be assumed that the concept of an allembracing
Council, whic&gt; I know has some advocates in this country, has
been rejected. The Council we -ropose to set up could conveniently be enlaroged
to rerform such a function if experience showed t7. e need.
This decision means that Government financial assistance for
the arts in general will in future be given through two main channels:
1. The new Ccuncil, which will be concerned with the theatre arts
( drama, oi: era and ballet) and film making for television with
an educational and cultural emphasis.
2. xisting agencies i. e. the A ustralian -roadcasting Commission,
the recently formed Music Board, the Cormironwealth Art
Advisory ? card and the Commonwealth Literary Fund.
The Council w! ill also advise the Governi-ent on special
requests for aid in cultural activities not already covered by Government
agencies and which, in the . East, have been dealt v. with on an ad hoc basis.
I should add here that the inclusion of filmr-making for television
in the activities to be ccvered by the new Council is not a substitute for full 
consideration by the C-cverninent of submissions it has received for the
estailishmnent of a Filrm Cor-oration to assist the film industry at lar'e.
The intention to give further aid to fili1-rnaking for television
is ipart of the Government's continuing effort to help in increasing the
Australian content of television programmes in this country. The question
of a Film Corporation, or some similar organisation, is a separate
proposition which needs more study.
The new Council will not, as a norrm. tal rractice finance carital
works for the arts in the Ctates because this is not considered to be within
the siphere of Commonwealth responsibility.
The ElizaLbethan Theatre Trust will remain as a servicing
organisation and entre. reneur and will continue its fund raising activities
in the States. The Council willd'stribute financial aid for the performing arts
pirimrarily, but not exclusively, through the Trust. Both the Council and the
Trust will be supported by advisory committees in all States.
Before deciding to establish this two-channel system of aid
for the arts a close study was made of the foundations and councils for the
arts in thle United States, the United Kingdom and Canada.
The names of the Chairman, members of the Council and the
Director will be announced -n due course. The Council will be associated
with the Frime Minister's D: eartment.
The Comnonvealth Government has also studied the work o6
its existing agnecies and as I have already indicated they will continue to
functica broadly in the samie way as they have in the ;, act, and the level of
any increase in financial assistance will be considered in the Budget context,
as will the grant to be made available to the new Council. There will be,
of course, a close liaison between the new Council and the existing agencies.
I might mention here that the Government already has under
consideration increased azssste'nce to writers in A ustrajia as a result of
recent dfscussions between the Advisory Board of the Commonwealth Literary
7 und and the Fund's Farliaimentary Committee.
The House vwl! also recall that we recently set up a Music
Board . ecifically for the Au! rpose of advising the Commonwealth Government
on assistance to Australin comiosers. This 3oard has been active since
its inception and has just had a1-roval for a new rroject designed to promote
the work of Australian czmrosers, nationally and internationally, and
atterr-; t to remedy the lack of knowledge of our own music. The details
of this roject are the uobject of a statement by me to thile press today.
I turn now to the second important decision the Government
has taken to encourage the arts in Australia.
The House ! ill recall that my predecessor Sir Robert Menziec:
and his administration decided that a national art gallery should be est lished
in Canberra and in 1M L -x. cinted a committee of enquiry to consider vhat
form it Chould take, what its function should be and how it should be controlled.
This Committee, under the distin2uiished Chairmanship of
Sir Deryl Lindsay, com-ileted its work last year and I would like to
acknowledge here how comi-rirehensive the report is and how valuable it !-has
been to the Government. It has contributed significantly to the Governmient's 
latest decision on the art gaillery and is tabled in this Farliament for the
information of -lonourable Membners.
The Government has decided that work on the establishment
of this national gallery will begin immediately.
The National Capital Development Commission expects the
planning, design and costing stage to take about two years. I site for
the gallery is being considered.
The Gallery will house the National Collection which at
: resent consists of nearly 2, QCC works of art. -uture acquisitions will
include A ustralian art tast -nd -: resent, art of the I sian and Facific
areas and art on a world-wide basis, beginning with the 2Cth century.
The Government believes the new gallery will add significantly
to the cultural life of Australa and the national capital.
It is hoped that this will be an added incentive to owners of
art collections to consider bequeathing their collections to the Commonweslth.
The Commonwealth has been active in recent years in acquiring
new works for the national collection. It is also develocing an exchange of
art exhibitions with other countries.
The existence of an art gallery in Canberra will add materially
to the dic-splay opportunities for visiting exhibitions and also for exhibitiens
from the galleries in the various ctates.
The Gallery will be named " The ustralian National Gallery"
and will be controlled a Council, with a full-ti: e director. The C-uncil
itself will be associated with the Frime Minister's Derartment. The Council
members and the Director will be appointed in due course.
These decisions will, I am sure give encouragement to t1hoe
who have for so long given thir time and energy to advancing our ovwn
distinctive cultural activities. I also hope that the growing public
recognition of what our actors, our artists, our viriters, our musicians
and others in a varied field af cultural interest are see. ing to do will add
much to what the Government is doing.
In the leaner years of the past, in the face of hardship and
little encouragement yotung . u. ctralians have risen to fame and brought
distinction to their country over a wide range of cultural activity. Given
the suvx-ort of Governments, * ederal and Ctate, and the backing of tilhe
peo) e, I am sure the talent is there for us to rise to new heights and give
our , eo; 1e a growing pleasure and satisfaction. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH .14
BY 19 R
The Rt Hon. HAROLD HOLT, C. H.,
ON
VIETNAM
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 2 November 1967]
Mr HAROLD HOLT ( Higgins-Prime
Minister) [ 8.471-Mr Speaker, the Leader
of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam) sought
unlimited time in order to present the views
of the Australian Labor Party on the Vietnam
issue. He read nineteen foolscap pages.
He read them beautifully. Occasionally he
indulged in a little preening, like a veteran
Old Vic Shakespearian. But he read it all.
Is there any -man sitting behind him who
knows the leadership that his leader has
given him on the issue of Vietnam, Australia's
participation in Vietnam, the policy
to be adopted with relation to our troops
in Vietnam, or our American alliance? Was
there one word in nearly 50 minutes of
declamation by the honourable gentleman
opposite as to where he stands on these
issues? This is what the country is waiting
to hear. Does the honourable gentleman
support Australia's participation in Vietnam?
That is a simple question. Does he
support it? Does he believe that we should
be in Vietnam? I invite him to say so.
He will not say so. Does he believe that
Australian troops should be in Vietnam?
I invite him to say so. If his Party were
elected to office would it draw back Australian
troops from Vietnam unless the
United States obeyed the requirements of
the Adelaide Conference decisions? He has
not mentioned a word about that tonight.
15464/ 67 Honourable -members could go right
through this speech and not find one line or
one word as to where the Australian Labor
Party stands on these great issues. And
this is the alternative Australian government-
the government which would have
to sit with our allies in discussion and
negotiations on the future of Vietnam. We
have waited ever since the honourable
gentleman was elected to the leadership of
his Party to find out where he stands on
these matters. I have said many hard
things about the predecessor to the honourable
gentleman. But at least he was an
honest-~ minded Leader of the Labor Party.
He told us where he stood and where his
Party stood. The country knew where it
would stand if it elected him to office. I
defy any Australian to say clearly where
Australia would stand on this great issue
if the Leader of the Opposition were
elected to govern this country.
These are vital matters because if honourable
gentlemen opposite were to take office
these would be the hard realities they would
have to face. What would the Labor Party
do about Australian troops in Vietnam?
Would it reinforce them? Would it withdraw
them? Would it demand conditions
of our allies which ' our allies might well
find insupportable? Would it sit in on a 
Manila-type summit conference with the
sort of policy that the former Leader of the
Opposition had? The honourable gentleman
has so often chided me, on Vietnam, with
being all the way with L. B. J. Is he all the
way with A. A. C. when it comes to Labor
Party policy on Vietnam? If he is not with
his former leader, where is he? His former
leader believes, as does the honourable
. member for Yarra ( Dr J. F. Cairns), that
the policy of the Labor Party now is where
it was when we stood against that party at
the last general election. Those two members
of the Labor Party do not run away
from these issues, and I give them credit,
as honest-minded men, for standing up for
their convictions. What conviction has the
honourable gentleman put forward tonight,
that in any way can be tested, as to where
a future Labor Government would stand
on these great issues?
These are not just trivial matters of
debate. The Leader of the Opposition has
been very clever in debate. He has dodged
every harsh issue that has been presented
to him just as he did when Prime Minister
Ky came to this country. The honourable
gentleman's Party was opposed to the visit
of Prime Minister Ky. His then Leader
said that he was going to march in demonstrations
against this visit, and he did so.
But where was the present Leader of the
Opposition? He was having a damn good
holiday somewhere, well out of the line of
fire, and no-one knew where he stood. So
he came back as Leader of the Opposition.
He had given the public to understand that
when he came into office as Leader there
would be a dramatic change in the attitude
of . the Labor Party to our position in Vietnam.
He was the moderate man. He did
not go along with his former Leader. But
after the Adelaide Conference where has
he gone? Did not this Conference decideand
I ask for confirmation from the honourable
member for Yarra-that the Labor
Party was where it was at the time of the
last election? Of course it did, and the
honourable member for Yarra said so, as
did the President of the Victorian Branch
of the Labor Party and the former Leader
of the Labor Party. But where does Labor
stand under the present Leader of the
Opposition? I invite honourable members to
follow through the 19 pages of carefully
prepared and studiously avoided references and try to find out where the Labor Party
stands on these great issues. This is not
good enough for the Australian people. We
have never shirked the issue in two World
Wars, in Korea and in Vietnam.
Mr Birrell--What do you mean by
' we'? Mr HAROLD HOLT-When I say ' we',
I mean the Australian people. I have the
honour tonight, as Leader of a Goveinment
elected with the greatest majority in
the history of this country, to speak for
the Australian people. The Leader of the
Opposition tried to confuse the issue for
us by quoting Lee Kuan Yew, the Prime
Minister of Singapore. Has he overlooked
the statements that Lee Kuan Yew has
been making recently about the mincing
machine and about what would happen to
Singapore and other South East Asian
countries if America withdrew from Vietnam?
The Leader of the Opposition made
a cheap sneer at my colleague, the honourable
member for Evans ( Dr Mackay), and
quoted a number of eminent clergymen. I
do not like quoting clergymen on matters
of this sort because I believe that we, as
the elected representatives of the people,
have to take the decisions on these matters.
But when the honourable gentleman purports
to give the view of eminent clergymen,
why does not he quote the view of
Archbishop Loane of Sydney? Why does he
not quote the view expressed publicly and
which appeared in more than one newspaper,
of Cardinal Gilroy on his return to
Australia? Both these gentlemen spoke of
the importance of this resistance to Communism
in South Vietnam. I am not going
to quote them extensively tonight but the
quotations are here if anyone want to
check them.
The Leader of the Opposition took a
long time to read a mass of material. I am
not seeking half the time he took and I do
not want an extension of time. But I can
say a great deal about where the honourable
gentleman stands, or more correctly,
fails to stand. Cofsistent with his normal
processes of deception or at least evasion,
the honourable gentleman tried to convey
the impression to us, not once but repeatedly,
that the Secretary. of Defence in
the United States of : America is somehow 
out of sorts with his. colleagues'! in. the. Administration
on the question of bombing.
A great deal can be said for. and against the
bombing. But the view held by the United
States Administration and the view held
by this Government and other allied governments
has been that bombing serves valuable
military purposes; that it helps to raise
the morale of the South Vietnamese who
do not feel themselves abandoned in this
struggle; ' that it ' helps to prevent the flow
of men: ' and " materials to the South; and
that it helps to save allied lives which otherwise
would be endangered if this flow of
materials and men were not impeded in
this way. That does not mean that we are
not'able to look, as the occasion arises, at
some move for a suspension or pause-in
the bombing if it is genuinely felt that this
would serve some purpose in attracting the
North Vietnamese to peace negotiations.
We have never taken a hard and fast line
oh these issues.
The honourable gentleman, from the comfort
of this place, slanders us repeatedly as
men who have no wish for peace. I reject
that and throw it in his teeth. We want
peace as much as anyone in this country.
We want peace for Australia because there
are great things that we can do with our
country, given a situation. of peace. How
can any man knowing the views of other
leaders in South East Asia, and knowing
the view so recently and so movingly put
to us by the leader of a country: that is
currently under invasion and aggression by
the forces of North Vietnam, talk in the
way that the honourable gentleman has
talked to us tonight? If the Australian
people are to look for leadership
and. guidance-from the present
Leader: of the . Opposition. they will
look in vain. He will be the artful
dodger as long as he can go on dodging,
until he has to face up to this issue directly.
We ask him to face up to it. Would he pull
Australian troops out of South Vietnam?
Would he endanger our alliance with the
United States? We argued last November
that Australia was in Vietnam for the same
reasons that it had been in two world wars
and in Korea. We said that we recognised
that we were not merely defending a country
against aggression and defending the way
of life we believe in but also that we were
giving strength to our own alliance with the United States, a country which, above all
others, . can help to keep Australia secure
in our alliance iudder ANZUS. The honourable
gentleman has made -no mention ' of
these matters tonight.. Is he reckless or
regardless of the effect it would have on
our alliance with the United States if we
were to pull our troops out of Vietnam, as
the Adelaide Conference proposed? That
alliance was vital to us before the British
decision to withdraw east of Suez. It is even
more important for us today now that we
know there is a time schedule on the British
presence in this area and certainly as a
land force in the Asian area. These are vital
matters for the people of this country. The
people are not to be fobbed off by a long
speech that covers up with a smoke screen
of words the basic points that are involved
in these proposals that we have to face. I
would like to hear the honourable gentleman
at some time-and he has not yet
done so in his long period of leadershipface
up to these matters.
Mr McNamara, at the conclusion of his
statement before the Preparedness Investigating
Sub-Committee of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, on 25th August 1967,
said: -In conclusion I would like to restate my view
that the present objectives of our bombing in the
north were soundly conceived and are being effectively
pursued. They are consistent with our overall
purposes in Vietnam and with our efforts to
confine the conflict. We are constantly exploring
ways of improving our efforts to insulate South
Vietnam from outside attack and support. Further
refinements in our air campaign may help. I am
convinced, however, that the final decision in this
conflict will not come until we and our allies
prove to North Vietnam she cannot win in the
south. The tragic and long drawn-out character
of that conflict in the south makes very tempting
the prospect of replacing it with some new kind
of air campaign against the north..
He wastalking against those who were then
advocating a very much more intensive
bombing campaign; he was not critical of
the campaign being conducted. He was giving
his explanation as to why he was resisting
more intensive bombing. He continued:
However tempting, such an alternative seems
to me completely illusory. To pursue this objective
would not only be futile but would involve
risks to our personnel and to our nation that I
am unable to recommend.
Later on he continued:
The bombing of North Vietnam has always been
considered a supplement to, and not a substitute
for, an effective counter-insurgency campaign in 
South Vietnam. These were our objectives when
our bombing programme was initiated in February
of 1965. They remain our objectives today.
Our bombing campaign has been aimed at
selected targets of military significance, primarily
the routes of infiltration. It has been carefully
tailored to accomplish its basic objectives and
thus to achieve the limited purposes toward which
all our activities in Vietnam are directed.
Having said that, I hope that the House will
not hear this distortion again from the honourable
gentleman who has tried to present
some picture of either disloyalty or disagreement
between the United States Secretary
of Defence, -his President and other senior
members of the Administration. The honourable
gentleman began his speech by
twitting the Government for the fact that
it had not go ne on with the debate on
Tuesday night. He said that a move came
from honourable gentlemen opposite. It is
interesting to recall that the vote was put
and the motion to go on with the discussion
on Vietnam attracted twenty-two votes from
the Opposition and was resisted by fifty-three
votes from this side of the House.
Mr Birrell-How many were absent from
each side?
Mr HAROLD HOLT-A lot were missing
from each side because nobody expected
the* debate to come on at that time. It
resulted from a move made by the honourable
member for Yarra ( Dr J. F. Cairns)-
I stand subject to correction on this-without
consultation with his leader.
Dr J. F. Cairns-I correct the Prime
Minister forthwith.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-Does the honourable
member correct me? Did he approve of
the motion?
Dr J. F. Cairns--Yes.
Mr HAROLD HOLT-Although the
Opposition could only amass twenty-two votes for that particular motion I am glad
to hear there is this identity of view and
purpose between the honourable member
for Yarra and the Leader of the Opposition.
At least they could come together on the
statement that the Leader of the Opposition
has made, because he has carefully avoided
every issue on which there was any possibility
of conflict between any member of his
Party and any other member of his Party.
He has left unresolved for the people of
this nation where the Australian Labor
Party stands on the issue of Vietnam. He
has not told us whether or not Australian
troops should be there. He has not told us
whether or not, if elected to Government,
he would carry out the Adelaide decisions.
On television, on an earlier occasion, I
think he did go so far as to say that this
would be the policy of his Party. Why has
he not reasserted it here in the national
Parliament? He is the one who is always
demanding that the Government come and
debate against him, yet when the Government
debates against him in this Parliament
he will not face the issues that the
public are anxiously expecting to hear
resolved. The plain fact of the matter is that today
the Australian Labor Party stands, despite
the facelift and despite the glamorous new
leadership, where it stood at the last general
election. It still stands for a troops-out policy
in Vietnam. It still stands against our participation
in Vietnam. As long as that is the
policy honestly presented by the Australian
Labor Party then the Australian people will
have no truck with it. It is because the Australian
people will have no truck with it
that the honourable gentleman -spent
minutes tonight setting up a smoke screen
to obscure the fact that he is not prepared
to tell the people of Australia where the
Australian Labour Party stands on this
matter.
BY AUJTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



Speech by the Prime Minister of Laos,
His Highness Prince Souvanna oua
at a Government Luncheon,
Parliament House, Canberra. 2nd November, 1967.
Ladics, Gentlemen, Mr. Prime Minister, I am touched to speak today
before this gathering of people from the Australian Parliament
people who have such a deep knowledge of international politics.
I am really touchod by the praise which has been
made by the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition,
Mr. Whitlam. All my actions in the present and the-past have
been uniquely aimed at letting my country survive in its
independence and its neutrality. As I have said on several
occasions Laos has been at war for more than 20 years. As I
have said before for Laos a greatly under-populated country,
this is a great thing. We are three million inside and there
are more than 16 million outside.
All that is in the past; the present means to us
that we have to make available more than half of our annual
budget for our defence. That's why we have more than a hundred
thousand Laotians under arms. 
2-
in the recent history of our relationship, this
is the first time that a Laotian Prime Linister has paid a
visit to your country. I feel this honour very deeply,
and so does our nation. Therefore, ladies and gentlemen,
the warm regards I addresj you in the name of my people are
full of Zrat: itde and friendship.
How could it be else? The relationship between
our jovernoents is excellent. You know our difficulties, and
as friends you. help us to solve them, taking as friends your
share of our troubles. In Laos, Australia is rightly ! aro-, m as
a dynamic, prosperous country, in a stage of full economic
development. Ye are also pleased to low that today she has
the feeling of belonging to that great entity of South East
Asia, where changes, nutations ana dangers retain har
attention particularly. In these conditions, the understanding
and collaboration between our t, o countries are natural..
But, in all truth, I have to say that in our exchanges your
share is by far the =: ore important and generous.
Howevei, Ladies and Gentlemnen, Laos does not find
the same understanding everywhere. i. ant to speak of our
' forgotten war, and of its consequences. ! any think that the
situation is not so drastic that we axaZg rate our troubles.
In fact we are tho victims of a certain literary romanticism.
The country .,! here it is good to live, one calls our old
kingdom a country w here time flows slowly, in a quiet and
musical nonchalance. Maybe Laos was so, in some periods of
our history, when we were not under attack by our neighbours.
But for at least twenty-two years, it has not been so at all. 
-3
L.~ iesa~ d(~ nt~ meL.) allo7w. ime to illutstrate
this period by so-me Gest'Gimony, fLor hose so-.; eti,, raes personal
nature I as~ c youi e::, calse rie. -' Tht thiis test') imony belongs
in effect -to -th-e history of our country, and therefore -to
the his-tory of 3out-. h ZJ7ast Asia wh. iJch is niow. at sta'Le.
Let u~ s -o bach to 1:* 45 Joan ended th-e status
of the French Protectora. te, r stablis.* ed in La,? os f-or more
tbhan-half a ce-ntury. e suddenly -faced orryi-n-ch-v. age
and a n-reat void. Ho-.-. evor. tie Liao -i-, triots seized th'e
-to recover thin dependence omd to reunifyr
their country. s you lrno%-, Laos w-as artificially divided
into twjo 1r. nteone hand, in th not he Kin-dom
of Luzang ifrabemi-and its f rovince, w:, hore -the Court edthe
IRoyal ministries are located,, on the other the rest of t'he
countnj w: as under the administration of th Frnc gvenos
.3o that the tro united int'o the indepnendernce
move.-aent. the Lao issara (% hi'_ ch 7ree . J S CCoiLsiC, , 71y
c r oat ed a Go va e: t DTheU --imemibers 7were. including :_ yiself and
o t h er L. ao ' Fationalirsts, Frrice 1Fhotsarath : wi eider1 brother,
ovur leader, axid Frne2ouu-Panouvoag, 2.: Y yoLUIIger brother, at
present loader of" the 17co Lao ' Aaksat, a F--arty* of coi-im,, uist
persuasion. Ti~ vr the rench ca.,, e back in strenth! in 1' q46.
and -ie q! e re obliged to take rocfa-e in Thailmid .:, here w: e
continued our struagl-e with alas, alotno mleans. Our only
streng; th asour hepe, adthe ipossilmility of a reasonable
solution at Gf3 hiands of our 1 or: mor coloniz-ers.
.3~ hnaogdid not vic-. i -the eveats thL'e seine w. a y
w--e did. Hie w.-as veyinfluenced by hIis 7Vietm-ih fIriends.
-: loly hie fell co-mpletely be-neath tercontrol. Kesar their
idea of a erciless.) arm--ed srgl. In fact th-e dis s emsion
beca such that our Governmi; ent, i. eary of the servitu de accepted
by ' ioLlphan,: Javong-decided to eust hi-m in na, 1r349. I i~ s destn
washenefoth eald ie beca-i. 2 a creature of the iorth
Vietnariese. 
-4
During that troub) lcd yre-r, '. ie h-d been t old
th' at the French C-eve: nmu'm-it th L-LI , ing of' L rolitical
chem~ i,, e 1for the-. foricr Protoctorate. T7ferelace . Jas matrde to
special atooy. okoiectyvhtaas envio~ gd our
Govern:. 2ort eat rae to ? ais Ivas notified Uf tile
Frcnch proposals, iich beccuime the sL'bject of the Fraanco-Lao
Treaty, sirmedJYn. 1aris in J 194g T2e contents of th~ at
ireaty,. ex-ramined by our ' Iovernr_ ent -, Then I returned to Dmn-ijkok,~
so ems d honouarabl.. ard acceptable in the e.-is tine:: Circtis to. Lc s.
Our objcectives being ach-ieved-', th1e LA1O0
movemient had n-, o ft: hrreason to exist. it ;, i-ac dissolved.
~ ot o f it-U-s iiemib e rs r ot urn -d t o Ljao s. -" or rersonaal Loa. ors
IPri :-ce 1 1citsarath stayed in ' hailmid. As for y brother
SouT)! m' 2~ rCL! VO., y-, a s' 12-Ve to his convictions and to th1e
organisation to ;-. hicli ' fe had adhered, ho 2resur-. Ied th1e frh
a-ainst ud his countr
4oweiver, -the follo;., in. yar in 15, a new and
impot~ t olitical fact a--c-ared. TPw-o Pr3iltisof the
Lao _ Issara oeetincluclilng m.-, yself , erc .: icmbo_ 7rs ofL the
Royal I! to v.; rans indetc ide-d thU.' at Seineral ele ctionis
should taker-p~ lacc in 1 ) 51. .; ere loy ally aj?.-lyin-t1.. e
~ Dri~ lccof ocr l 1' beral deimocrc. cy, , h.' ich ao~ sall oT -inions.
21bo vote bein.-favourable t'Uo our -party, tha
Lao Cao ( v : hich1, ei h " 1ro-res , arty) I 1ra a'e
lead th',' e 2' sv rnfeoitr ' Jou---_' anoulvo1n:, ad hi-s f_-riends,
helpned by th-1e Viet., ainh, the. y kept)' U _ fir-! tin-tIL :!, rench and
the Lao. 7, ti~ h eao our coanti'ry7 s_, riously r
three years. In 10/ 53, Lu=. 2 I'rabmir, th2 % oyal cnd r: eliriols
capital 1. Ias iyn danger. Thalkhel: in the south, seized bthe
Victmi-nh. In Prance. at the sa~ no timec the volitical
conce-tio-n of thec ' Fren-ch Union vas u-ndor-loin-a notable ch-an-e.
The independence of the Associated 2ts Jas conceived on
anoth., er basis. Timus, in 19,, 53, byr thel F_ r L co-L:_ o TratyFnc 
decided to Ziv Laos complete inadcende-nce. This Treaty
is notable for neveDr havmnr:' ! been tif. ied by the Dronch
~ ar i ament -cause of its conflict vt' the rech
Constitutio-i. 1i~ ovaer, so far as La os is concerne.,. d, o-l1
the special lincs w.. ith rcaac disx-peared. Trd jnce
vias complete, as co-cmplete as tLhe lmost infraz igont of our
natijonalistUs could hope.
HTow.-ever, av, n~ ts icre oving--to a criLsis. In 19' 4,
the battle of Dien Dien Tuended f in-ally-the7 1In1dochina war.
In Gaiieva, the bellic~ ren tUhaec ,, utris colcerned in
this -trage,--: dY iut in confere~ c,, nce. 0 Lao, L _ Yd I -ooint
it OLIt 15o i. 1, icato its servi tade -to the Victr-ainh, wa
represented by iTorth Tiotnam, which con: Lfirmed what . we had
alw-ys miaintaincd th. at, ' theiit it'Us ]_ 4orth1-Vicetrna.-e se Callies.
thec Pathot -ao) ': Tould be nothing.
Y ow i e 1e re o n th t h res hol1d o f i. eac. -HOvqTevcr, I
could only conceive of ne. ace in TLaos on tnc-, baskr of national
r ec o nc ili a t ion-. i. should not r~ taea ci* vil -iiar, for
the -profit only of ozi er* srac2. rds; t-' e Vuturc olicy
of our yrourn:, naion the , ilea of i~ itaiysec;', od to i-e -the
best formula. C'ontuitly 1 tri,-. ed to bring, y comp triots
Go acce. ct -this conce:,-t, heor; ct -Ti. several. ob-tacles.
1evrth-oless~ , Li 10,57 e sacc Oeded -L. a creatlia.', a"
Govermient of 1hatienal Union whi~ ich could kceep on oylly
with the greatest1 difficulty. " Pie~ Covorm. en of th1-e U'nitoed
! Dta te ofL . iaerica not inclinod to Inavour the -mersence
of the Pat! hoit TLao inside thie Toyal Govornmerit. Pressulro
reached the mt where I hrad to-, re: eign in-, 13 158, leavinfg a
OitLuation Ghat detcrior,-: tcd ra-pidly, as+ a; s easy to forecast.
In the event, after U-_-cular failures, th-Ie -w-ay
I had so: nhad t'o be roer7ui., Ed. ILjx-, poriJc-1co provos riore am. d.
maore that. for such a .? ra--ilc ~ igio:~ lyinj: whera it does
bocause of roo:--ra7, hy ornd the, history of its porle, -the only
w. ay. is the ado tion of a v: lol icy of strict neutralityT an.' d
non-coi tMont. 
6
lh-arefore, in 19360, after thec tragic events
that you -my remlemfbei-, I ca. P back: int-'. o rzowcr. lThc followiinrg
year, a secon. d Conference as _ 1ieol Jn Genoeva, for the
i-robleo of Lao2 alone. ' Lourtecn nations voere prosen'G.
Finally in juily, 1962 the jtatut of " ou'rality for the
Kingclom~ was agreed ai uaned by the. thirteen othor
nations narticipoatin in th1e or-, ferencc.
-were fuallyN satisfiod -v.-ith the Geneva A1ccords.
eh o.-hat the ni-Jht-mare of? int-ornal subve: rsion anLd
forei arerssion -, ae over. &gt; ialas, ou~ r people iwere
,-rievously deceived. The,. 2Xcccrds v. rc i,.: uediately d
shianelossly violateod. The Lao Hasat ( the political par'ty
cruslied by the 1' athet uao after -the for: aation of -the
Govcrnma-ent o' ' Thtional Uniuin in 1957, valet of theo H,-. noi
Gov-. rn.:_ Icnt.. co-ntinucd its sabot-aL-c. -0-11 war., instead of
sto--iinvg, ngrey) aore intonse. Today five years after the
signaturc of the Gencva 1* ccorie, wie canr cow-it about 40,000
_: orth Victnaiic soldiors On ou~ r territory. : hyarc fi-b. tirtc.
besd5e, 00 9tht paid, trainocd mid encailred
byT, o rth Vietnan. The devolopm.. e-n-1 of ouU conryi arlyzed.
Thousaands of" refuvsecs strea;-i into thei Govern.. vaintal zones.
UuandrcOs ofC vill.-c-a aLdeo iiod. Onlyv half of tho soil is
cult-ivatLLed. ' The IHo--Ch-Iin trail b-oo-rie a-n actcive
tra:-sit routo for 1 ort. h Viotnau_-es: e forces.
This Tadios end Gentuile. on, is the real 1v-icturo of
ou~ r country. It be admiltted tGhat it does n.. ot c; 7actly
corres-.. ond with~ tho 1cturc :) ain-God byv -writers of a quie-t
care-free country, pjreooc e d b2 festv1l and asc h
acountry of three uillion inh) itants wit C US~. aeu
thiis is thie : sroatest tc': d of its history
LU, thec most dcrsi. aspect ' tGo th a'uh-t
this vueeloss, blood, , tragedyr could not occurre If o
i dcoo ci c al z: e dy-P ~ a-UJ 0 o s1-dh -; io ' U 00: 10 2d d intorfered
directly indire., ctly ini our in-Genal affa-irs. 73y vatriight,
i. hat i:; eral, do thei--tsuaco t~ e iji to liberat-e Lis? 
Truly,: n are still subject -to the reijn_ 7 of
force ir: rela-tionshlirs bet. ico:. nat-Jos. So rmh~ ch tIh0.-Iworse
for the ;' orak. The deception of the o-rv1l 1 nations is growillclay
by day,. 7-or ou~ r rtbitternaess is do-nor people,
wh-o onlyv dociro, -pace and tr -Cl~ ciil it-, -the-re-, p-Zct of
theiir front-iers anI&amp; o-f their sovercignty.
Laldies and. C, ci tle:; icn, I zA~ s orry -to lhave been.-
so long. for theo ouw'Usi. de 1 willl ropoat outr
plraint wI-ith, out end, for.; t'o pU it brely thi role
Of _ 00aCC MI-d .72. r conIcerns1 US all.
IPinally, 1 iould lito say agan hat otir
pcorile are apy tGo be able to coun-t oan solid, scin~ cre
frienidshipli. c. th of AiSJtr7,' liG. I-se. ct for liborty,
respect for are, solidarity betvien peoples, th'I'eso arc the
"' 11i ' i ieS '-ie0 lik in vo u, fLo r thy arc o inc er a, r ien.-dly jand 
-8
We count on you and your assistance to help us
survive. You must remember that Laos is in the vanguard of
the free world, de are neutrals; we ojant friendly relations
with all countries in spite of their philosophies and political
systems. ie have our old religion, our monarchy, our traditionsd
' vie want friendly relations with the socialist countries and all
other countries but we don't want communism in our home.
We hope to see perpetual peace in this world, and
friendly co-existence become a reality between all nations.
We want to see all men brothers in spite of their differences
of ideologies and cultures and everything else. This is our
most hopeful wish, and in this spirit I'd ask you, gentlemen,
to drink with me to the health of your Prime Minister, Mr. Holt. 



e r,
3 O
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 119/ 1967
' he following cable has been received from the
Secretary of the Australian delegation at the Uganda Conference of the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association:-
" Annual Meeting of Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association has elected Executive Committee to plan future course
of Association, now recognised as most important link binding
Commonwealth of Nations. The Committee comprises: Howson,
Australia ( Chairman);, Thomson, Secretary of State United Kingdom;
Connolly, Government Leader Canadian Senate; Reddy, Speaker,
Indian Parliament; Pindling, Prime Minister Baham as; Kalema,
Trade Minister Uganda; Ngaza, Minister Social Services Kenya;
McNeill, Minister Home Affairs, Jamaica; Ngkampoh, Assistant
Minister Finance Malaysia; Perera, Former Minister Finance,
Ceylon. Committee will meet in Mauritius May 1968.
CANBERRA 2ND NOV3MBR 1967. 



LU C 0-Bi1 IN H1C 1 1-OF F77. INC3 SCV. i' 3-ICUMIA / 11-11
FRINVU ii'JR~ T OF LACEGS0 2nd Novemb er, 167
Speech by tie 1-rime Mv~ inister, Mr. rodol
Your :_-Ti; Jhnes ses, Your 3xcell-1encies, F arliamentary, hivinisterial Colleermes,
Distin~ uiched Guests, Ladiec and Oentlemen:
In recent wee_-ks we have had the pleasure of welcoming in
this Fvrllamentary dining-rom notabilities from other countries, Heado
of Gover-nment, Heads of s1tate, and now we have the leasure of welcominv
the !-Yead of Government of Laos.
This giver, us a very particular pleasure because we have
admired greatly the dogged courage with w,. hich he and ais countrymen
have faced the threats to their Inde-p: endent e,, istence over the years. 1
am very glad, Prime Minister, that you have been n1J e to respond co
readily and co soon to tie -nvitation I extended to you when I haad the
1-Jes ure of visiting your = xuntry last P pril. " hile wie deeply regret tha
it was not possible because of the singular service She-wlas rendering in
relaticn to the Food and Agricultural Crganisation that th Pines, your
gracious wife, was not Cole to accompany you, vwe are delighted that you
did thinI'k fit to bring Princess Moune, wiho adds her Own distinction to
the cratirhering. ve are glad to welcome also the "" ecretary of . State for Social
V.' elfare, Mr. Keo Viphakcne, and other members of your party. And it
Is a verconal pleasure for me to wielcome again your Con, Captain . S1ouvaenlc
P hourna, who you very kI.-ndly made available as my r: ersonal aid when I
was in your country and he now serves in that ca,-; acity with you.
Cur relations with the countries of Asia are growing closer
steadily and indeed one :. Irhtamost say rapidly. I. nd") ecause of this,
we welcome your visit as the c-rlme Minister of one ofi thle free Statee of
izst 1 cia as we also wielcorned the visit only three weeks-ago of the Prime
Minister of Japan. It vwar, my own special privilege to 1) e the first A ustralian
Prime Minister to visit your country and I had the honour of being I thinilk
I may claim to say the first foreign politician to sit in your C. abinet with' you
and your Cabinet collea27uec. 7 use the word rollticlan *. uecause modesty
inhibited me from descri inyseff as a State.-rnan for this purpose. But
wihen 7 come to you, Sir, 7 am--' nder no such restraint either of langua! 7e
or indeed of cause. You, by your own record the record of a man whlo
on six, ce-;: arate occasions has been Frime Minister of 1his country and G&amp;
Prime 1.4inistershir, whic'h has ex--tended over about 14-years.
P nd desrite ell the threats, despite afy~ zession, desnite
actual . nvasion, you have found ft -ossible to si. Itain tine identity of your
cou-ntri' -nd the cur;-ort of yc--7 eorle and that isa tribu?. te to your own
Statesmanship. ' Y; e have rev--ected the way in which in this difficult
situation you have tried to ad:--ere scrupulously to th--e neutrality of Lacs
as irovided in the Geneva 1. greement Of now, and I have h-ad
first Lhand observation ofL tlis., somethinc of the difficulies you and your
peoy-1e ex-perience in settino2 about those urgent tacks of social and econoinic
develov; rnent which you are -o eager to pursue -rn your own country. / 2 
-2-
' Ve know in our much more favoured circumstances here in
A ustralia, with the application we have to make to the needs of security
and the requirements of a growing people, how difficult it is to apply ourselves
as we would hope and to the degree we would desire to the tasks of development
of the resources of our country and the enhancement of the social welfare
of the country. But I wonder how many of us realise that such is your problem
with IL CCC of something less than three million people under arms at
this ti-e, and because of the other demands on your limited resources
you are able to apply only about 17 of your Budget to capital construction.
How difficult these problems are for you and for your people. You have,
I hope, our sympathetic understanding of these problems and our admiration
for the manner in which you are facing up to your own difficulties.
You told me when I was with you there earlier in April that
there were some 4C, CC Horth Vietnamese troops on your own soil and
you were speaking not of those who pass down through your territory in
order to infiltrate into Couth Vietnam but those who were there as a regular
hostile force on your cv. n soil. The Fathet Lao, which is the Communist
military force is roughly only of the order of 2C, C nd you told us then
that but for the assistance which was coming from iorth Vietnam you would
be quite capable of coping with this problem and that there was no grass-root
support for the Pathet Lao. Indeed I remember the very picturesque
expression you used that you are able to contend with the Fathet Lao but the
North Vietnamese came in and established their positions and then down came
the Fathet Lao like a flock of crows. This is a cont'ning problem with you,
and we, with all our difficulties, who have never had to contend with an
invader on our own soil, can have little real appreciation of what it means
to a country of your limited size, a country in area only approximately
that of the State of Victoria. Although you have made it clear to us you
have resources which, given , peace, you would be able to develop for the
well-being of your people.
' e share vi'th you a desire for this peace because we too
can do better things with our own country if we can apply our resources in
greater measure to the pur oses of peace. But you are facing this in very
much more difficult circumstances and with very much more limited
oprportunity. VWell, we have tried to help in various ways and modest as
our contribution has necessarily been, we have extended it gladly and in
the hope that it will help your people to develop for themselves a better
way of life. It is with this same object in view that we have for two
years now been engaged in assisting you in various projects, such as the
beef cattle experimental project not far from Vientiane, and we have had
some of your people come here for training. have assisted you to
stabilise the strength of your currency and we are glad to learn real success
has attended our efforts in that direction.
Now, Sir, I shall be joined in prorosing this toast to you by
the Leader of Her Majesty's Crposition in this country and I am sure that
he shares, and his colleagues share, the admiration of all of us for you
and your people. You come to us as a people with ancient cultures, and you
have established a distinctive national entity and identity. I know that
there were many more millions of Laotians formerly forming part of your
country. Now many of them are scattered through vearious other parts as
a result of invasion or ag2ression in the past. Pnd yet, with less than
three million people in this limited area and inhibited from developing your
own natural resources because of the need to keep up your resistance to
aggression, you have never surrendered to a vassalage which might have
enabled you to go alon~ more calmly and peacefully with the development / 3 
of these resources. You have zealously preserved your ovin independent
identity. These are things which we applaud. These are things which
this country has been willing to fight for in two world wars and are fighting
for at this time. V! e see in you and in your enlightened Statesmanship a
ray of hope for the. future in this area of the world. You have been able to
rpreserve your entity, your culture, your independence nd, given the
support of willing friends, not only will you be able to continue this but
you will gladly join as you have evidenced in various institutions in the
region in the co-operative work for peaceful purposes that we believe can
make for a better and more secure life for all people in this region. Co
we welcome you as a symbol of the Asia not only of today but more hopefully
of the I. sia of a brighter tomorrow.
V/ e ask you to carry back to your people the warm good wishes
of the ustralian people and to assure them of cur sympathetic support, and
our ho e that through your difficulties you will retain the identity of your
nation and continue to make your valuable contribution to a peaceful,
procsercus and better world.
Now I ask the Leader of the Opposition if he will join with me
in the toast which I will shortly submit to our distinguished visitor and the
party which accompany him. 



' k VER'. S
CL
( y lJNOyi% 7
STATEiIENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2nd NOVEMBER, 1967
FUTURE PROGRAMME OF BZF ROAD DEVELOPMENT IN THE NORTH
I am pleased to announce to Honourable Members that the
Premiers of Queensland, Western Australia and South Australia
have accepted a Commonwealth offer to provide, over the seven
year period from 1st July 1967, non-repayable grants totalling
350 million for the further development of beef roads in
Northern Austrelia.
Of the total amount, $ 39.5 million will be made available
to the State of Queensland, ' 9.5 million to the State of
Western Australia and l million to the State of South Australia.
The programme to be undertaken in Queensland will provide
for the construction of selected roads in the Channel Country
and the Gilbert, Burdekin, Fitzroy, MIitchell, Cape York and
Gulf Regions. In Western Australia the programme will cover
selected road works in the Kimberley Region and in South
Australia permanent work on the Biidsville Track. The overall
programme in each State will be capable of some variation if this
is desirable. Each State will be the constructing authority for
its roads and will be solely responsible for necessary maintenance.
Honourable Members will recall that the Commonwealth,
in collaboration with the appropriate State Governments, has
been continuously associated with beef road development in the
North since 1961. The Commonwealth has spent ? 10.4 million
since 1961 on its own initial beef roads programme in the
Northern Territory, linked with the developments in the States,
and has begun work on a further programme estimated to cost
$ 14.3 million. As well, the Commonwealth has provided by
way of grants and loans to the States, ' 28.9 million, in a
programme which has triggered-off an expansion of private
investment in the beef industry. This in turn will result
in greater beef production, in increased prosperity in the
North and in greater export earnings for Australia as a
whole. The further programme I now announce is evidence of
the Commonwealth's desire to foster the further development
of the beef industry and the North generally, I am confident
that the next seven years will see tremendous benefits from
this programme, not only to the North, but to the Nation as
a whole. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME M~ INISTER
Tn-' E RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.,
IN THE HOTDE OF REPRESENTATIVES 17
2ND NOVE1] ER, 1967 3ot96
OFFICE OF ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
Honourable Members will recall that in a Statement to this
House on 7th September this year I announced certain dccisions
the Commonwealth Government had taken on Aboriginals following
the referendum in May and later discussions with the States. I
referred to the changes to the Constitution brought about by the
referendum and to the Government's view that the prime function
of the Commonwealth in Aboriginal affairs in the future should be
to have a policy co-ordinating role in matters of common interest
to the Cornmonwszalth, its Territories and the Australian States.
I also announced that the machinery to perform this function
would be provided by an Office of Aboriginal Affairs to be
established within the Prime Minister's Department. This
arrangement was designed to bring it under my own Central
Administration. By this means, we would have an effective channel of
communication not only between the States and the Commonwealth
on Aboriginal matters through the Premiers and mysellf, but
between the Commonwealth Government, the Aboriginals themselves
and organisations represunting them.
I now wish to announce a further stage in the Government's
proposals in this matter. The Government wishes to have
continually available to it the best advice on Aboriginal
affairs it can get on a national level, and it has therefore
decided that the new office should serve a Council for
Aboriginal Affairs, which will have two particular functions:-
It will advise the Government in the formulation
of national policies for the Aboriginal citizens
of Australia.
It w . ill consult with Commonwealth Dcpartments and
authorities whose activities have a bearing on
Aboriginal welfare.
It will also act as the Commonwealth agency for ensuring
co-operation between Commonwealth and State authorities at the
official level. It will, like the office, be within my
jurisdiction as Prime Minister and associated with the Prime
Minister's Department in Canberra.
The new Council will consist of a Chairman and two
members. The Chairman will not be a full-time appointmnent but,
at least during the early years of the Council's work, he will
devote a large proportion of his time to its affairs. One of
the other members will be the executive member who will be the
director of the office serving the Council. The third member
will be chosen for his direct knojvledge and understandin? 7 of the
Aboriginal people.
The Council will draw upon the knowledge and experience
of anthropologists and other academic specialists as well as
State and Commonw~ alth officials working in the field. It will
also call into counsel members of Aboriginal communities and
others concerned with their welfare and advancement. 
-2-
The Council will concontrate at the outset on fully
establishing the new office of Aboriginal Affairs and, in
consultation with other Departments and with the States, but
also will move as soon as possible to the formulation of
proposals for~ bnaonwealth policies in relation to aboriginals.
I repeat here, however, what I said in September that
while the Commonwealth Parliament is now in a position to make
special laws, the Commornealth does not seek to intrude
unnecessarily in this field or into areas of activity currently
being dealt with by the States. We believe that detailed
administration to be most effective should be on a State or
regional basis
I would ada that since I made my first announcement in
September of the Government's intentions as a consequence of the
Referendum result, we have had many constructive suggestions and
much useful advice from representative people. This has bceen of
considerable value to the Government and has helped us materially
in this further development of our policy.
I am confident both the Council for Aboriginal Affairs
and the new office will provide a powerful reinforcement for the
continuing efforts that the Commonwealth Government, the
Australian States and the Northern Territory are making for the
advancement of Australian aboririnals.
I now come to the question of the person to be appointed
as the first Chairman of the new Council for Aboriginal Affairs.
This is an im~ portant appointment to which, naturally, the Government
has given a great deal of thought so that a person of strong quality
and competence and also with a feeling for the task would be chosen.
I am now able to re-port that following a series of discussions
with Dr. ' 1HC.. Coombs about his future, Dr. Coombs will be taking
up the position of Chairman.
Dr. Coombs some time ago indicated to the Treasurar and to
me that, after 18 years as Governor of the Reserve Bank, he felt
the stage was apiproaching at which he ought to step down. He also
indicated that thereafter, if the Government wished, he would be
prepared tD assume other appropriate responsibilities. While the
Government would be well-content for Dr, Coombs to continue as
Governor of the Bank, it felt that it should respect his judgment
in this matter.
In the light of this, discussion took place with Dr. Coombs
concerning the application of his abilities and experience to the
field of Aboriginal affairs, and I am happy to report that we found
him responsive and enthusiastic in this direction hence the
appointment which I have just announced.
I may add that it has also been decided that Dr. Coombs
should be appointed Chairman of the Council for the Arts, about
which I made an announcement yesterday. This is a field of
activity in which he has already done very valuable work.
Dr. Coombs has accepted certain commitments as Governor of
the Bank during the first part of 1968 and he will not formally
retire from that post until these have been fulfilled. He will,
nevertheless, be starting immediately on his new tasks and
effective arrangements will be made to relieve him of certain of
his responsibilities in the Bank for this purpose. Perhaps I
should state that Dr. Coombs has stipulated that while he
remains Governor, there should be no additional remuneration in
respect of his Aboriginal Affairs and Council for the Arts posts. 
p -3-
At this point, I desire, personally and on behalf of the
Government, to pay to Dr. Coomnbs the highest tribute for his
distinguished service to Australia as Governor of the Bank and
also in other major fields of national endeavour.
I now come to arrangements in relation to the Reserve
Bank in view of the impending retirement of Dr. Coombs. I am
authorised by my colleague, the Treasurer, to say that
Mr. J. G. Phillips, the present Deputy Governor, will be. appointed
to sucecad Dr. Coombs. Knowing th,, e admirable work that Mr. Phillips
has done over many years as an economist and central banker,
the Government has great confidence in his ability to carry out
the responsibilities of Governor of the Reserve Bank and Chairman
of the Reserve Bank Board. 



0. INAUGURATION OF LONSDALE PLANT OF CHRYSLER.
AUSTRALIA LIMITED
71 % FRCa ? a LONSDALE, SOUThi AUSTRALIA
., 1967oy 3RD NOVEMBER, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Mr and Mrs Brown, Mr and Mrs Boyd, Mr Premier and Mrs Dunstan,
Ministers , Members of Parliament, Leader of the, Qpposition, Mr Mayor,
and the very many other Distinguished Guests around me, and those
associated with the Chrysler Plant, Ladies and Gentlemen ( if I haven ' t
already covered you, and good afternoon to you all:
I don't know that I can classify what I am about to say, in
the terms of Mr Greig, as an inaugural address, but I assure you it does
givye me a very special pleasure to be here and to welcome the formal.
addition tb the armoury of Australian industrial assets, represented by.
these amazingly fine plants that we have visited at the Chrysler Lonsdale
establishment. Before I comment in a little detail on one or two aspects of
today's ceremony, could I just make a few personal references perso~ al
references not of a parliamentary kind, I assure you, but of a friendly:
kind because this must be a very proud day in the life of Mr David Brown.
And we are sharing his sense of pride and pleasure and achievement whtch
must represent for him the result of a great deal of painstaking work, a
great deal of courage and a great deal of applied effort and skill.
We welcome Mr and Mrs Boyd. We were told that this Ip the
first time that a President of Chrysler had visited Australia. Australia s
having an increasing run of visits from Presidents, whether they be hea~ s
of state or heads of great corporations In various parts of the world.
I think this, too, is an indication of the growing significance our country
possesses in the eyes of the rest of the world. So we particularly welcome
the head of this great motor organisation, one of the bigthree of the United
States of America, and now one of the big three in our own country's
automotive industry. I should not pass from personal references without saying
how pleased I have been as I am sure so many of you are in this room
to see with us, rather heavily disguised, our old friend, Fergy. When
I first caught a glimpse of him this afternoon, I thought he was Australia's
answer to the late Ernest Hemingway, but still, one can't mistake him, as
you see those gleaming, sparkling eyes, and those of us who have knowrq
over the years the contribution he has made to the pioneering efforts of
Chrysler Dodge in Australia applaud him and welcome him here on this
occasion. I did learn that the Chrysler Corporation had here with
us a public relations counsel by the name of Ford. Well, now, I don't
know whether that shows how big-hearted or how confident they are perhaps
I should say how valiant they are, but If Mr Ford has any spare time over
the next few weeks, I would be very glad to consult with him. I think I may
need him. I confess I was rather prompted to develop this thought because
as I looked across here, I saw a handsome vehicle which was marked
" VIP Safari". I hasten to assure you it was no addition to the Commonwealth
fleet. / 2 
2-
But, ladies and gentlemen, this Is a great moment In the
history of this State, and It is a very welcome occasion in the history of
the economic and Industrial growth of Australia. It Is, I assure you, for
me a stirring experience to go around this country as your Prime Minister
and see In all parts of Australia In one form or another, whether It Is
some vast mineral project, whether It Is a new water project, whether It
Is a great Industrial development, whatever form it takes, this addition to
Australia's developmental strength and our industrial growth. I hope that
we can all take an Australian view of these developments, wherever they
occur, because I emphasise that wherever they occur, they benefit fellow
Australians wherever those fellow Australians may be.
If there is prosperity through Hamersley, or through the
Ord or through the alumina plant at Gladstone, or from whatever other
cause, then tkhis Is a prosperity which will tend to spread through to
organisations such as this. If people have the means, they will be looking
for the amenities, and already in Australia we have shown our appreciation
and the value we place upon our automotive industry by the fact that we
rank now, I am assured by those who study these things closely, second
only to the United States of America in the availability of motor vehicles per
head of the popu lation. And the automotive industry has become the largest
employer of labour In the nation. It particularly typifies the po st-war
industrial growth of Australia because It contains those elements of growth
which are a peculiar feature of the post-war period.
First of all, it is a new Industry for this country. Secondly,
It absorbs a very considerable proportion of the labour of migrants who come
to Australia, more, I think, than any other industry in the Commonwealth.
And thirdly, it has brought us the benefit of capital, of technological skill,
of experience, from those who have developed these things abroad. Mr Boyd
has spoken of the many millions of dollars of Investment from his company
here, but they have also brought skills here and the value to Australia Is.
almost incalculable from what has developed out of the automotive industry
In this country. Now I know there Is always a disposition on the part of some
to cast a critical eye over foreign Investment in Australia. I have never had
that critical view myself because the advantages have always seemed to me
to so vastly outweigh any disadvantages that in a young, developing country
we had to welcome the capital, just as we had to welcome people to develop
our population, and we had to welcome the technical skills which would help
to make this country strong. And even where these enterprises have been
completely owned from overseas, I have recognised an Australian equity
existing In them, because if they are profitable, we take 421 per cent of
profits by way of tax. From what is left, a great deal of it Is ploughed back
Into further development and therefore further Australian emnp loyment, a~ nd
If some sums are remitted overseas, then we take a further tax, usually
of the order of 15 per cent on whatever is remitted overseas. We derive
revenues from the employment that is given, just as Australians derive
welfare from the fact of this employment and the incomes that come Into
Australian households. Then, In addition to this, has anybody ever tired to calculate
the secondary effects generated through the economy by a vast organisation
such as this, the demands upon other suppliers, the sub-contractors, the
orders for steel, for cement, for a whole variety of components that go into
the making first of the factory establishment, and then of the car itself.
And so we have been particularly well served by this particular foarm of
I 4b P. O./ 3 
-3
investment here in Australia. But Chrysler, In the words of Mr Boyd, has gone one
better. It has assured us thait quite apart from any general Australian
equity we may derive from these activities, special arrangements are being
made so that there shall be a direct Australian participation in the shareholding
of the organisation. And we welcome that.
He has also told us two other things which are very
welcome to me. One Is that there is a growing export trade from the
products ot this company, thereby helping to earn valuable foreign exchange
for Australia, I was here, as Mr Brown will recall, when you celebrated
the production of your 50, 000th Valiant and the 5, 000th export at that time.
Now you have swollen the volume of export very considerably and we are
told today of the arrangements which have been made by the American
principals to see that Australia Is to have an export opportunity outside this
country, and through the rest of Oceania, through Asia, through Africa,
and through what Mr Boyd describes as our Far EFast, but which will be known
to m ost of us as our Near North. I am afraid if we were exporting to the
Far East, we would be invading his market In the United States, and that
wouldn't do. But we in Australia have had to come to the realisation over
recent years that what has in the past familiarly been regarded by others,
and even here, as the Far East, is for us our very Near North, and he
opens up for us great opportunities therefore for an expanding export trade.
It Is a matter for pride for all of us that Australian workmanship, that
Australian skills and the finish to the car itself, can obtain for it a place
in markets beyond this country.
Now, Mr Premier, you in this State have a disadvantage
compared with some of the other States of the Commonwealth. The resources
you have been able to turn up of a natural kind tend to be rather more limited
than In some of the more favoured States. But South Australia has done*
well in this important respect. You have attracted Industry here because
of the quality of your work-force, the industrial stability which this workforce
has demonstrated, by the stability generally and good sense which
have been displayed by the people of this State. I know this has made a
particular impression upon Mr Boyd and I have heard other visiting
industrialists comment on it. While South Australia can go on contributing
that special quality to Its attrectiveness, I do not question that Its own
industrial development will grow apace.
In speaking of the work-force, what has struck me,
as a former Minister for Labour several years ago, Is the improvement
made in foundry production compared with the darker and less satisfactory
days of an earlier time. The working conditions here are a matter for
congratulation. They demonstrate that not only have we made technical
progress and achieved greater efficiency, but in that progress we have
greatly improved the working conditions of those wiho take part in the
enterprise. For all these things, Mr Boyd and MW Brown, you are
to be congratulated. In formally declaring this Lonsdale Plant open, I convey
to you on behalf of my colleagues of the Government my own personal good
wishes, every wish that you w1, ill continue to pros per and that you will be a
permanent element in a growing and increasingly prosperous Australian
automotive industry. Good luck to Chrysler. May the Valiants be a symbol
of your courage, your farsightedness and the speed of your progress in the
future. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE 8.30 PM
ON 9TH NOVEMBER, 1967
S EN A TE E LE C TIO0N 1 96 7
OPENING ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR HAROLD
HOLT, PRESENTED ON TELEVISION AND RADIO ON
9TH NOVEMBER, 1967
Twelve months ago, you returned my Government
with a record majority in the house of Representatives. You
gave us warm and powerful support for reasons which seemed to
you to be vitally important important for Australia's securityimportant
for its economic welfare important for the security
and welfare of yourselves and your families.
The greatest issue before you was whether we
should desert our allies in time of conflict and this is what
we would be doing if we withdrew our forces from Viet Nam. This,
in effect, was what the Australian Labor Party proposed to you.
This, in basic English, is what it still proposes under its
new leadership. Wrapped up in this question last November
and now is what reliance would Australia be able to place on
its treaty arrangements with the United States arrangements
which mean so much to our security if we were to walk out
on the Americans in Viet Nam,~ That danger of a weakening of
our treaty arrangements remains while Labor persists with
its policy of withdrawal. At issue also last November and now is our
growing relationship with the free countries of Asia.
Several of these are contributing as we are to the
resistance in Viet Nam to communist aggression. They are
fearful that this expansion could imperil their security,
So are others not actively engaged, such as Malaysia,
Singapore, Laos and Taiwan. Not only is the security of all
these countries threatened, but also at risk are the bright
prospects revealing themselves for us all by increased trade
and growning co-operation for mutually helpful peaceful
purposes. These were aspects of Australia's external
position before you last November.
They are still before you, but importance has
been heightened. It has been heightened by the British
announcement, made since the last election of plans for a
phased withdrawal of forces from the Malasia/ Singapore area,
But external policy was only one issue,
vital though you rightly believed it to be. You were also 
-2
conscious that under the sound and stable government we had
given, Australia was making remarkable economic progress.
Indeed, only one industrialised country Japan can point
to a higher rate of increase in its national product over
the last five years. That progress, and the prosperity
which accompanies it continue. You had good reason to believe
then as you have now that the fanciful doctrinaire
economic and social policies put forward by the Labor Party would
endanger this steady progress. They would certainly involve
an astronomic increase in government expenditures.
In the coming Senate election, many less
important issues will be argued before you by our opponents.
Attempts will be made by them to distract you from issues
fundamental to the nation's welbi But you refused to be
diverted last November. Since then, the Labor Party has gone
through a process of face-lifting. It has tried to project
a more attractive image under a new and younger leadership.
But all the evidence proves that the basic policies remain
unchanged. The gulf between the views of the Government
and those of the Opposition on external and domestic matters
remains as wide as ever.
This particular campaign produces another major
issue, Although the Government enjoys a record
majority in the House of Representatives, it is in a minority
in the Senate, You may wonder why this is so. The immediate
reason is the death last year of two Liberal Senators, but
the Senate is always close to an even division, because its
members are elected by proportional representation, while
the Members of the House of Representatives are elected as
a direct consequence of the choice of individual electors..
In the coming election, therefore, you are not
electing a government, you are electing thirty Senators
five from each of the six States. I hope you will see to it
that the majority of them will be government Senators!
I say this for the plain reason, which you will
readily understand, that if government is to be effective, the
Government of the day should be able to count on majority
support in both Houses of Parliament,
You rejected the policies of those Labor Senators
who oppose us in the Senate today.
Are we to be able to get on with the country's
business and carry out the mandate you gave us twelve months
ago, or are we to continue a situation where a combination
of Senators whose policies you have I repeat rejected,
whether from the ALP, the DLP or as Independents, can take
the business out of the Government's hands whenever they
choose? To give the final say to those you rejected
so decisively twelve months ago, would be, I think you will
agree, both absurd and an abandonment of democratic principle.
The official platform of the ALP says it will
abolish the Senate. But, under its new leadership, the ALP 
-3
has used its representation there, regimented by the vote of
the full Caucus, to thwart the democratically elected majority
in the House of Representatives. A typical instance was its
action in holding up for six months the improvements proposed
by the Government to the Aged Persons Homes Scheme.
The Government has two years of its three-year
term to run, but the numbers remain against us in the Senate.
Unless you resolve this situation favourably for the Government,
Australia faces a period of political uncertainty and confusion.
Effective government is impossible unless we can carry out the
policies and programmes you have endorsed. And this becomes
the more necessary in what is clearly a very difficult period
ahead when you consider the international scene.
The broad question you have to decide is whether
you give the Government the means to do its job in the firm,
speedy, decisive way you would wish it to perform.
In the course of the campaign, I shall be telling
you in more detail what we have done at home and abroad since
you elected us for a three-year term last November. I said then
that what we promised we would perform and, indeed, that we would
be doing more than we promised.
This has been done, and more than we promised
has been done and we shall continue to do more as opportunity
offers. We set speedily about the task of giving effect
to our policy undertakings. As soon as the new parliament met,
we busied ourselves putting our promises on to the Statute Book,
We went a stage further in liberalising the means
test. We gave further help to the disabled by the Sheltered
Employment Assistance Bill. We doubled the amount annually
available for science facilities in independent schools. We
established a Commonwealth Ministry of Education and Science.
We made it possible for more young people to
benefit from the Homes Savings Grants Scheme. At the time of
this further liberalisation, some 77,000 young couples had
received home savings grants totalling over thirty-four-and-ahalf
million dollars to assist them to own and establish a
home. We have given effect to our promise to provide an
additional $ 50 million for beef roads.
We have broken new ground in a number of directions
not mentioned last November.
Here is the picture, without going into detail:
In the area of Social Welfare: we have extended
child endowment; we have given social service benefits to the
mentally retarded; we have moved to assist deserted wives; we
have done more to lift the tax burden on elderly people; and
we have worked out a scheme to assist pensioners who need
hearing aids. These may seem small in the national picture, 
-4
but each of them meets a special need.
I should add that, following the referendum,
I have set up an Office of Aboriginal Affairs in my own
Department. In the area of National Development, since
last November's election, we have introduced legislation to
cover the new discovery of off-shore oil, which will encourage
investment and iron out problems between the Commonwealth and
the States. In this field of development just to show you
what constantly goes on we have helped Tasmania with the
Gordon River Project and assisted the South Australian gas
pipeline project. We have announced substantial financial
help for the Ord River project in Western Australia and the
Nogoa Dam project in Queensland,
Emergency assistance is constant five States
have been helped with their drought, bushfire and flood
emergencies. I emphasise, however, that I shall not be
outlining a new three-year programme when we still have two
years to run under our presend mandate, We should all be quite
clear about this. The Labor Party may tell you what it would
do if it were in government. But it is not in government, and
is not making a bid for government at this time. You will
remember its spokesmen saying recently that this was not the
time to challenge the Government decisively not even in the
Senate, We were told then that the Labor Party is not yet
ready, but that it will be ready in 1969. We shall be ready
also'.. But what you are to resolve at this moment is whether
the Government you have chosen is to have a majority support
in the Senate in the interests of effective government.
You have much to preserve,. Through the long
period of Liberal leadership, the progress of the Australian
economy has been sure and steady-Our political and economic
stability have greatly promoted our development and our standing
in the eyes of others. We enjoy one of the highest standards
of living in the world. No free industrialised country can
point to as high a level of employment, so consistently
sustained, over a long period of years.
A bigger percentage of Australians own, or are
in process of acquiring, their own homes than exists in any
other part of the world. In the availability of motor vehicles
to the population, we rank second only to the United States.
We are devoting a bigger proportion of our Gross National
Product to investment than any country other than Japan. Over
our period of office, we have increased the provision in the
Butget for social welfare from $ 185 million to $ 1,071 million,
We have increased the provision for defence from $ 108 million
to $ 1,118 million. Even when allowance is made for the increase
in population and changes in the value of money, these facts
confirm spectacular progress. Just think of the diversity of
this great continent, the nature and tempo of its development. __ 7 
5
You would need to travel thousands of miles to understand fully
what is happening. The growth of new towns and new ports in
response to the exploitation of fantastic mineral discoveries
is one exciting part of the picture.
Changes in the past have not only been remarkable
in themselves. They are pointers to the kind of future we want
and for which we plan. We can be confident of this future if
we are given peace, and if we can maintain a continuing
partnership between Government and Industry in a free enterprise
system. We must also think in terms of priorities.
Defence ranks high in our national priorities. This year we are
provising $ 1,118 million, an increase of eighteen per cent over
last year. Five years ago our defence bill was $ 428 million,
nearly $ 700 million less than the estimate for this year. We
have achieved this expansion without serious distortion or
disruption of the domestic economy. It is a high price to pay,
but security is never bought cheaply. And we are firmly
convinced that our domestic programme, the education and health
of our people, our responsibility to the very young and to the
very old all of these things depend upon our security as
a relatively small nation in a large and dangerous part of the
world. Our opponents depict the Government and its
supporters as people who have little concern for those in need
of help whether aged, invalid or disabled, or younger people
having a need for education or, as they marry, a need for
housing. Our record of performance over our period of
Government since you rejected Labor in 1949 gives the lie to that
line of propaganda. Let's follow the figures. The vote for
social welfare in the last Budget introduced by a Labor
Government, provided a total of One hundred and eighty-five
million dollars. Our Budget for this year provides One
thousand and seventy-one million.
Not only has the total provision grown enormously,
but the percentage of the total budget we devote to social
welfare is a higher percentage than in the last Labor Budget.
What is more, this increase in amount and percentage has been
achieved despite the increased provision we have made for
national defence from the low figure of One hundred and four
million dollars in Labor's last Budget to One thousand one
hundred and eighteen million dollars this year.
We have greatly widened the eligibility for
assistance to the aged and invalid. The education of the
young, the provision of housing, the care of the sick and
disabled have led us to introduce many new benefits not in
existence when we came to office. Let me name a few of them:
the provision of pharmaceutical and
medical benefits generally; 
-6
the special schemes in these fields for
pensioners;
o the assistance given to provide homes for
the aged;
grants to universities;
the other new policy measures in the
education field which have produced an
increase in Commonwealth provisions for
education from less than Eighteen million
dollars in Labor's last budget to One
hundred and ninety-four million dollars
this year,
All these measures illustrate a concern that the
wealth of a prospering community should contribute to the wellbeing
of people in real need,
These spectacular increases would not have been
possible unless we had succeeded by our policies in developing
and enlarging our economy,
I would like to tell you now a little about our
thinking and hopes in one or two areas of policy which concern
us all,~ The first is education. The sincerity of our
belief that education is important to every Australian and vital
to the nation is, I suggest, proved by our record. We now have
a Ministry of Education and Science. This year, the provision
for education in our budget increased by thirty-five per cent
over that of last year. Large though the growth of the education
vote has been over recent years, this does not prevent us looking
at targets for tomorrow,~ I know my colleague, the Minister for
Education and Science, would like to help children of preschool
age who are put at a disadvantage because of a bad home
environment. At the other end of the scale, he wants to help
talented youngsters who at present cannot pay their way through
universities. He feels, also, that the success of our scheme to
provide science laboratories and equipment invites us now to
look at the Humanities, to the school libraries,
I mention this background of thinking to let
you know we regard policy-making as a continuing process, not
merely as an electioneering device every three years.
Let me give you another illustration, We have
always said, and I repeat the undertaking, that we will continue
to improve our national health scheme. In many parts of the
world, our scheme is regarded as a model., But no plan meets 
-7
all human needs, We know we have not yet properly covered
the emergency of long illness. There is anxiety about this,
particularly in old people. Here then is another area of
genuine human need which will take a high priority in our
thinking, What we can do is, of course, governed by
what we have. Money can't be plucked out of the air. But we
do plan constantly to make further progress towards our social
objectives, I come back now to the issue of national security
on which you voted decisively for my Government a year ago.
Let me re-state our foreign policy aims in
relation to South-East Asia of whiL_': Vietnam is a signifcant
part. Our military commitment in South Vietnam arises out of
our larger and long-term assessment of the security of South-East
Asia and our belief that the new nations that have come into
being there should be allowed to survive as independent
communities. We believe this in their interests and in ours.
When we committed ourselves to the defence of
South Vietnam, we did so in the belief that the fact of aggression
in South Vietnam was real, as was the threat of its expansion
through other parts of South-East Asia, We have no cause to
alter our assessment, We believedthen, and we still believe,
that a successful communist takeover of any of the directlyaffected
nations would not only be disastrous to the peoples
of those countries, but would weaken, and in time destroy, the
capacity of other nations of South-East Asia to maintain their
own independence. We share the view of the Government of the
United States and of the governments of the free countries of
South-East Asia and the Pacific that the transfer of the area to
communist control, either by subversion or aggression, would
doom the peoples of the area to domination and servitude.
Who can deny that the unchecked advance of
communist subversion and aggression in South-East Asia would be
a threat to our own national interests? Our powerful ally,
the United States, has assessed that it would be a threat to its
national interests. For us, in our geographical and strategic
position, the threat would be very much greater,
But there is a more positive and constructive
side to our policies. The new nations of South-East Asia,
although beset by difficult political and economic challenges,
are real national entities with commendable purposes and a
vision for their future progress which is worth backing. Their
chances must fail unless external aggression and subversion
are held at bay. Already the other free nations of the area
have benefited from allied intervention in South Vietnam. They
have been able to go ahead with economic development and there
is today more genuine co-operation for peaceful, constructive
purposes than these countries have ever previously known.
These are the bedrock reasons for our policy
and our commitment. 
-8
The course of the immediate conflict in South
Vietnam does not alter the fundamental reasons for our policies.
But I have re-stated them here, because it is for you to weigh
them against the newest policy decisions of the Australian
Labor Party, It is clear from the decisions taken by the
Federal Conference of the ALP at Adelaide, that the Party has,
in substance, the same policy on Australia's military presence
in Vietnam that it had at the general election last year. The
United States is given an unacceptable ultimatum, But if it
is not accepted, Labor says that Australian troops will be
withdrawn. A Labor Government would scrap the foreign
policy which the Australian people Dverwhelmingly endorsed a
year ago. It would, for all practical military purposes, turn
its back on South Vietnam, and reduce our American alliance to
a meaningless set of pious words.
The issue is not whether we want peace in Vietnam.
We all want peace in Vietnam. The issue is whether an
Australian foreign policy, which attaches immense importance
to the American alliance and to the independence of the free
countries of South-East Asia, is to be preserved or destroyed,
So the Senate election, among other things, is
an opportunity for the Australian people to say again where they
stand in relation to their own vital national interests., This
is, I repeat, even more important than at the time of the
House of Representatives election a year ago. Since then the
intentions of Britain east of Suez have been made known.
While you are making your assessments about our
position internationally you should take into account the
British Government's decision to make a phased, but total,
military withdrawal from the mainland of South-East Asia by
the mid-seventies. Australia, its allies, and its friends will,
as a consequence, be engaged in close and far-reaching consultations.
I put it to you that we must, in these circumstances,
have in office a government with a consistent and intelligible
foreign policy a government which can work in close
co-operation with allies who see the needs of the area much as
we do. I mention, in particular, our American allies.
I was sharply reminded of the Labor Party's
isolationism in foreign affairs when I attended the opening of
the United States Naval Communication Station at North West
Cape as recently as September 16. Here was tangible, exciting
proof of the reality of our ANZUS Treaty with the United Statesa
dramatic example of the " effictive self-help and mutual aid"
described in Article 11 of the Treaty.
But have you forgotten that if the Labor Party
had been in power in 1963 there would have been no North West
Cape Station? When the United States Naval Communication
Station Agreement Bill was before Parliament, the Labor Party
produced an amendment designed to deny to the United States
sole control of the station. The Labor Party served notice of
impossible terms on the United States. When defeated on this, 
9-
the Labor Party moved that the third reading of the Bill should
be postponed for six months-This, in plain language, was an
attempt to kill the Bill,
But today we don't hear any apology from the Labor
Party for its wrong thinking in 1963, Instead we find a
perpetuation of the folly in Labor's present attitude to our
obligations under the American alliance. But there is nothing
new about the Labor Party's dangerous isolationism in foreign
policy. It emerges all along the line, It is a danger signal
a warning we should all take note of
So I say again that the issues of national
security are still paramount-Let me put it to you in the
simplest terms: The security of this country depends very
largely upon how far we can have South-East Asian countries
kept out of the hands of the communists. If -these countries did
fall to communism, we in Australia would be a very exposed and,
in terms of trade and area co-operation, a much more isolated and
restricted nation.. That's the heart of the political argument in this
country, We believe -and the majority of Australians shared
our belief a year ago -that the external policies of the Labor
Party are to put it bluntly -suicidal,
So I ask you to take this Senate campaign very
seriously. It so happens that the Labor Party's leaders in the
Senate enjoy the support of the Party masters outside
Parliament who would weaken the alliances which are the keystone
of our security. All that we have worked for and built up
over the years could be quickly and disastrously undermined if
the voice of the Labor Party's policy-makers became the voice
of Australia, As I said earlier, political instability and
uncertainty are inevitable when a government with a big majority
in the House of Representatives is in a minority in the Senate.
We want that position resolved in the interests of effective
government. But we also hope that you will record a positive
Senate vote for the Government as a reaffirmation of what you
said a year ago. What we plan for the well-being of Australians
and the development of our country must not be put at risk,
I put it as high as that with confidence,
because I don't think the Australian people change their minds
from day to day on basic questions of national security and
survival nor, for that matter, on basic questions of their
country's economic strength and their own welfare. 



EiMBA RGC: Not for relhease until 7. 15 pm ( FS? TE R's
Senate Campaign 19; 67
NA TIO_ DNAL COA DC AST BY TH E FP IME
MINISTE3: ( MR HAIRCLD HCLT)
Friday, ICth November, 1c, 7
"' Following is the text of the first of a series of National Broadcasts to
be made by the Prime Minister, Mr Holt, during the Senate campaign.
This talk will be relayed over the ABC's netwo-rk at 7. 15 this evening
This Senate election differs from a general election for
the House of Represenatives. The general election decides who is to
govern A ustralia, and the next general elect ion is not due, in the normal
course, until 1969. Bu* you will be hearing a lot about policy from our
opponents. Years ago, elections were regarded by many people as
a policy auction. The theory was the bigger the promises you made, the
bigger the vote you were likely to get. The Australian electorate of today
is more mature and knowledgeable. But rhe Labor Party has not yet
appreciated this fact. From time to time, 3ince we came into office first
in 1949, the Labor Party has presented you, the electors, with a
fantastic set of promises. In 1966, Mr Calwell made the sky the limit.
But you, the electors, were not duped by this.
You recognised tht even a smsible and practical domestic
programme, directed to national growth and social welfare, lacks reality
unless it is set in the framnework of a foreign policy cementing our security.
We have yet to hear the Labor Party offer us the kind of domestic
programme that could be carried out without the prospect of serious
inflation, without oppressive taxation and without discouraging private
enterprise and private enterprise still provides three out of every four
jobs in Australia. And what about national security? Here the ALP is bogged
down under prejudice and isolationism. It shows no reality about
Australia's position in a dangerous world.
We of the Government have put first things first.
We believe we have correctly analysed where the threats to our security
lie. We have made friendships and treaties with countries and people
who also recognise these threats.
But we have not neglected either national growth or
social welfare. We have helped build this country to its present stability
and strength. There are many outside Australia who envy us. The
progress of our economy has been steady and sure. We enjoy one of the
highest standards of living in the world, and there is virtually no limit
to our potential if we go about this in the right way.
Since the elections of last year, we have been giving
speedy effect to our policy undertakings. We have, in fact, been doing
a great deal more than that in the area of national development. This
makes impressive reading: Legislation to cover the discovery of offshore
oil and gas, the provision of an additional $ 50 million for beef
roads in Northern Australia, great water projects on the Ord River / 2 
-2-
in Western Australia and the Nogoa Dam in Queensland.
I mention these here to emphasise that we regard policymaking
as a continuing process not limited to what is said at election
times. In opening the present campaign, I Illustrated our forward
thinking on education and national health. We look to the future, we
move steadily towards cur social objectives but our planning Is always
based on what we, and you as taxpayers, can reasonably affcrd and what
the national economy can accommodate.
We are following the course we charted a year ago. We
do not believe you want us to deviate from it.
Candidates for the Senate who believe that the role of that
chamber is to take the business of the country out of the hands of a
government you have elected, carry vanity to the point of arrogance
and absurdity. When the fsenate has the numbers to defeat the government
of the day on party lines; when It tries to usurp the role of the House of
Representatives, the effectiveness of government must be hampered.
The issues confronting Australia today are large and
critical. Too large and too critical to permit of confusions and
uncertainties from a Senate where the government you have chosen could
be compelled by the vote In this Senate campaign to remain indefinitely in a
minority. 



E MBA RGO NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 7 PM ( EST)
FOR PRESS: 7mvf PM. No. 121/ 1967
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE FOR VICTORIA
Following is the text of a telegram which was sent today by
the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt, to the Premier of Victoria, Sir
Henry Bolte " In your telegram of 10th November, you
said that some local employment work will be necessary
and desirable in certain drought area districts and
sought my confirmation that the cost of such works would
fall within the grant element of Commonwealth assistance
to Victoria. I am pleased to inform you that theCommonwealth
will treat as eligible for grant assistance under drought
assistance arrangements grants made by your Government to
local authorities and government Instrumentalities to piovide
necessary relief work In drought areas. Such grants should,
of course, be limited to cases where the drought is clearly
the cause of the unemployment."
CANBERRA, November, 1967 



FOR PRESS
ND 54 STATEiENT BY THE LINISTER FOR NATION* L DEVELOPI-ENT
( Hon. David Fairbairn, iM. P.)
COMION. IEALTH OFFERS TO FINNCE WORK
ON SNO -Y MOUITAINS ROADS
The Snowy Mountains authority will offer the New South
Wales Government 33A million to help maintain Snowy Mountains
tourist roads for the next 20 years.
The Minister for National Development ( Mr. Fairbairn)
said this today. He said that in addition to contributions for the
maintenance of roads for the use of the public and the S. i. I. A.,
the Authority this summer was prepared to spend '&gt; 50,000 in
restoring the Alpine . ay to its 1965 condition '' hen the
Snowy Mountains Authority, having no further need for the road,
ceased regular maintenance.
This part of the offer was conditional upon the State
accepting future responsibility for the Alpine Way.
Mr. Fairbairn said the $ 3,250,000 would be made
available to the State at $ 200,000 a year for the first ten
years, $ 150,000 a year for the next five years, and $ 100,000
a year for the final five years.
" The Snowy Mountains authority and the Commonwealth
have spent about $ 30 million on the construction of roads to
and within the Snowy Mountains area," Mr. Fairbairn said.
" These roads, including the . Alpine ' ay, were built
for the simple reason that it would have been impossible to get
on with the Snowy i. iountains Scheme without them.
" However, they have proved a major tourist asset to
the State, and this is a side dividend that we are all pleased
to see. 
-2-
" Mvlost of the roads in the area are still being
maintained at the expense of the Snowy Mountains Authority.
" The , uthority's use of the roads is decreasing and
the tourist traffic is increasing rapidly.
" We estimate that in a few years the traffic
attributable to the operation and maintenance of the Scheme
will be less than 2 per cent of the traffic in the area.
" In these circumstances, we think it is fair to begin
a phased change in responsibility for the upkeep of these roads.
" To begin with, the Federal offer will cover more than
half the estimated cost of maintanance.
" The h uthority's need for the _ ilpine Way ended some
years ago, but it is considered reasonable to restore it to its
former condition before it passes into the care of the State."
, tr. Fairbairn said the Snowy Authority was still
studying a suggestion that it should p; y the State a licence fee
for the occupation of land by hydro-electic and other works.
Canberra.
November 15, 1967. 



EMBARGO--NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 7 PM ( EST),
FOR PRESS: 7 O 16 PM. No. 12C/ 1967
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Following Is the text of a telegram which was sent today
by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt, to the Premier of South Australia,
Mr Donald Dunstan: " In your letters of 1st and 8th November about
drought assistance arrangements, you told me of your plans
regarding the rate of interest which your State Intends to
charge on loans for carry-on, restocking etc.; you asked
about the availability of the grants component of the
Commonwealth funds to cover such local employment works
as may be found necessary; and also for rebate on the cost
of rail traffic needed to Import oats from Western Australia
for seed and essential feed purposes to be met out of drought
relief grants from the Commonwealth.
I am pleased to advise that the proposed arrangements
concerning Interest to be charged by South Australia on
loans are acceptable to the Commonwealth.
We are also willing to treat as eligible for grant
assistance under drought assistance arrangements grants made
by your Gcvernment to local authorities and government
Instrumentalities to provide necessary relief work In drought
areas. S2uch grants should, of course, be limited to cases where
the drought Is clearly the cause of the unemployn-ent.
The Commonwealth would also be prepared to
provide reimbursement for rebates of up to 75 per cent, on
proposed movement from Merredin to Port Adelaide of oats
for seed and fodder."
CANBERRA, November, 1967 



FOR PRESS 874 874
IUD 53 STATE . iENTB' THE MINISER FOR NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
( Hon. David Fairbairn, M. P.)
SNOY WATER HELPS FARMERS
The Snowy Miountains Scheme this summer is helping
drought-affected farmers in the iMurray and i. urrumbidgee Valleys.
The iinister for National Development ( 1ir. Fairbairn)
said today that the Scheme would provide nearly one million acre
feet of water this irrigation season for irrigators along these
rivers thus augmenting the natural flows which have been greatly
reduced because of the drought.
He said the Sncwy Mountains Council, in accordance with
the Snowy ;' ountains agreement and in response to requests made
by the River iiurray Commission and the '. ater Conservation and
Irrigation Commission of New South .: ales would provide:
For the lurray, as from iiay 1, 1967 a diversion of
nearly 400,000 acre feet from the Snowy to the
. iurray basin.
For the Tumut/ Murrumbidgee, 70,000 acre feet a month
for eight months from September 1.
" Many representations have been made to me and to the
Snowy ountains Council for releases of water for irrigation
purposes from Lake ucumbene, the principal storage of the
Snowy i. ountains Scheme," 1Mr. Fairbairn said.
" There is apparently a widespread impression that the
lake is full and that the Council is holding back water for use
in generating electricity next winter.
" The situation is that streamflows in the Snowy area
are the lowest recorded since their measurement commenced over
years ago. as a result Lake Eucumbene is only about one
third full. " However, despite the limited resources and the need to
stretch them as far as possible, the Council has guaranteed considerable
quantities of water for the Murray and Miurrumbidgee
irrigators". Mr. F9irbnirn stressed that in the present circumstances
it was not possible for the Couicil to incre;, se these guarantees.
Some reserves had to be held in Lake iucumbene to snfeguard both
irrigators 9nd electricity consumers against the possibility of
an extension of the drought into next senson.
CANBR A.
November 15, 1967 I 



EMBARGO : NOT FOR RELEASE BEFC) RE 9.130 PM ( EST) Cut,
SENATE ELECTION 1967 1 7NOV 1967
448RAR$?
NATIONAL TELECAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR HAROLD HOLT
Thursday, 16 November, 1967
( Following is the text of a televised election talk by the Prime Minister,
Mr Harold Holt. The five-minute programme will be seen In all States
this evening. The ABC will telecast the talk at the following times
New South Walesi Victoria and Tasmania 9. 30 pm; Queensland and TIestern
Australia 9.20 pm,, South Australia 1C pm',
I remind you again that the purpose of this S3enate election
is not to choose an Australian Government. You did that in 1966 for what
would normally be a three-year term. You are now to elect thirty, out of the
full total of sixty, Senators, and those elected will take their places in July
of next year. As you know, the Government you elected last November with
a large majority in the House of Pepresentatives, is actually in a minority
in the Senate. What I now say to you is that the Government you have already
chosen should be given an effective majority in both the House of Representatives
and the Senate. Wj~ ithout this there can only be uncertainty, confusion,
frustration and delays in the work of the national Parliament.
The twelve months since the general ections have not altered
either the basic questions you voted on or your assessment of them. You
said decisively then that the A merican alliance was vital to our security,
that our Viet Nam commitment shared with our A merican and other
allies was based on a correct understanding of the communist threat to
South-East Asia. You said that our economic prosperity and nobody denies
that under my Government we do have a. remarkable economic prosperity
could not be separated from our international security.
We were then and we remain in direct conflict with the Labor
Party on these matters. You completely rejected then, as you must again,
a Labor policy which would undermine our alliances and endanger our
national interests. You will remember that Mr Calwell did not mince his words
at the time. He wanted a retreat to Australian shores. He did not want
any part of Viet Nam. He did not care If we walked out on our allies. But
Mr Calwell's successor is as vague and evasive on this issue as his former
leader was clear and forthright. This deliberate vagueness should deceive
nobody who has read the latest policy decisions of the ALP on Viet Nam.
The makers tf Labor policy, the delegates to the Adelaide
Conference, decided In effect that a Labor Government would demand a
virtual abandonment by America of Its objectives in Viet Nam as the price
of Australan military support. Mr Galwell said of the Adelaide decisions:
" here has been no weakening of Labor opposition to the continuation of the
war and to Australia's part in It. Other prominent Labor men have confirmed
this. / 2 
-2
Fortunately for Australia, the Labor Party is not in a position
to deliver an ultimatum to our American allies. It is not in government.
But you cannot afford, in the course of this Senate election
campaign, to be distracted from the realities of politics and the realities
of our position on these matters, by attempts to turn your minds to other
things. The Labor Party will trade punches on a variety of other issues.
It is surely most revealing that it avoids fight on the basic questions of the
security and prosperity of this country. This kind of shadow sparring may
serve as entertainment intended as a diversion from more critical matters,
but it is no substitute for national leadership in difficult times.
On the matters which profoundly affect the future of our country,
the Labor Party is consistent only in its refusal to come to grips with the
reality of our situation in the Pacific. Labor's isolationism was once
merely a socialistic attitude, a theatrical posture. Nowit is a policy full
of danger for Australia, formulated and promoted by the many left-wing
elements of the ALP who dominate its foreign pclicy decisions. You will
find these attitudes strongly advanced by Labor's left-wing leaders in the
Senate. It would be hazardous folly to give them the numbers in that Chamber
to defeat the Government on matters crucial to the security of this country.
CANBERRA, 16 November, 1967. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR R'ELEASE BEFORE 7.15 PM
Senate Election 1967 Q.
NATIONAL BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER 4' ORAHi
( MR HAROLD HOLT,
Friday, 17th November, 1967
( Following Is the text of a broadcast to be made by the Prime Mini ster, Mr
Holt, over the ABC's network at 7. 15 pm. ( EST) this evening)~
My colleagues and I don't conduct the business of this country
as though It were a popularity contest. We deal in a responsible way with
the problems and opportunities that come to us,* We need your support, of
course, if we are to govern.
You are not likely to take seriously the curious propaganda.
line pit forward by the Leader of the Labor Party, that this magnificent
country of ours is failing to male good progress. But perhaps we ought to
get the record straight. In the few minutes of this broadcast, I cannot give
you a complete story about the domestic achievements of my own Governmient
and the earlier Governments with which I have been associated. But I can
give you a few highlights.
Consider national health. The aim of our National Health
Scheme is to provide every citizen with a high level of medical and hospital
services and without financial hardship. Commonwealth money, in
increasing amounts, makes possible our hospital benefits, our medical
benefits, and the pensioner medical services and pharmaceutical benefits.
We estimate that for this financial year, we shall spend on the nation's
health more than $ 270 million. In the last full year of a Labor Government,
slightly more than $ 12 million was spent on health.
Turn to our record on education. Before we came to government,
Commonwealth expenditure on education was small, because education was
particularly regarded as a State responsibility. It still is, but we have
taken the lead in many new ventures in the education field. I can only
s u min arise them here. We Instituted a system of university grants to
the States and we established the Australian Universities Commission.
We greatly expanded the system of Commonwealth scholarships. In
partnership with the States, we have embarked on a major programme to
establish colleges of advanced education. We have given grants to the
States for science laboratories in government and independent schools.
This is only a sketchy outline of a programme on education
which we see as a continuing responsibility.
It was a Government of which I was a member which first
introduced child endowment into Australia. I had the honour of bringing
the bill before the House of Representatives. Endowment is, we are glad
to report, now a large item in our yearly Budget. / 12 
-2-
At the other end of the scale, we can point to an impressive
record in our provision to meet the needs of the aged. Apart from pensions,
adequate housing for the aged has been a special innovation in our period
of government. These, I repeat, are only pointers to the Government record.
But they are timely when our opponents paint such a gloomy picture of the
state of the nation. However dreary statistics might be, they give the lie
to the pessimists. They show, for example, that a bigger percentage of
Australians own, or are in process of acquiring, their own homes than
exists in any other part of the world. We rank second only to the United
States when it comes to the availability of motor vehicles in the population.
Our record of sustained employment has not been surpassed in any free
industr ielised country.
So the general picture, as we approach this Senate election
is, as the evidence of your own observation will confirm, that of a healthy
and flourishing economy.
We believe as Liberals that we have played an important part
in bringing about the things we enjoy over a long period of Liberal
leadership. We firmly believe that the free enterprise system we encourage
is preferable to the socialist concepts of our opponents, and is proved
infinitely better by the hard test of results. We always discover, when an
election is due, that our opponents do not relish the facts of growth and
prosperity. They like even less being reminded that our record of
achievement on the Irme front is set in the frame work of a realistic
external policy, and that this external policy has the support of the nation.
Canberra, 17th November, 1967 



S" S PM. No. 122/ 1967
DEWLUATION CF POUND STERLING
Statement by the Frime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Cabinet has considered the situation created by
the British Government's announcement of the devaluation of the Found
Sterling by 14. 3 per cent. It has decided that there shall be no change
made in the currency value of the Australian Dollar.
The decision has been taken after considering the
views of the Governor and Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank and
of senior Government officials.
Cabinet recognised that the effects of this decision
w: ill fall unevenly on the Australian economy as come industries,
particularly some primary industries, are more closely linked with the
British market than others. These difficulties, some of them critical,
are now under urgent examination to find appropriate ways and means
of overcoming the problems.
CANBERRA, 2Sth November, 1967 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEAS E BE-POR-E. 7.15 PM
DECISION ON AUSTRALIAN CURRENCY
NATIONAL TELECAST AND BROADCAST BY THE 24NOI
PRIME MINISTER, MVR HAROLD HOLT. NOOV V
21ST NOVEMBER, 1967 / 8AR
yesterday, the Australian Government made its decision
to maintain the existing value of the Australian Dollar, following the
devaluation of the Pound Sterling. It was an historic decision for Australia
a difficult decision, also but In a sense It showed that we had come of
age as a nation. We are not a large country In terms of population, but
we loom large through our International trade. We rank amongst the
twelve leading trading nations of the world. At the time we took our
decision, we knew that of the other eleven, while Britain had devalued its
currency, the remaining ten had decided to maintain their currency values
undisturbed. After thoroughly reviewing our own situation, we decided
that we should, also. In the past, Australia's trade has been so closely linked
with that of Britain that, when Britain devalued her currency last In 1949,
we followed her, so that the relationship between our currency and hers
remained unchanged. The situation today Is vastly different.
I want to tell you why we made this significant bie ak with
the past. The rate of exchange between our Australian currency and the
Pound Sterling has been unchanged since 1931, but In that period there has
been a transformation of world economic and financial relationships. The
Australian Dollar today Is a currency in its own right. It has to stand on
its own feet and It has shown itself capable of doing so. We have an enviable
reputation abroad for political and economic stability. This has helped us
to attract much capital and much interest on the part of other countries.
But to pursue this Independence we have to be strong in our own right.
In other days, Britain was our best customer, and we still
remain one of her best markets. But times have changed. We have
diversified our trade and strengthened our economy on a broader base.
While primary produce still bulks largest In our overseas earnlings, and
Britain is a principal market, we are diversifying rapidly with our exports
of minerals and manufactured goods. In fact, Japan has now become our
largest market. These things had to be taken into account when we took
stock of what we should do. We are preserving the existing relationship
with other currencies like the United States Dollar, most Western
European currencies, as well as those of Japan, South Africa and a
number of Sterling area countries.
Because our trade with Britain is still important, some
may have thought that we should have followed Sterling down, if not all
the way, by devaluing our Dollar against other currencies. But trade and
commerce with the countries to which those currencies belong is far
greater In total now than our trade with Great Britain, and all the largest
of them had decided not to devalue. They took their decisions, no doubt,
on a judgment of their own Interests. But there was also, I believe, a
significant element of International co-operation about It In an attempt to
achieve a stronger world economy. They all saw that by devaluing / 2 
2-
themselves, they might help to bring about a world-wide-run of competitive
exchange a justments which could have caused international monetary
chaos. In Australia's own case, while some of our exporters
would have gained a temporary increase in their Incomes had we devalued,
the long term outlook over the whole area of our economy and our
international trading relationships, would have been heavily to our
disadvantage We certainly would not have helped Britain had we followed
her down. There is a mutual Interest for us In seeing Sterling regain
its strength) and Britain has, In fect, looked to us to do precisely what
we have decided to do. In the long term, a growing British economy will
offer larger market opportunities for world traders.
In other ways, too, our decision to hold the dollar at its
present level avoids incurring long term liabilities. For Instance, our
Indebtedness to the United States is something like 000 million. If
we had devalued to the same degree as Britain we would have added, in
effect, $ 1U5140 million to this debt right away. It Is true In the same
sense -that we lose something like $ A90 million from our sterling balances,
but this is offset by a reduction in real terms of our Sterling indebtedness
in the United Kingdom. It Is, of course, one thing for us to take a decision and
another thing to live with that decision. But we are in a strong economic
position with a comfortable level of external reserves.* It was imperative
that we did nothing to undermine confidence in the Australian Dollar. We
believe that by acting as we have we are protecting the Dollar.
Let me say something of the effect that devaluation would
have had on the home front. One likely effect would have been a rise In
costs and prices. This would affect every housewife and every wage earner.
While we have experienced some price rises, we have been free of serious
inflation now for a number of years. There would also have been new
burdens on certain areas of our manufacturing In dustries which would
have disturbed the present stability we enjoy, and caused unnecessary
difficulties in programmes of development and expansion.
I have said that some of our exporters would gain a
temporary Increase in their Incomes, but the cost of our Imports from
those countries which have not devalued and all the other payments we
make to them would be increased. These additional costs would spread
with multiplying effects through the economy.
To arrest inflationary forces, we would have had to adopt
strong measures of restraint tighter money, perhaps more taxation and
so on. This Is what Britain has had to do.
Domestic inflation is no respecter of persons. It strikes
at exp orters as well as everybody else, and any gains from higher
overseas earnings would have been offset to some degree, and perhaps
more than offset, by higher costs at home.
I am sure the decision we have taken Is the right one, and
indeed the only one which measures up to our long term needs and the
standing of our currency in the world today. The fact that we have been
able to take up this independent position will, I hope, be a source of pride
e a / 3 
-3
to all Australians because it demonstrates tbestrength--of -our currency
and the sound economic position of the nation.
I do not minimise the fact that there will be problems for
many associated with this decision. I do not believe them to be nearly
as great, or as numerous, as the problems which would have arisen
had we devalued along with Britain. We recognised that by not following
Sterling down, some Industries who still depend largely on selling theli
products In Britain could be adversely affected, perhaps critically so.
That goes for rural Industries producing for export. There are other
Industries, like wool, which sell on a world market, but whose prices
can be affected either by Sterling devaluation or by other measures the
British Government has taken. These industries have already been
labouring under difficulties due to falling prices, rising costs, drought,
or a combination of these factors.
It was apparent to us, however, that since the impact
would vary from in dustry to industry creating a different set of problems
for each, the right course would be to study their problem intensively,
Tanhde dGeocvideer nwmheantt mIse aascutirnegs smpiegehdti lbye onne tcheiss. s arIyn Icno enascuhlt aptiaornti cwuiltahr thcease.,
Economic Committee of Cabinet, it is arranging for an urgent examinAtion
of areas of industry likely to be adversely affected by the Government's
decision. We shall look to positive measures to ensure that a proper
balance is maintained over the whole range of our economy.
There will undoubtedly be difficulties in some sectors of the
economy in the short term. But I am confident they will not be permanent,
nor will they be damaging In the long term. I am sure that you, my
fellow Australians, will recognise the rightness of what we have done.
I am confident that as a people we can meet whatever problems arise
during the period of readjustment which lies ahead for some of our
industries. These are the responsibilities which fall on us now that
we have established a position of Independence in the world of International
finance and now that we have demonstrated over a considerable period
our capacity to maintain a stable and progressive economy at home.
We accept, those responsibilities gladly, cheerfully and confidently. 



EMBP'RGC: NCT FOR REL7_ 3A0 IS B FO ' 76~~ P
Senate Election 19c. 67 k
NATIONA-L BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER
( MR HAROLD HCLT) 21ST NOVEMBER, 1967
( Following Is the text of a broadcast to be made by the Prime Minister,
Mr Holt, over the ABC' ' s network at 7. 55 pm ( EST) this evening'
During this S3enate election campaign, we heard from our
opponents some very curious interpretations of the now famous A-. delaide
decision of the F'ederal ALP Conference on Viet Nam. The masters of
Labor policy resolved that a Labor Government would withdraw cur armed
forces if the United States did not consent to terms laid down by the A LP.
it is an interesting fact that the Victorian Stat e Conference
of the ALP in June a month before the Adelaide meeting carried a
resolution very similar to the one later accepted by the Federal Conference.
The Victorian resolution also said and I quote:
" A1t Federal Conference and elsewhere, the A LP policy on
the need to withdraw Australian troops should be stated in an
unambiguous and unequivocal way so as to prevent any
confusion in the public mind."
It is also worth recording that the official Victorian Labor Party newspaper
" Fact" said after the Federal Conference that the Adelaide decisions had
formally underpinned Labor's opposition to the Viet Nam war and had
reiterated the position formerly stated by Mr Arthur Calwell.
The Victorian Labor President, Mr W. Brown, said on August 13
that the Labor Party was moving further to the left. He went on:
" The Conference had strengthened policy on the Viet Nam
war. It attached a meaningful set of objectives to what
basically was and remains a ' troops out' policy."
Mr Brown added these significant words " Possibly we could
now say that it is a policy of ' troops out unless..."'
As for Mr Calwell, he said that the Adelaide decisions showed
there had been no weakening of Labor opposition to the continuation of the
war and to Australia's part in it.
Now the history of this episode shows pretty clearly that the
Adelaide resolution was the brainchild of the Left-Wing Victorian Branch
of the ALP. Not so long ago, the present Leader of the Federal Parliamentary
Labor Party had some unkind things to say about the leftists of the Victorian
ALP. One would have thought that he favoured radical changes In the
Labor Party's policy on Viet Nam. But when the masters of Labor policy
spoke in Adelaide, when they wrote the policy down, the Parliamentary
Leader accepted it. He had to accept it or get out. / 2 
-2-
But what happens? Mr Whitlam knows that the policy he must
carry out is repugnant to the Australian people so he pretends that it does
not mean what it says. He makes great play of the phrase " holding
operations". He says vaguely that the war may be over in two years. He
suggests that the United States would give a kindly ear to the suggestions
that it should leave the North Vietnamese free to infiltrate the South and
that the American troops in the South should be content to defend themselves.
This ambiguous attitude of the Opposition Leader is the crux of
this campaign so far as the Viet Nam issue is concerned. It is farcical for
him to assert that the United States would act upon, or even consider, the
terms laid down by the Adelaide ALP Conference. The terms indeed could
formally be described as an ultimatum.
It is not good enough for the Leader of the Opposition to say that
he will answer awkward questions about Labor policy two years from now.
He is asking for votes today and he should tell Australia today what a Labor
Government would do about the orders it has received from the policy-makers
of the ALP.
a 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 123/ 1967
DISCUSSIONS WITH REPRESENTATIVE S OF
THE ASSOCIATE" D CHA MER S OF MANUFACTURES
Stat ement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
At the request of the Associated 1Chambers of Manufactures,
I had a discussion this morning with the Federal President, Mr F. C.
Curtis, and the six State Presidents of the Chambersi The meeting had
been sought to inforain me of views held by the members of AGMA on
problems which could arise for manuf atiring Industry consequential
upon the British devaluation of sterling and the Australian Gvrmnts
decision to maintain the existing value of the Australian dollar.
It was put to me that difficulties could arise in various
directions. There could be an increased penetration of the Australian
market by British exports taking advantage of the favourable position
created for them by the sterling devaluation. The British competitive
edge was likely to be felt not only on the Australian market, but In those
export markets particularly New Zealand where Australian manufactures
had been making some headway. Problems could arise for individual
manufactures from cancellation of orders as well as from a reduced share
of the Australian and export markets.
I assured the manufacturers' delegation that the Government
was fully conscious of the importance to the Australian economy and our
national well-being, of healthy and expanding manufacturing Industries.
This had been stressed by me in a number of statements I had made in
the course of this year. We would therefore wish to be helpful In meeting
these problems. I said It was probable that the problems for different
Australian industries would emerge at different times and to different
degrees. This seemed to me to call for a selective approach rather than
for one across the board which ACMA had proposed. I pointed to the
machinery already in existence for the protection of Australian manufactures,
Including the Tariff Board and the special advisory authority system. A
special advisory authority had been set up to ensure that in those cases where
the threat, or actuality, of serious damage could be demonstrated, remedial
action could be taken speedily with safeguards of subsequent Tariff Board
enquiry. I recommended the revival of the industry panel system which
had previously proved helpful working in co-operation with the Department
of Trade and Industry. This would permit a thorough examination of the
facts and, where justified, assist in the preparation of a case to the
Government seeking emergency action by the special advisory authority.
I told the representatives of ACMA that study had already
commenced on the effects of the British decision, and undertook to bring
their views to the meeting of Cabinet scheduled for next week.
I have also agreed that, within the fortnight following that meeting, a a e e / 2 
-2-
I would arrange for ACMA representatives to meet with the Economic
Committee of Cabinet. This interval of time would enable the Government
and the Chambers to form a clearer picture of the likely consequences and
the experience of their members in the period immediately following the
British devaluation.
CANBERRA, 22nd November, 1967
BACKGROUND: The ACMA delegation comprised
Mr Mr Mr Mr Mr Mr Mr Mr Frank R. Curtis, President
W. W. Pettingell, Vice President
M. I. MacTaggart, President, New South Wales
L. H. Waite, President, Victoria
W. Hughes, President, Western Australia
A. Gehrmann, President, Queensland
S. Thyne, President, Tasmania
W. J. Henderson, Assistant Director. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASIEPBEFORE 7.15 PNJ0-"
Senate Election 1967
FINAL MESSAGE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER
( MR HAROLD HOLT)
22ND NOVEMIBER, 1967
( This final message will be broadcast and telecast nationally this evening.
The ABC will broadcast the talk at 7.15 pm ( EST) and the telecast will be
at 8.30 pm 
This is my last opportunity to speak directly to you all before
you vote on Sattirday. So I would like to sum up this Senate campaign as
I see it. You will all know by now that this is not an election to choose a
government. YVou exercised that choice a year ago and your answer was
decisively In my Government's favour. On Saturday, your responsibility
is to elect thirty Senators five from each State and therefore I ask you
by your vote to give us the majority we need In the Senate. You can do this
by electing a majority of Government Senators In each of the six States.
The tirst and most obvious reason for doing this is that we cannot
have the most effective administration If a Government with a big majority
In the House of Representatives the popular House-lacks a majority in
the Senate. If you ask why, the answer may be stated quite simply.
Although the Senate Is intended to function as a House safeguarding State
interests and as a House of Review, It acts so far as the ALP is concerned
as a party House with a regimented vote.
I should also point out that the Senate is always fairly close to
being evenly divided because it is elected by the proportional system of
voting. That Is an additional reason why I ask for a solid Government vote
in all States. Effective government Is, of course, obviously necessary, but let
me put to you an even more important reason why I ask for your Senate
votes. I am not simply asking you to reaffirm what you said a year ago.
I put the matter with more urgency than that. All of us in the Government
would welcome from you today a repudiation of what the policy-makers of
the Labor Party decided in-Adlaide in July. The Federal Parliamentary
Labor Party Is under direction from the Federal Conference of the ALP to
advocate withdrawal of our armed forces from Viet Nam If the United States
does not bow to the Labor Party's demands.
This is serious enough, but more serious, I suggest, Is the
attitude now taken up by the Leader of the Opposition. His interpretation
of his Federal Conference's binding decision must alarm all thoughtful
Australians. We can only read Into his devious explanations his demand
for cessation of the bombing of North Vietnam and for converting the
conflict into a ' holding operation' that the communists of North Viet Nam
should have unopposed access to the South with no restraint on their
capacity to carry the war to our own troops and those of our allies, and
that our Australian troops and the Americans should merely sit down and try to
defend themselves. We are then told that If these courses are not followed,
a Labor Government would pull out our troops. e e. e / 2 
-2
The Leader of the Opposition puts forward neither a military nor
a political solution. He talks about my Government encouraging escalation
of the war, yet a plain man's view must be that he is encouraging defeat.
Let us not make any mistake about the significance of Labor's
policy on Viet Nam. This policy, and all it implies, should be understood
by e very Australian as It will be understood by our friends and allies. The
Federal Conference of the Labor Party has refused to accept the nation's
verdict on Viet Nam and external security. It has contemptuously rejected
the electorate's decision a decision reached only seven months before the
Conference met and has threatened to break with the United States on
South-East Asian policy. Anyone would be blind who cannot see this.
The Leader of the Opposition suggests that Issues that seemed
clear a year ago are not so clear now. They were never clear to the Labor
Party. As far as we are concerned, these things are very clear
That South Viet Nam has a right to choose its own way of life;
That a communist takeover in South-East Asia would be contrary
to the vital interests of Australia;
That our alliance with the United States must be preserved! and
That we want peace as much as the Labor Party says it wants
peace but we want peace on decent terms a just and
enduring peace.
The Leader of the Opposition has a taste for challenges these days.
Well, let him stand up in public and read in a loud, clear voice and without
running away from it, the actual resolution carried by the Federal ALP
Conference in Adelaide. It has been hailed by Mr Arthur Galwell, and other
leading Labor spokesmen. So why should Mr Whitlam be so elusive about
his party line? It is understandable, of course, that the Labor Party should, in
this campaign, be eager to talk about anything except the country's external
policy. But even when our opponents talk about the Australian scene it is all
sour grapes. You may recall that a few weeks ago the Opposition was very
peevish when we announced substantial financial help for the Ord River
project in Western Australia and the Nogoa Dam project In Queensland.
They were critical when we gave effect to our promises to provide an
additional $ 50 million for beef roads. They were peevish, incensed and
un happy because these decisions were welcomed by people directly affected
all over Australia. If you think our opponents' reluctance to be pleased by thes e
things Is rather childish, what about the story they have been telling you
about the state of the nation? When the Leader of the Opposition opened
his campaign on the night of November 13, you would have thought this
country was on its Last legs. He was brimming over with synthetic gloom.
He saw A ustralia as a backward, poverty-stricken, rejected country
and we the Government were cast in the role of the villains. That kind
of political childishness only highlights the truths about the P: ustralian scene
today. s. 
3-
We are in an almost fantastic growth period and our economic
progress is remarkable by any standards. I would not be so fond or
foolish as to say that our governments since 1949 have been the magicians
who made all this possible. But I can fairly say that sound and stable
government has created the climate In which our national prosperity has
flourished. We enjoy one of the highest standards of living In the world
and there Is no limit to our potential if we go about this in the right way.
I say " in the right way" because the most sensible and practical
domestic programme designed to promote national growth and individual
welfare has little reality unless it Is set In the framework of a foreign
policy cementing our security. You can find plenty of shifting sand in
Labor's policy, but not much cement.
I said at the outset that we cannot have effective administration
unless the Government of the day In command of the popular House also has
a majority voice In rhe Senate.
That is a business-like reason for voting for the Government's
candidates on November
1 also put It to you that It would be bad for Australia to
record a vote which could be Interpreted at home and abroad as support
for the dangerous policy decisions taken by the Federal ALP Conference In
Adelaide. I end this message with the words I used In opening the
campaign what we plan for the well-being and security of Australia and
the development of our country must not be put at risk. 



FOR PISS 28NOV 196
1._ 94F^ P. M. No. 127/ lo67.
TASi-fIAN APPLE AI\ N FEAR IN. BUSTRY
Exchange of Telegrans between the Prime Minister and
the Premier of Tasmania
Following are texts of telegrams exchanged between the Prime
Minister, i* r. Holt, and the Premier of Tasmania, IMr. Reece, regarding
the impact on the apple and pear industry of the British devaluation:-
Telegram to Prime Minister fro Mr. Reece date. d 22nd Noiemn
" Strongly request that you arrange discussions in Canberra if
desired to per;, ni my Government and State fruit Board to ; make
submissions concerning serious effect of British devaluation and
suggested increase in overseas shipping freights on Tasmanian apple
and pear industry. Also seek clarity on press statement of Mr.
Anthony of 13th November that relief for growers of fruit held in
Suez Canal be first looked into by State Government as I un'. erstand
all relevant Tasmanian information has already been furnished by
representatives of the industry."
Telegram to Mr. eece froPrime I. nister dated 24. November
" Reference your telep. ram 22nd November concerning possible
impact on Tasmanian Apple and Pear InCustry of devaluation of
Pound Sterling and proposed increase in overseas shipping freights.
In my announcement earlier this week of the Government's
decision to maintain the existing value of Australian dollar, I said
that we were arranging for an urgent examination of areas of industry
likely to be adversely affected by the Government's decision. As
part of this examination, my colleague, the Minister for Primary
Industry, has sought information from the Australian Apple and Pear
Board of the full implications of the effects of the British
devaluation on the apple and pear industry. It is considered . that
the Board would, in the first instance, be in the best position to
assess these implications.
Regarding the suggested increase in overseas shipping
freights, I understand that, while the proposal is that the
sterling rate be increased, the payments in Australian currency to
meet the adjusted freight rates should be lower. I am informed
that there should, in fact, be a decrease in freight paid by
Australian exporters to the United ' ingdom. and the Continent., The
actual extent of any freight movement will be dete rined in
negotiations with the Australian shipper body in this trade on
which the Australian Apple and Pear Board is represented.
You referred to a recent oress statement by the Minister
for Primary Industry concerning Australian apples and pears held
in the Suez Canal. My colleague' 3 statement of 1lth November
made reference to the difficulty of ascertaining identity of and
extent to which individual growers are actually experiencing hardship.
Information needs to be collected from all States for this
ourpose. Tasmanian information has been received from State Fruit
board thro gh Apple and Pear Board. All Tasmanian growers wiith
fruit in the Canal are listed but I should point out that it is
not possible to dissect from it precisely which cases are hardship 
cases. As an illustration, one grower listed has six cases in the
Canal out of a total season's shipment of nearly seven thousand
cases but the State Board has given no comment as to whether this
case ( or several similar ones) is to be considered a hardship case
or not. The Minister's statement also pointed out that if it is
established that some growers whose fruit is involved are
experiencing financial difficulties the provision of relief for
them is a matter that would normally be looked into by the State
Governments concerned in the first instance."
CANBERRA 24th November, 1967: 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 125/ 196 7
APPOINTMENTS TO COUNCIL FOR ABORIG" ANAL AFFAIRS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt.
Following the -decision announced on 2nd November to
establish a Council for Aboriginal Affairs, significant progress has been
made. The Members of the Council In addition to the Chairman,
Dr Coombes, whose appoint m ent was announced at that time, have now
been decided upon. They are Professor W i E. H. Stanner, MA, Ph. D, and
Mr Barrie Dexter, MA ( Hons.) Dip. Ed. Mr Dexter will be the executive
member of the Council and will direct the Commonwealth Office of
Aboriginal Affairs1 which Is being established to serve the Councili
Professor Stanner Is Professor of Anthropology and
Sociology in the Institute of Advanced Studies of the Australian National
University. He has had a long personal and academic association with the
aboriginal people and will bring to bear extensive knowledge of their life
and culture on the problems of their advancement. He has also had
extensive experience as an anthropologist in Africa and the South S13eas and
is familiar with policies being adopted in these and other areas in the
advancement of native peoples.
Mr Dexter has, since 1964, been Australian Ambassador
in Laos. He has had a distinguished career in the Department of External
Affairs and has seen service in the USA, Africa and South East Asia.
Mr Dexter will return from Laos early in the New Year to take up his new
appointment. Work is already In progress on the establishment of
the office and Members of the Council will be establishing early contact
with Commonwealth and State authorities in the field, with academic and
other groups with Interest in, and knowledge relevant to aboriginal
advancement and with representative groups of the aboriginal people
themselves. I am confident that, when these contacts have been
established, prompt and effective progress will be made in the necessary
studies and in the formulation of Commonwealth policies for aboriginal
advancement.
CANBERRA, 24 November, 1967 



FOR PRESS: I4DMC " g FM. No. 126/ 1967
VSENATE ELECTION
Eve of Poll Message from the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
When you vote for a government or a party, you expect
to know where it stands on the big issues affecting the nation's security and
well-being. I have stated all through this campaign that the great issue
of the 1966 House of Representatives election whether we should desert our
allies in time of conflict is still the critical question we all have to answer.
You know where I stand on this matter. You know
where the Government stands. W.! here do the Labor Party and its leaders
stand? We know where some leading Labor members stand.
They say their present policy is, in essence, the same as at the last general
election. We cannot say for certain where the Leader, Mr WhItlam stands.
He has conducted so evasive an action since this campaign began that he
must have misled even himself.
So we are forced back to the policy itself the
policy laid down by the ALP Federal Conference binding under the rules of
the ALP on all Labor members, including Mr Whitlam.
At the Adelaide Conference in August, the ALP declared
itself to be opposed to the continuance of the war in Viet Nam and to
Australian participation in it. It laid down conditions which, if not accepted
by our American allies, would lead to withdrawal by a Labor-led Australian
Government of our armed forces. Writing in " Fact", the official Labor
newspaper, shortly after this conference, Mr Calwell s; id
" In its present mood, the United States will not accept any
one of the conditions a Labor Government would lay down, and
it would rather pull out altogether and if it does this it will
abandon its entire Asian communist containment policy and
most of its Pacific Ocean bases, including Okinawa and Taiwan.
It will resume its policy of isolation.
Does Mir WAhitlam accept or reject Mr Calwell's
assessment of the United ' 7tates' reaction to Labor's conditions? Does he
persist in believing that these conditions would promote an alliance with
America, which he now claims 1tfs party recognises to be of such crucial
Importance to Australia? Instead of saying In simple terms what Labor's policy
is, the Leader of the Opposition has tried to make it impossible for the
electors to understand Labor policy. This kind of political smokescreen
is not good enough when the security of the nation Is Involved. It Is not good
enough to hide behind the word " peace" if what you mean by peace is retreat,
stagnation or surrender. */ 2 
-2-
I ask the Australian electorate to support us at the
polls not only for reasons of high national policy but for the good and
practical reasons that we cannot have an efficient administration unless
the Government, with a clear-cut mandate of two years to run, has a
majority voice in both Houses of Parliament.
Far-reaching and historic decisons we have taken
even in the heat of this campaign offer you the most potent cause for
ensuring that the business of government is not impeded by hostile
Senate groupings in the critical months ahead.
When in due course the country is called upon to
make its choice of a government, you will be able to decide then whether
the Labor Party should be given an opportunity to demonstrate its capacity
or incapacity to govern. Meanwhile, there are formidable tasks in front of us,
your present government. A. clear vote for the Government in this Senate
election will allow us to get on with the job.
CANBERRA, 24 November, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 128/ 1967
SATELLITE IN ORBIT
The Minister for Supply, Senator Henty, rang direct
from Woomera this afternoon to advise the Prime Minister in Canberra
that Australia's first satellite was in orbit.
Mr Holt asked Senator Henty to pass on his congratulations
to all concerned with the project. The Prime Minister described it as a
notable scientific achievement demonstrating the remarkable advance
by Australia in this field. It was a tribute to our scientists and to
successful co-operation with scientists of other nations.
CANBERRA, 29th November, 1967 



FOR PRESS: OOC/ P FM. No. 130/ 1967
REQUEST IN LORD B RUCE'S WILL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
The Government has been advised from Equity Trustees,
the Administrators of the V.' ill of the late Lord Bruce, that the former
Prime Minister had requested that his ashes should be scattered
over Canberra. The Government has approved of this being done and will
ask the RAAF to perform the ceremony. The Government will arrange
for a special memorial service to be held during the scattering of the
ashes. It feels that the service should be fully representative of the
Parliament and it intends, therefore, to hold the ceremonies on a
suitable occasion after the resumption of Parliament next year.
CANBERRA, November, 1967 



,\ IRsDEP.
R e r,
FOR PRESS C ~ D EC 1967 PM. NO0. 129/ 1967
STERLING DEVALUATION: CAB I NET DISCUSSES
EFFECTS ON AUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
When announcing on 20th November the decision of the
Government that there should be no change made In the value of the
Australian Dollar following the British Government's amnouucement of,
devaluation of the Pound Sterling, I said that Cabinet recognised that the
effects of this decision would fall unevenly on the Australian economy,
I referred to the fact that some industries, particularly some primary
industries, are more closely linked with the British market than others,
and commented that the difficulties of affected industries were currently
under urgent examination to find appropriate ways and means of overcoming
their problems. Cabinet has had before It today a series of papers arising
out of this examination by Departments. Our discussion this morning
was directed to a paper prepared by the Treasury which dealt with the
more general Implications, together with the economic context In which
they should be seen. This paper covered recent developments overseas,
Including the extent of devaluations in various countries; our reserves
position and balance of payments prospects; our general budget position
and prospects; and trends in the Australian economy.
We recognised the difficulty, especially at this early
stage, of making anything in the nature of precise calculations of the
effects on Australia of the recent devaluations. However, It is now clear
that the Sterling devaluation has not been accompanied by an extensive
chain of devaluations on the part of other countries. Our holdings of
gold and foreign exchange now amount to about 070 million. As our
drawing rights with the International Monetary Fund stand at $ 630 million,
our total first and second line reserves amount to about $ 1,700 million.
Thus, our reserves position is quite strong.
While it Is not possible to make a precise assessment of
the direct and Indirect effects of the overseas devaluations on our balance
of payments for the remainder of the year, we believe that, so far as the
direct effect Is concerned, apart from the downward adjustments in our
Sterling balances, the net effect of the devaluations will be quite small.
We have every confidence in the longer term situation of our balance of
payments. We do not believe that the devaluations are likely to lead
to any large net effect on this year's Budget, apart from any decisions we
might take to deal with problems arising from them. We have concluded
from our study of the Treasury paper that, faced as we are with these
moderate devaluations by countries , which account for only a relatively
small proportion of our total trade, and which have little slack to expand
outward by more than a few per cent, the net direct effects on our
domestic economy as a whole should be quite small. There is reason to
believe that in the longer term, the effects on our economy should be
o. e / 2 
-2
favourable. We are not in a position, however-to. make firm judgments
as to indirect effects which might flow from the conditions now being
experienced throughout the world as a result of the devaluation of a major
currency. We considered this afternoon the effects of Sterling
devaluation on rural industry, secondary industry, minerals and metals,
freight rates and our Territories. These were dealt with in papers
prepared by the Departments of Trade and Industry, National Development,
Primary Industry and Territories.
Total exports to all markets of rural products In 1966-67
amounted to 051 million. Of this total, some $ 408 million, or twenty
per cent, was exported to Britain and other countries which have devalued.
The Minister for Primary Industry has asked all the Commonwealth
Marketing Boards to examine as a matter of urgency and advise him of
their view of the full Implications of the effects of the British devaluation
on the industries with which they are concerned. It is evident that it
will be some time before a full assessment of the effects on all industries
can be made, but Cabinet hopes to have a more complete picture before
the meetings it will be holding In the week of 11th December.
We have already agreed, at their request, to meet
representatives of t he manufacturing industries that week, and are
considering a variety of representations and requests from other
Industries. The Cabinet has made a good deal of progress in its
consideration of a programme of export Incentives. It has been asked
by industry representatives to defer a decision on this until the effects of
devaluation can be more clearly seen. However, it is our desire to
announce our export incentives programme In the course of the next few
weeks. We shall do this after taking into account the views of Industry.
CANBERRA, November, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: X-S~ 1
13 DEC W PM. No. 131/ 1967
EXHIBITION OF AUSTRALIAN PAINTING IN INDIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
An exhibition of contemporary A ustralian painting, which
will be seen in several Indian cities over the next few weeks, has opened
in New Delhi. The exhibition is being sponsored by the Commonwealth
Government in co-operation with the Government of India, the Indian
Education Ministry and the Indian Academy of Art.
The exhibition comprises thirty-four paintings. Fourteen
have come from the Australian exhibition at EXPO 67 in Montreal and the
remainder, with two exceptions, from the National Collection. The
exceptions are " The Billy Boy" by William Dobell, lent by the Australian
WTar Memorial, and an Arthur Boyd from a private collection.
The paintings were selected on behalf of the Art Advisory
Board by one of its members, Mr Robert Campbell, CMG, OBE.
Mr Campbell, a former Director of the National Gallery
of South Australia, will travel in India with the exhibition. After New Delhi,
the exhibition will go to Calcutta, Madras and Bombay over a period of
about two and a half months.
It Is hoped that arrangements can be made for the
exhibition to go to Pakistan at the end of the Indian tour.
The exhibition had its origin in the joint communique
issued by the Australian Minister for External Affairs and the Indian Minister
of E~ xternal Affairs at the conclusion of Mr Hasluck's visit to India in March,
1966. The communique stated that increased cultural exchanges would offer
further opportunities for close constructive friendship between India and
Australia. Both Ministers agreed to give immediate attention to developing
further means by which these exchanges might be usefully increased.
The exhibition will further this objec tive and give an
insight into the diversity and vigour of contemporary Australian painting.
UCANBERRA, December, 1967. 



FOR PRESS: 1 L 1Bj RV PM. No. 132/ 1967
SENIOR GOVERNMENT APPOINTMENTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Sir Edwin Hicks, Secretary to the Department of Defence,
will become Australia's High Commissioner to New Zealand early next
year. He will be succeeded by Sir Henry Bland, at present Secretary
to the Department of Labour and National Service. S11ir Henry's appointment
will be from 3th January, 1968.
Sir Edwin has distinguished himself as one of the Commonwealth's
most able administrators during his eleven years as Permanent
Head of the Department of Defence and, prior to that, when S3ecretary to the
Department of Air from 1951 to 1956. During a period of increased defence
activity, Sir Edwin served in the finest traditions of the Public Service and
the Government Is fortunate that his valued service and advice will be
retained through his acceptance now of the post of High Commissiloner to
New Zealand. Sir Edwin's intimate knowledge of a wide spectrum of
Government policy should prove invaluable In his new post.
The new Secretary to the Department of Defence, Sir Henry
Bland, Is also one of Australia's foremost administrators. A graduate in
law from Sydney University, he was formerly Agent-General for New South
" Hales in London. He joined the Department of Labour and National Service
in 19,46 and, in 1952, at the age of 42, became Cecretary to that Department.
S ir Henry has led numerous A us tralian delegations to conferences of the
International Labour Organization and has had wide and lengthy experience
in public administration. It Is expected that Cabinet will tomorrow have discussions
directed to. the appointment of a successor to the post of Fecretary to the
Department of Labour and National Service.
CANBERRA, 6 December, 1967 



iDEC 1W
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 133/ 1c, 7
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
The Prime Minister of India, Mrs Indira Gandhi, will
make an official visit to Australia from 13th to 17th January at the
invitation of the Australian Government. She will visit Canberra,
Sydney and Melbourne. Details of her programme will be announced
later. There will be general pleasure in Australia that Mrs
Gandhi is coming to this country. She represents a great people and
nation one of the most populous nations in the world. Australia
attaches high importance to Its relations with India and to co-operation
between the two countries, and Mrs Gandhi will find warm friendship
here among the Australian Government and people. I hope that during
her visit she will be able to meet a wide range of Australians in official
and private circles. My colleagues and I are looking forward to a valuable
exchange of ideas.
CANBERRA, 7 December, 1967. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 134/ 1967
PRAISE FOR AUSTRALIA'S SATELLITE
Congratulatory messages received In Canberra this
week including one from Fresident Johnson, have highlighted the international
recognition which Australia has achieved with the launching of Its first
satellite VRESAT. Following are-texts of messages from President
Johnson, the American Vice President and Chfairman of the National
Aeronautics and Space Council ( Mr Hubert H. Humphrey) and the US
Secretary of Defense Wir Robert McNamara:-
President Johnson " I was delighted to learn that you have added a
satellite ' launching to the growing list of Australia's firsts.
Its promise shines as brightly as the Southern Cross.
The nations that have known such a triumph
welcome you to their brave company. The peoples of the earth
celebrate your achievement as another milestone in man's
great journey to the limits of the cosmos. are proud to go
with you in peace and hope. Sincerely,
Lyndon B. Johnson."
Vice-President Humphrey " Word that your scientific spacecraft is performing
successfully in orb it is a source of s atisf action to all.
Congratulations and welcome to the space club.
Mr Robert McNamara " The Akdvanced Research Projects Agency sends its
wholehearted congratulations to Australia on the successful orbiting
of Its first spacecraft, Al.' RESAT-1. A. RPA is proud to have been
of assistance in this impressive venture. It Is fitting that Australia's
entry into the space community should be aboard a Redstone rocket
which also boosted the Initial US satellite into space. We are await Ing
with Interest the results of the scientific experiments carried aboard
your spacecraft."
CANBERRA, P December, 1967 



~ SOT ER'S Drp
FOR PRESS* 148RAPF0 PM. NO. 135/ 1967
DEVALUATION: REAFFIRMATION OF GOVERNMEI'WS
DECISION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Since the Commonwealth Government* decided on
November to maintain the value of the Australian Dollar when Britain
devalued the Pount Sterling, the effect on Australian Industries and the
economic outlook in general have been under continuous study.
Nothing has emerged to alter the assessmnents made at the
time of the British devaluation and on which the Government's decision
was based. If anything, subsequent developments have strengthened our
confidence in the wisdom of our decision. The Government was confident,
and remains confident, that in sum, the net direct effects on our balance
of payments and on our economy are not likely to be more than marginal.
We beI eve they will, in the long term, be favourable.
We have recognised, however, that some particular
Industries might be significantly affected in the short term.
Representations on behalf of industries likely to be affeced
have been made to -the Government and are being studied. The Economic
Committee of Cabinet, the, departments directly concerned with trade and
Industry, and the industry groups themselves, are also active in asse~ sing
effects and are in close* consultation.
To ensure -that during this period of adjustment misconceptions
do not arise and thereby distort the decision the Government has taken'and
the reasons for taking that decision,' it seems desirable to restate the
basis on which our judgments have been formed.
My colleague, the Minister for Trade and Industry has
suggested that the decision, as taken, was contrary to the traditional and
technical indicators. Because of his absence abroad at the GATT meetings
In Geneva, my colleague did not have the advantage of participating In the
wide-ranging Cabinet discussions, nor did he have the detail before him
of the latest appreciation of the likely effects of British devaluation on our
own economy. The facts we faced were that, while Sterling was beind devalued
by a moderate percentage, nnst other countries, Including those who haye
the largest share of our overseas trade today, decided not to devalue.
The United States, Ca n ad a and the Common Market countries made
immediate decisions, and we had the benefit of this In forming our own
Judgment. We knew that, of the twelve leading trading nations, including
Australia, only the United Kingdom had devalued.
In the final result, of 107 countries who are members of the
International Monetary Fund, only 16 devalued their currencies. The other
91 countries, which include all major countries of the Western World
except the United Kingdom, decided to adhere to their exchange rates. ./ 2 
-2
We had to see things in perspective. Only 13 per cent of our
exports went to the United Kingdom last year and, all told, the countries which
have devalued took only 20 per cent of our total exports. Had we followed
Sterling, we would have been devaluing against the greater part of the Western
World and our principal markets.
Such a step would have been justifiable only If our own domestic
and external relations made it absolutely necessary.
There were no elements In our economic situation to warrant
this. The economy is sound, and we have a steady growth rate.
While our external reserves have fal~ sn to some extent from the
very high level they reached In 1963-64, they are still relatively strong.
Our reserves In gold and foreign exctiange amount to 070
million. Our drawing rights with the International Monetary Fund total
$ 630 million. Therefore, our total first and second line reserves is 700
million. On a longer view, our balance of payments prospects are highly
promising. Our capacity to produce for export is growing rapidly. Developments
In mineral production will add greatly to our export earnings. Our
export capacity is also being enlarged in other directions, and import saving
production is increasing.
We do not foresee any drastic reversal in the general level of
capital inflow from abroad.
It has been said that, by maintaining the value of the Dollar, we
appreciated our currency. The truth is we neither appreciated nor devalued it.
Since 1948, the Pound value of our currency in relation to other
currencies has been established with the International Monetary Fund as
have the Pound values of most other national currencies outside the Communist
world. Most other countries took the same decision. They decided to
stay where they were.
What happened was that the United Kingdom was forced Into a
devaluation of her currency because of a crisis in her balance of payments and
her domestic economy. The leading trading nations of the world, including
Australia, had no substantial reason to change.
There was no crisis in our balance of payments or in our
domestic economy. There is none now.
Devaluation for Australia at this stage would have brought costs
and penalties. It would have meant we would have had to pay more for our
Imports and, in our case, imports mean, very largely, materials for
production and capital equipment. To add to their costs means adding to
costs through industry, Including export industry.
Furthermore, it could have set inflationary forces moving. It
could have provided grounds for higher wage rates and for support to industries
afflicted with excessive costs. / 3 
-3-
These things we did not want to happen. V" e have a valuable
reputation for stability and for good management of our economic affairs.
have no intention whatever of impairing that reputation.
It has been suggested that we face a massive inflow of cheap
British goods competing with our own manufactures. This does not stand the
test of facts today. There will be changes in Britain which bear directly on her economy
and on the extent of her new ex: port potential. Sterling costs of Britain's
imports will rise. Corporation tax is being increased from 40 per cent to
42 per cent. Export and selective employment tax rebates for most
manufacturers will be abolished. These alone, it is estimated, could add
7 per cent to British costs. There is little doubt too, there will be increases
in wage costs as time goes on.
The United Kingdom does not have a great deal of surplus capacity
for production, and her work-force is more or less constant. To raise export
production, resources will have to be shifted from other industries, and this
will take time. Our assessment here is that the United Kingdom will concentrate
its export drive on North American and continental markets. We take only
about 5 per cent of Britain's total exports, and it is reasonable to expect that,
of any additional exports she builds up, only about that proportion will find
their way into Australia.
In any case, some 70 per cent. of our imports from Britain
come in free of duty, which indicates that largely they represent goods of
various kinds which are not produced here.
There was no sound nor obvious justification for devaluation. Had
we done so we would have struck at the confidence which other countries have
acquired in the stability of Australia, and could have compromised our
prospects of attracting a continuous and increasing capital inflow.
The question has been raised whether the International Monetary
Fund would have approved an Australian devaluation. Under the rules of the
Fund, members must secure approval for any variation in their currency values.
To support a claim for a change, it is necessary to establish a
chronic external imbalance which shows no reasonable prospect of correction
by increased exports or by reduced imports, or by the imposition of tolerable
domestic measures. We were not and -are not in a state of economic ill-health, V7e
did not seek approval from the Fund for devaluation. We had no case to make for
devaluation, but we did have confidence in the strength of our own currency and
the capacity of our economy and the Australian people to adjust to change.
Nevertheless, the Government is conscious that certain industries,
which still depend largely on selling their products in Britain, could be adversely
affected. It was apparent that since the impact would vary from industry to
industry, creating a different set of problems for each, the right course would
be to study their problem intensively and decide what measures would be
necessary in each particular case. / 4, 
7
.8 The Government is doing this now. Until results of Its
current industry consultaticas cnnbe weighed, Cabinet will not decide what
new machinery, if any, is necessary to give effect to the Government
policy, already announced, of giving special assistance in those areas
where industry may suffer directly because of the British decision to
devalue. There have been, since the decision on 20th November, a
series of talks with industry groups, departments and marketing boards.
There is a good deal of information coming from overseas which also has
to be weighed in our conclusions am to the future course of action.
What has been done by the Government has been designed
directly and deliberately to protect the strength of the Australian Dollar.
This is fundamental to the soundness of our economy and or prospects for
continued expansion. We are satisfied we made the right decision on every
count.
CANBERRa,, 12th December, 1967 



FOR PRESS i' Dt4? d
j;-iPJ0PM. NO. 136/ 1967
GOVERNMENT MEASURES TO ASSIST INDUSTRY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt_
This week the Federal Government has met representatives
of the manufacturing and rural Industries of Australia to discuss the
immediate and long term effects of the British devaluation of the Pound
Sterling and the Australian decision to maintain the value of the Dollar.
General assessments by inustry were closely in line
with those made by the Government and detailed consideration began of
the special problems of certain industries.
I made it clear when the Government took its decision on
devaluation, and again this week, that when current surveys were complete,
the Governent would proceed to give appropriate assistance in areas of
industry which have suffered directly. Surveys are In progress and will
continue for some time, b ut firm decisions have now b een taken on some
aspects. There are matters of urgency to some industries,
particularly rural industrie s. They fall into two categories
Immediate problems as the result of the devaluation of
British and other currencies.
Long-term fundamental problems of rural Industries.
Cabinet therefore decided yesterday on certain measures
to help the rural industries likely to be affected immediately and also to
initiate a full examination of basic problems by the relevant Ministers and
by special high-level committees. The decisions are summarised below.
A Devaluation Reporting Committee of three senior
officials under the chairmanship of the Secretary of the Department of
Primary Industry ( Mr A. C. B. Maiden) will begin work at once. The other
members will Be Sir Alan Westerman and Mr M. W. O'Donnell.
This Committee will report direct to the Cabinet through
the Prime Minister. It will consider the immediate problems of devaluation
in the rural Industries by examining losses from devaluation considered
to be demonstrable and unavoidable, and make recommendations for action
regarding them. A special enquiry into the fundamental problems of rural
industries, Involving consideration of the reconstruction of certain
industries, will be made by the Minister for Primary Industry ( Mr Anthony).
Mr Anthony will consult with the appropriate State
Ministers and with the leaders of rural Industries. He will then bring
specific proposals before Cabinet. / 2 
-2-
The Government has, for some time, had under consideration
a restructuring of the dairy Industry-and -proposals are now ready for
Cabinet. Consideration will be given to applying the principles on which these
proposals are based to certain other rural industries.
The Wheat Board has already suffered Identifiable losses
of something like $ 30 million on outstanding Sterling contracts as a direct
result of British devaluation. Insurance cover against devaluation was sought
by the Wheat Board but was not available.
The Government will reimburse the Wheat Board for this
loss less the amount of the premiums which would have been payable had
insurance cover been available.
. Other marketing authorities which were not able to take
out full cover against devaluation with the Reserve Bank, and which have
suffered loss as a result, will be eligible for assistance in the same way after
the facts have been established by the Devaluation Reporting Conmidttee.
There Is some urgency for the canned fruit industry because
of the imminent ripening of fruit In the forthcoming harvest. Some 65 per cent
of canned fruit exports go to Britain. Cabinet decided that the Government
would assist the canned fruit Industry and details of this assistance will be
announced by the Minister for Trade and Industry.
The assistance to be announced by the Minister will be
conditional on the industry working out urgently long-term arrangements to
put before the Government for the rationalisation of the marketing of canned
fruits and for the stabilisation of the industry on a more satisfactory longterm
basis. It will apply to the very exceptional circumstances of this
industry In relation to the 1968 pack.
The manufacturing industries In both their domestic and
export operations have also been the subject of special consideration. Four
measures have been approved by Cabinet
The Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Austmlia, by
agreement with the Government, has already begun to set
up industry panels. These panels will cover all industries
exposed to the risk of direct disability arising from devaluation
abroad. They will be associated with the Department of Trade
and Industry and will examine problems in individual
industries with a view to advising the Government through the
Minister for Trade and Industry.
( it) The existing Special Advisory Authority for manufacturing
Industries will be available to deal with emergency cases.
The Authority will, if found necessary, be streamlined and
strengthened. This Authority has power to act at once to
recommend additional protection to meet any abnormal
competition from imports which could Include that resulting
from the devaluation of other currencies. Action taken by the
Authority Is subject to review by the Tariff Board. 
q ( iii) A committee-will be set up, consisting of Government
officials and representatives of -manufacturing
industry and commerce, to Investigate export
problems which individual firms and Industries
might bring to It as a result of devaluation.
Reports of this committee will, if necessary, be
brought before a committee of the Cabinet,
comprising the Minister for Trade and Industry,
the Treasurer and the Minister for Labour and
National Service.
( Iv) A new five-year Pay-roll Tax Export Incentive scheme
has also been approved. The Export Development
Council had offered advice on this matter. The new
scheme will replace the existing one when it expires
next year. The scheme will be more appropriate to
cu rrent and prospective circumstances In encouraging
exports of manufactures.
The Market Development Allowance income
tax rebate will be set at 42.5 cents in the dollar,
compared with 37.5 cents In the dollar under the
existing scheme. These new arrangements will begin on
1st July, 1968. Further details wiill. be
announced by the Minister for Trade and Industry.
CANBERRA, December, 1967 


PM No. 137/ 1967
PRIME MINISTER MISSING - Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen 
The Australian people are aware that the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt is missing off Portsea Beach. My information is that he was swimming this morning with a companion, Mr. Stewart, Director of the Fort Quarantine Station. Shortly after noon the two were separated in strong currents. At about 12.40 Mr Stewart reached the shore and raised the alarm.
A full-scale search and rescue operation was immediately mounted. The operation is continuing. It includes RAAF and civil aircraft and helicopters, police and naval units.
We will all pray that despite the grim situation, the Prime Minister may still be found safe.
This evening we all share with Mrs Holt and the family their terrible anxieties.
CANBERRA,17th December, 1967


