
PUBLIC MEETING AT MACKAY, QUEENSLAND
DAWSON ELECTION CAMPAIGN 16th FEBRUARY, 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Chairman, Ministerial and Parliamentary Colleagues:
Mr. Fordyce and Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am, as my colleagues have expressed themselves to be, very glad
to be able to take a personal and active part here in this electorate of Dawson
in the by-election which is being contested on behalf of the Government parties
by a splendid candidate to whom you were listening a little earlier in the
evening. In John Fordyce we have the kind of candidate who can speak the kind
of language and represent the interests which Dawson traditionally has hoped to
see served in the national Parliament of the nation. He doesn't come to you
as a crusader with a fanatical gleam in his eye, thinking of one topic only and
regardless of the rest in which you are concerned. He comes from a background
of diversified interests in the great industries and the varied activities which
constitute this rich and diversified electorate and I am quite certain any of you who
have not previously heard him in action have seen him in the flesh and heard him
tonight, will feel that in John Fordyce, carrying the banner of the Government
parties you have a candidate who will serve this electorate well for many years
to come. Now I come to you tonight, not for the first time in Mackay and
certainly not as a stranger to Queensland, and I am not speaking of interest shown
in this State in more recent years, but it is perhaps appropriate that my first
visit to Queensland should have been made as a young member of the Federal
Parliament just thirty years ago when at that time Australia not being then so
conscious of the problems we face today and certainly with nothing of the economy
we possess at this time, concentrated on what we would regard today as perhaps
as not such large issues on which to wage a political controversy, but I can assure
that at that time the hottest issue in my own electorate of Fawkner as I then
represented was the price of sugar to the housewives of Victoria. And so I came to
Queensland to see for myself whether the people I represented were being
exploited in the fixed price being charged to us for sugar from this State, and. I
was able to see as I travelled North through the rich sugar areas and into that
beautiful country which constitutes in my own judgment the most picturesque
and attractive part of Australia. I was able to see that here were an industrious
people working in tropical conditions which in past years it had been said that
people of European race could not successfully handle, and here was the most
efficient sugar industry in the world being developed by my fellow Australians
under conditions which the rest of Australia should applaud. And since then I
think I can fairly claim to have been a good friend of the industry and a good
friend of this State. I am glad to say that this judgment anyhow is that held by
my old colleague, Sir Arthur Fadden whom you knew so well in this city and by the
present Premier and former Treasurer of this State, Mr. Nicklin and Mr. Hiley. 
So I come to you as a friend and in confidence that what I have been
able to do in the past and express on behalf of this State its development
potential and the place it occupies in the national scene will have demonstrated
my own good faith in what I have to say to you in the course of my remarks here
tonight. I have come tonight also as the political head of the nation and I say
that very proudly, and at the same time conscious of the sort of responsibility
it creates in the holder of that office. Mr. Whitlam, I see, was reported in the
press today as having said that the leadership had been handed to me on a platter.
Well I can understand the envy in his tone having regard to the current problems
but really what he was saying was that having served my distinguished leader
loyally and with devotion to the policies and principles we had worked out
together for some ten years, when he saw fit to retire, my party paid me the
honour of electing ine unanimously. Now perhaps if Mr. Whitlam had exercised
the same degree of patience, it might have been handed to him on a platter too,
but you can't have it both ways and he' s trying to get it rather quicker than I
sought to do. But I am sure that there can be few countries in the world in which
the democratic tradition has become so firmly entrenched and in which over
sixteen or seventeen years of office we have been able to build up a much more friendly
and co-operative community spirit than existed in the early years when I first
came into Parliament, that as a result of these things there has been as smooth a
transition of political authority as any country could hope to experience. Here
we are going along steadily much as we have before but with a new Government
feeling it to be its own responsibility to turn its attention to the policies of the
day to see to what extent these should be varied in the national interest.
I want to talk to you tonight not just as the electors of Dawson, not
just pointing to domestic or parochial issues and seeking to persuade you to vote
for our side of government because you have responded to some direct appeal
which goes to your own immediate self-interest. I don't decry that as a means
of campaigning or indeed as forming an important part in the campaign now
undertaken but I do believe from what I have read of the speeches of my colleagues
that they have covered those aspects very thoroughly indeed before I came to the
election. And I would therefore prefer to speak to you tonight as a fellow Australian
interested in the large national questions, not academic questions but questions
which bear on your own security, your own prosperity, your own position as a
citizen in a country growing in stature, growing in influence, growing in prosperity
and strength, and these things are of tremendous importance to us all, and it is
fair for us to put it to you that if you believe that we have had any substantial hand
as a government through our experience, through our judgment, through our
capacities in bringing Australia to this level of eminence which has attracted the
admiration of other countries in the world, then it is fair for us to say to you when
the time comes, " Support the candidates we present to you" so that this process
can be strengthened and so that it can continue to your advantage and to the
national advantage. Now this is what we put to you in the course of this by-election.
We can't say to you, " Look contrast what we are doing with what the Labor Party
has been doing" because we have to go so back into the past in order to point to
what the Labor Party did in that day and time that to many of you, particularly a
younger generation of voters, it seems somewhat unreal. And yet there it was
the record stands cn the board and I would hope that at times when you feel critical
of your own government of the day, you will not be unmindful that we are facing up
to situations and problems which earlier governments found themselves incapable of
dealing with adequately. 
If I may mention just one matter which I know troubles those of you
who rely upon stable prices for competitive capacity in the export markets of
the world, and we are grappling with this problem year in and year out. Not
an easy thing in an economy t-hat seeks to maintain full employment for its
people through every State in the Commonwealth, to keep a stable price level.
We have to contend in Australia with conditions of drought, other climatic factors.
We have to contend with the fluctuations that occur so dramatically at times, ' as
you learnt to your loss in respect of sugar in recent periods. We have-to contend
with these things and at the same time try to maintain some stability of price
levels. I don't imagine that the Labor Party found this easy. When we took over
at the end of 1949, the price level was rising at the rate of 10 per cent. per annum,
and here for most of the period of recent years, we have been able to maintain a
comparatively stable price level and it is only in the last year or so that these
pressures have reasserted themselves, coming though, now, we believe, firmly
under control. So we would put it to you that here is a government in office for
seventeen years, not made up of the same people because we haven't clung
to office as individuals. There has been a steady movement out of the Ministry
with fresh faces and fresh vigour coming to build up the strength of the Cabinet
that is left behind, and in point of fact there are only two members of the present
Cabinet who were there when we first took office at the end of 1949. Those are
the Deputy Prime Minister and myself. All the rest are men and in Annabelle's
case, a very disti-nguished woman who have come to us since we came back into
office ir. 1949. But there we've been. We are, as I say, a reinvigorated team of
Ministers, refreshed by new recruits from time to time, for seventeen years, and
no-one in their senses, if they had a successful business conducting their affairs
and showing substantial profits year by year would think of tipping the whole
management out in order to put in its place, a completely untried set of executives
who have had no active experience of running that business at all. There is not
one member of the Labor Party who will have administered a Government Department
at any time over the past seventeen years, not in the national field at any rate,
so that this we think is a matter of some importance.
Now, let us look at this next question, as it has been presented in-this
electorate, of development, but I am going to ask you to look at it also in
association with defence, because if there is any area of Australia which has more caui
to wish to see a strong and balanced defence programme, it is the community that
lives in the north of Au stralia which is conscious as we all should be of the fact
that we have 100 millions of restless neighbours to our immediate north, we have
700 million Chinese at present led by a government devoted to a philosophy of
world domination, and exeiting its pressures around South East Asia today to such a
degree that we have had to meet it as a physical threat of war in the South Viet Nam
area, and we years ago spent many years in Malaysia, trying to clean up the
Communist guerrilla activity there. Now for Australia this problem has to become one
of balance. It would be plainly, however serious we might regard our necessity,
it woul d plainly be of great detriment to us to attempt to devote too large a
proportion of our resources in the defence field, Of course, there has to be a
substantial proportion going there, and œ 400M. and more of defence expenditure
a year is no trivial figure for a country of this population to undertake. But
development itself is defence in the long term because it is out of the growth of the
nation, the growth of its population, the growth of its industries, that we draw the
future strength in terms of manpower and resources for our own security and the
contribution we make in this area in alliance with powerful friends for the peace
and stability of the area as a whole. It is worth recalling that the United States of
America in 1776 that's a long time ago the Declaration of Independence, had four
millions of people, four millions only, and that was only twelve years before
Australia ha its first settlement. Now in that period, they have grown from four
millions to 19 3 millions, while we have been struggling to get up to 11 millions,
and the secret of their success was instead of involving themselves in footling
arguments about overseas investment, they took the people, they took the capital
and they built the most powerful nation in the world in an area the same size as that
of Australia and with resources certainly apparently greater than ours, but who are we
to know at this point of time just what the resources of this continent will prove to be. 
We have discovered in recent years literally treasure hou. ses of
resources for this continent, and they wouldn't be developed today at the rate
they are or to the extent they are unless there was capital coming to us from
overseas, joining in part with Australian capital for this purpose, bit I know
there are people who cover this problem with all sorts of emotional overtones
and lose a sense of perspective about it. They ask, " What's the Australian
equity in this kind of enterprise?" Let me tell you something of the Australian
equity. In every million pounds that is made or say dollars that is made of
profit by an overseas investor in Australia, we take $ 425 000 from that million
in direct company taxation. Now in practice, a company having paid its tax,
ploughs back half of what's left into its own further development; in other words,
more equipment, more job opportunities, more development for the nation. Now
let us assume that there was $ 575,000 of this $ lM. left and that $ 275,000 of it
went back into the business, leaving $ 300,000 for remittance overseas. Now even
on the most favoured terms, other than in the United Kingdom itself, the overseas
inve stor will have to pay a withholding tax of 15 per ce nt. So out of that $ l1M.
of profit, we would have attracted to the Australian Treasury just cn half a million
dollars, some $ 300,000 or thereabouts would have been ploughed back into the
business, creating more job opportunities for our fellow Australians and the rest
would have gone in remittance overseas. Now, with what comes into us as a
result of this enterprise we finance the business of goverrnment, defence expenditure,
the social welfare expenditure, the payments to State Governments, the advances
for roads, the great variety of things which the Commonwealth Government these
days has to undertake. So whatever views you may develop about overseas
investment, don't let anybody convince you that we don't have an Australian equity
in every successful overseas enterprise which flourishes in this country. Ninety
per cent, of all the investment we make in Australia comes from our own Australian
savings, but there are important areas in which new techniques, new enterprise,
new development in areas remote which have not experienced that development
before. All these things add to the national strength and it is largely because in
recent years we have been securing an investment of great dimension from the
United Kingdom, the United States, and now to a growing degree from Europe
and other parts of the world, that we have been able to sustain a migration
programme which is giving us a population growth rate of 2 per cent, or more a year.
Now, in England, it is less than one per cent. In the: United States, it is 1.3 per
cent. and this extra percentage of population growth means we have to build more
houses, and on the same scale, America, if it had our population growth would
have to build an additional half a million homes a year; the United Kingdom
170, 000 homes a year, and this is an indication of the sort of weight which rests
on our own economy as we seek to cope with the problem of growth and with this
great problem of defence. Now again, it calls for considerable experience, a great
deal of judgment to maintain these things in reasonable balance so that the economy
can move steadily forward and not become too top heavy in any one particular
direction. Now as to the offer which comes to you from Mr. Fordyce's opponent
that he will carry for Dawson the Labor banner as your representative for the future
and I say for the future because I don't think that there are people in this electorate
who would be so mean-minded as to say, " Well, we are going to take a poke at
the Government this time. It doesn't matter very much, They won't be put out of
office. It willkeep them on their toes" knowing that for Dr. Patterson to be
elected on this occasion and then rejected when we come to the general election
later this year would for him, at any rate, be virtually the ruin of whatever prospects
he might have under the rules which apply of re-engagement in the Commonwealth
Public Service. And, therefore, I say, if you are to be fair to him, if you elect
him this time, you should be doing so with the thought i n your mind that you are
going on to elect him at the end of this year. 
Now, will he be able, if elected not merely now, but to continue
as your representative, to give Dawson what Dawson wants in the national
Parliament? In the first place, what private policy will he be able to express
We have see illustrated vividly for us over recent days that no Labor Member
of Parliament can regard himself as free to vote and act the way his own
judgment tells him to do, not even the way that the Caucus, after discussion by
majority decision determines to do, and s3 what confidence can he have whatever
policy he wants to put up, even if he can persuade his Caucus colleagues, will he
finally secure the endorsement of those outside the Parliament who dictate policy
for it. When in the last election, we talked about 36 " faceless" men, the Labor
Pa.-ty rejected our charge and said it was totally unfair and untrue. Mw we are
told that there aren't merely the " 36 faceless men"; Mr. Whitlam has descr~ bed
his associates as the 12 witless men" of the Federal Executive. Where is Dr.
Patterson to go with them?"
Now in addition, Mr. Whitlam went on record yesterday and this he would
not deny because he said it quite deliberately, as declaring that he wanted t o be
the leader and I quote his actual words " of a radical and socialist Labor party'.
Now that's fair enough. If you want to be the Leader of a " radical and socialist
Labor party" then it is a very proper thing to say so. It is about time that we
did learn from the Labor Party just what it was that it wanted to be, but do you as
voters in Dawson want a candidate I gather that Dr. Patterson has already
thrown in his lot with Mr. Whitlam ( I hope I state that correctly) but do you want a
" radical and socialist party' to be speaking for Dawson and putting before the
community policies which reflect that radical and socialist spirit. I think most
Australians today want policies which give them the opportunity co take advantage
of all that Australia offers and what country has wider opportunities, more abundant
and varied opportunities for the free expression of choice than we have in Australia
at this time. The Australian people had a taste of regimentation during the wpir years.
They've never wanted it again and any party which would seek to reimpose it on the
Australian community is doomed to electoral disaster. But in these brave words
of Mr. Whitlam, one finds echoes of the regimentation of the past. With the full
choice of every other word he wanted to use, he declared that the party he wanted
to lead was to be a radical and socialist Labor Party.
And so when I read aboutMr. Whitlam fighting the Left Wing of the Australian
Labor Party, I wonder where the Right Wing has got to. If he's the Right Wing
then I think back to the time when he said that ideologically he was closer to
Dr. Cairns than to the Right Wing of his own party. So there must be a bit of
jostling in the Left if he represents the Right and Dr. Cairns, Senator Cavanagh
and Tommy Uren represenL the Left Wing of the party. Now Dawson doesn; t
want that kind of electorate representative, I am quite certain. You have in John
Fordyce a candidate mh-can express the kind of policies which Dawson wants
to see espoused and w'io will stand for the kind of Australian way of life which has been
built up over these seventeen years and which has commended itself to the
Australian people at every election held since that time. True, you gave us a narrow
squeak particularly here in Queensland in 1961, but I hope that we have demonstrated
since then that we too can learn from experience and that the Australia of today
which stands so high in the rest of the world will stand equally high in the eyes
of the electors of Dawson when they come to the poll on the 26th.
Now ladies and gentleman, there are a great many things one can say,
but you have certainly given me a very warm welcome here tonight and it must be
becoming considerably warm even for those of you who are accustomed to the
climate of this very delightful part of the world. My good friend, Ian Wood I
haven't been here, I think, for ten years and at that time we had quite a bit of
difficulty on the waterfront as some of you will remember it almost as vividly as I
do, but I don't feel I've been away from you very long because you've got the
greatest travelling salesman for Mackay in the person of your Senate representative
that any city in the Commonwealth can hope to possess. 
And so, ladies and gentlemen, the choice should not be a
difficult one for you. Here you have a country proceeding vigorously with its
national growth under policies of free enterprise, still providing three out of
every four jobs in Australia. I will close, perhaps, just on one reference which
comes back into my mind as I mention this. I said earlier that I made my
first visit back in 1936, and I can remember the excitement I felt about this
wonderful part of Australia which I discovered for the first time, and the
amazement I sensed at what seemed to be the wonderful opportunities, the
potential of what could be the richest State in the Commonwealth of Australia.
And I went back to Melbourne and talked to some of the men I knew in business
a nd commerce there and I said, " Look, here's this terrific State with all its
potential. Why aren't you putting more of your resources into investment In
projects in Queensland? And the answer I got was, " Not on your life. This is the
highest taxed State in the Commonwealth and if you make a success of the
business you stand a very godd chance of . having it taken over by the Government"
Now that was the period when governments took over all sorts of things including
butcher shops to try to run them as a State enterprise. But you had then the
highest rate of tax applying anywhere in the Commonwealth, and this was under
Labor Administrations of those days, and when you wonder now why you don't
have as many employment opportunities in Cue ensland as in some of the other
States, you have to go back to a period when the investors of that time were
discouraged by the circumstances they found in the State discouraged from coming
here and building the job-giving enterprises which they turned to other States to
carry oat. Now I believe that Queensland is launched on a new wave of expansion
because it is creating again a climate of incentive, a climate of attraction before
people who are prepared to risk their capital and their skills in a State which offers
much to them, and that climate will continue to exist while those who put their
risk of investment here feel that there is a favourable environment, a favourable
political stability. We are getting investment from around the world today because
of the political stability people perceive in this country and when they come to
individual States inside Australia, they look to the State which seems to them to
offer the most attractive climate and the greatest area of political stability.
Now you are achieving that and I would hate to see a vote in Dawson
which could'nt be a true expression of the long-term political sentiment of this area
being given to a Labor candidate just to teach the qovernment a lesson and certainly
n1ot see it when you have a fine young candidate who will, I am sure, serve
this electorate with devotion and ability if you will only get behind him and
give him your support. We ask you to do so. 



ADDI S OF VIQE-PRESIDENT HUBERT H. HUPHIREY
AT PRIME MINISTER'S LUNCHEON
Canberra 19th February, 1966
Mr. Prime Minister and the 111inisters of the Government of
Australia; my good friend Mr. Calwell, the Leader of the Opposition,
but great Australian, great citizen, my friend that has been
conversing with me during these moments of our luncheon; the great
presiding officer of the Senate of the Australian Parliament, Sir
Alister Mc½ ullin, we've settled most of the problems over here; my
esteemed friend, the Ambassador of the United States, 11Mr. Clark, and
of course all of the many good friends that we have that are here
from other nations; your Excellencies the Ambassadors and Ministers,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I must say first of all that I have been touched by the references
to the Vice-Presidency. I have been told and I was aware of
the fact that this is the second time in ten years that Australia has
been visited by a Vice-President, which shows the gentle nature of the
American public and the great consideration that we have for your -: ellbeing
here. You can only take one of these Vice-Presidents about
every decade. I also have been reinded as to the uncertainties of
the political future of the Vice-Presidency and I've been well aware
of it, and I've been making the most of every day that I have.
I can't help but say, since the other visitor from the office of the
Vice-Presidency was Mr. Richard 111N. i xon, that I have always patterned
mj life and tried to emulate a gentleman by the name of Richard IA.
Johnson Vice-President under van Buren. And I want you to know that
Van Buren was a Democrat; the only partisan reference that I shall
feel free to make.
Mr. Prime Minister you have mentioned so rmany things here that
I would like to cornent upon that i'm afraid that you've touched the
favourite nerve cell in my body, namely the talking cell. You
ought to be waare of that. But I've been told by Ambassador Clark,
and by you, Sir, and others, that in Australia you just get up and
give forth as much and as long as you want. So lean back my friends
and start to enjoy what you haven't intended.
First I want to say to Ambassador Clark that we're very proud
of his work here. lie's been entertaining a host of visitors from
the United States, and he's been able to manage Congressmen and
Senators better than he did the Speaker of the House of Representatives
or the Presiding Officer of the Senate, and they've come in substantial
numbers. Time and Life and Newsweek have arrived to be able to guide
you in matters of foreign ane, domestic policy; and I understand that
Ford and General Motors have made their appearance or will. And
you will even have my good friend George Moore of the First National
City Bank of New York.
With this combination, plus the Vice-President once in every
ten years, you ought to be able to survive. In fact I think you'll
do well even if we hadn't have come. But the fact is that we're
very, very pleased that we've received the kind of gracious, warm,
friendly, home-like reception that you have accorded us.
Mr. Prime Minister, ou mentioned that I had some resoonsibilities
in the field of Space. Well isn't it good to come and see friends
who are with you both in heaven and earth. And you are here in
Australia. I recall one of the first flights in our Gemini programme.
We Americans listened on the radio to the broadcast of how the citizens
of Perth were turning on their lights so that the Astronaut ight know
that he was over friendly territory in Australia. We never had any 
doubt about that even if your lights Were out we knew that there
would be a friend waiting for us with a warm hand of friendship.
I must say that our relationships have made us feel like
brothers and sisters. And today you went the extra mile I just
can't tell you how much I've appreciated everything that has
happened. Last night when ve set foot on your precious soil and
I lo6ked about it seemed like the sunset, in the great Mid-West as
I would say if I were not under some constraints, but as I wo. uld
say, as it were, in South-Western Texas.
One can't say in Australia that it was a miniature because this
country is so big. This is one of the few countries that mke the
Texan feel like that he has an inferiority complex. You gave us a
beautiful, beautiful entrance to your lovely and dynamic country and
then this morning as I awakened and looked out and felt the crisp air
I knew then it was almost like 1 nnesota, my State. And then when
I came from the Parliament Building just after the noon hcur and
I looked out front and there were the placards and amateur sign
painters and all the demonstrators, I said; " 4hat this Prime Minister
,-ill do to make me feel at home:" I just can't properly and
adequately express my profound. gratitu e to him for this feeling of
ease and adjustment that you give me as I stand on foreign shores.
But I want you to know that my investigation indicates that while you
went to great lengths to get that demonstration No. 1, it is not as
large as we can produce at Berkeley. And, No. 2, the Leader was
from America. One of our exports. We do it up well and the exchange
programme continues.
Next time vwe find a group of protestors in America I am going
to ask if there is an Australian, and if there isn't, why, we are
going to have to call off the protest. We believe in quid pro quo
you laow, " fifty-fifty".
Now in all seriousness, I do rant to say to all of our good
friends here, the High Conrnissioners that represent members of the
Commonwealth, to our friends of the Press of Australia and other areas,
to the good citizens of this great country, and to my fellow: Americans,
that it is a very re-assuring and gratifying and energizing experience
to be able to exchange viewers with the Government people such as I've
met here today in Australia.
We have been able to talk frankly, candidly, expressing our
points of view 7-ithout any fear or without any concern as to their
being properly understood and accepted as the honest expressions of
people with an integrity and sincerity of purpose. And I can say
that in every free country we have opposition and it is the opposition
which in a very real sense keeps us on course. Opposition in a
democracy is as vital, may I say, as the seasons in a full year.
And to Mr. Calwell, the Leader of the Opposition, may I express
to you my personal thanks for your gracious remarks and for your
presence here at this luncheon.
I hadn't quite known ", hat I should say to you today, and I've
decided that the best thing to do would be to talk to you as friend
and neighbour. Last evening after having had the opportunity to go
to the Ambassador's residence to unpack our cases and to just settle
down, we placed a telephone call to a great anad distinguished
statesman, not only of Australia but of the world, Sir Robert Menzies,
and ve had a delightful hour and a half with this remarkable nan. 
Sir Robert is a friend not only of the people of Australia and
a leader in this great nation but he is a friend and leader for all
of us. He has come to our country, the United States, on repeated
occasions and he is accepted as a brother, almost as a fellow citizen.
Yet he is so devoted to his own Australia that he would not want anyone
to dilute his patriotic devotion to his own citizenship by even
a remark that might be misunderstood or misinterpreted. \ Ve respect
his judgment. We admire his patriotism, his courage, and we enjoy
his wit. President Johnson considers him one of his close friends.
And may I say to the distinguished new Prime Minister, Mr.
Holt, that we look upon you, Sir, as a continuing friend. As one of
whose counsel and advice we welcome and whose friendship we, too,
cherish. And ve know that in the days ahead that the Prime Minister
of Australia this Prime Minister will have in the hearts of the
American people that abundance of affection and respect which was so
evident for Sir Robert Menzies.
So we feel at home, and I want to talk to you now as just
neighbours. Australia, as the Prime Minister has so well noted, has
been with us in peace and war, and we with Australia and Australians.
Our sons and men have come here to meet you and marry your daughters
and sisters. Our nations believe in parliamentary democracy.
We have common ideals and in a very real sense common traditions.
But our traditions and our ideals are not unique to ourselves. This
principle and this belief in human dignity is no monopoly of Americans
or Australians or the English. There are people of every race creed
and nationality that believe in human dignity. And there are people
of every region of this world and of every race, and every ethnic
group, and of every persuasion, that believe in freedom. And
I believe that most of mankind longs for peace.
So that we have many things in common. And when we speak of
consultation amongst ourselves Australians and Americans, the
United Kingdom, and New Zealand. We do not speak of that consultation
as an exclusive club. But rather we speak of it as one of the
approaches to be of help to others, and to broaden that great community
of free men and free nations so that we can work together in common
cause and common purpose.
The great need today of the freedom-loving peoples of this
world is to recognize, No. 1, the problems that confront us, and agree
upon those problems; and No. 2, the necessity of united purpose and
the united effort in meeting those problems.
A great American statesman and a great human being, Dr. Benjamin
Franklin, once said that " We either hang together or we hang separately."
And I might say that those words of wisdom, colloquial as they were
have a universal application. And all through Asia and Africa and
Europe, Latin America, North America, South America, wherever you go,
free men and free nations and those who aspire to freedom had better
rec nize that there are powerful forces arrayed against them. That
there are difficult problems that yet beset mankind the problems that
we spoke of here of poverty, of illiteracy, of disease, of despair,
of hopelessness, of frustration that these are the common problems
of most of mankind. and that we should unite in a common effort to
overcome them.
We should also recognize that the forces of tyrrany which are
at work in the world today, while different in their methodology, are
no different in their purpose than all of history. Tyrants are
tyrants. Despots are despots. The method, however, and the
strategy and the tactics of the 20th century tyranny are far more 
sophisticated far more complicated than those that mankind has
known in other cent ries.
And it is because of this compleity of both the problems
and the opposition, or the enemy, that we sometimes fall apart;
that we sometimes have differences even though there need be
none. It's because . we haven't as yet quite understood individually
and collectively how best to approach this new set of
circumstances that confronts us.
President Johnson asked me to journey to Asia, South East
Asia, and the sub-continent, and then down under to Australia and
New Zealand. Not to tell people what to think, but to let you
know that we're thinking about in our country and to try to find
some common denominators, and to share in your wisdom, your
observations, and to give you some of our observations and our
considerations on these problems that affect our world. And
I have reported today to this government, as I have to others,
on the observations that w-e have made on this journey.
This distinguished American statesman that is with us
one of our seasoned diplomats a great public servant Governor
Averell Harriman, Ambassador-at-Large for the President of the
United States we have reported what we have witnessed in Vietnam,
in Thailand, in Laos, in Pakistan, in India and we have shared
views and thoughts with the leaders of your government.
And how happy I am today to say that we see these things
very much the same way. When I listened to the Prime Minister
in his remarks, I said, tthealtl', s what I want to say." This
is what I tried to say. But how well he said it.
In my visit this morning with the Ministers and the Prime
Minister I believe that I expressed about as clearly and w-ith as
much articulation as I am capable of, .1what was said here today
and what I hope now to be able to say to you.
First of all let me say this: we must look upon Southeast
Asia and the sub-continent as regions. We cannot afford
to direct our energies toward individual nation-states if the
problems of those nation-states were unconnected with other
nation states. South-east Asia was looked upon by President Johnson in
his memorable address at John Hopkins back in April as a region
for economic development regional economic development.
I submit that it is also a region in the conflict which is
now under way. In that region we are fighting two wars and we're
allies in those two wars. The Australians and the Americans,
the New Zealanders and the Koreans, standing alongside of our
good friends, the people of South Vietnam, -ho are bearing the
brunt of the battle. Who have been pummelled, who have been
attacked, who have been abused, whose leaders have been assassinated,
who have been the victims of terror and subversion and
propaganda the likes of which few people have ever been able to
withstand or to take. 
Let me say that we all owe a debt of respect to the people
of South Vietnam. For years they have been under merciless attack
not conventional war not with the rules of war as civilised
nations have known them, but a new form of war the wars of
National Liberation they call them from Peking. What a play
on words: How the communists have destroyed the meaning of words.
They speak of liberation when they mean oppression. They
speak of a people's republic when they have no regard for the people
and no definition or understanding of the world republic. They
speak of the people's democracies and there is not a single
democratic thought or institution thatTs been developed. The
communists have polluted and adulterated the meaning of words that
decent humanity has known for centuries.
I think it is about time that we understood that fact. They
not only fight us with weapons; they not only use every conceivable
device that is known for the purpose of human destruction; they
destroy the meaning of language. They destroy the meaning of the
precious word. Words like " freedom". Words like " democracy".
' Words like " liberty". Words like " justice". These are words of
the spirit. These are precious words.
The communists not only destroy the village and the hamlet in
South Vietnam he not only attacks established government and tries
to discredit it in nation after nation. He destroys the very
meaning of life as one interprets it in the written word and the
spoken word. So we have a newr war that we battle that we fight. We're
really trying to save the moaning of our language. We are trying
to save the legal definition of our constitutions. We're trying to
protect if you please the territory and the geography of our land.
But above all we are trying to save a way of life.
Not the way of life in terms of the past but a way to approach
life where mankind can be liberated from disease and from poverty,
and from hunger.
We are the revolutionists not the communists. Wie are the
liberators not the communists. We are the agents of justice and
reform not the communists. I for one don't intend to let them
get by with claiming the honours that are due to the people that are
in this room and other people around this world that believe in
freedom and justice and independence.
So, we find ourselves in conflict today in Vietnam. But
. may I say quite frankly that we've also faced other dangers. The
conxmunists would like us out of Berlin. And isn't it interesting
that the very same people who advocate that we stand firm in Berlin,
deep in the land of communist control, in an area that is militarily
difficult to defend the very same people who would pledge all of
our resources, as we said in our Declaration of Independence, our
lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honour the very same people
who say we must stand firm in Berlin regardless of the cost, can
turn around and advocate that you forget Vietnam?
I guess they may feel that somehow or other, whatever is
going on in Vietnam, that the Viet Cong, represents a sort of an
international reform movement. Frustrated social workers who
believe in human progress: 
Well lot mo assure you that that is not the Viet Cong. There
may be those in the Viet Cong that are the victims of frustration
and bitterness over the iany years of colonialism and the lack of
opportunity and justice in Vietnam. But the Viet Cong is no social
reformdo-gooder outfit. It is made up of a hard corps of
disciplined warriors, backed by Hanoi and backed by Peking. Just
exactly, mpy I say, as East Berlin is backed by the Soviet Union.
So we have met the menaco of couniasm before. We mot it in
Berlin and we didn't flinch. And because we didn't there's peace
in Europe. We have met the nnace of com. munism in Greece. And some people
said it was just a little civil war. But isn't it interesting that
when Yugoslavia broke with the Soviet Union, or Marshal Tito broke
with Stalin, closed the border then the lifeline from Moscow to
Belgrade into the hills and the mountains of Greece when that lifeline
was chocked off that the Greek Civil War came to an end?
It wasn't a civil war as such. To be sure, there were Greeks
involved. But it was one that was : master-minded in those days from
Moscow, it was supplied from Belgrade, and it was fought on the plains
and the mountains of Greece.
Harry S. Truman, President of the United States, was the author
of the Greek-Turkish Aid Programe. General Van Fleet from the
United States xvent to Greece. W'e met the communist threat in Greece
and by the strange developments of international politics over which
we had no control the supply line and the efforts of the communist
powers were cut off and the Greek Civil War ended.
People say that you should be careful of these comparisons
because they don't alrays add up the same. That's true. There are
details that are different. But the fundamentals are the same.
We met coimmunist power in Korea. We did not seek a battlefield
in Korea. In fact we have said that we had no interest in
Korea, or little interest. And that was the warning. That was the
alert. The communist forces from the North struck South Korea,
violating every international pledge and every international
agreement. And we met the communist power in Korea.
We met it in Berlin. We met it in Korea. We met it when
Mr. IKhrushchev tried to put his missiles in Cuba, and now wre are
meeting it in Vietnam.
It's different this time. A new communist force. A very
militant communist force. An aggressive militant regime in Peking.
It has no regard for international law. It speaks with disdain of
even its commnunist associates. It has little or no regard for
standards for international conduct.
What you see in Vietnam today is not a civil war, but you see
the projection of a massive international communist doctrine at work
wars of national liberation being tested in the test tube of Vietnam.
The pilot project of cormmunist strategy. Peking to Hanoi bo the
rice paddies and the mountains and the valleys of Vietnam. 
And we have to meet it. We didn't choose the battlefield.
We never will choose a battlefield. We can't as free people. We do
not believe in attack. We do not believe in aggression. We do
not believe in preventive war. We cannot select the time or the day
or the enemy or place. It is impossible. We simply have to meet
the attack where it comes.
Now the lessons of history teach us and surely Australians
have known it more than almost any others because even though you are
far removed from many areas of the world you were among the first to
recognize that the trouble in North Africa was your danger. The
trouble in Korea thousands of miles away was your trouble. You have
not failed to understand international responsibility and international interdopendence.
And so today, Australia finds herself in Vietnam.
Not only because of Australia, but because it understands that
aggression unckecked is aggression unleashed. It understands that
te aggressor's appetite is insatiable. It understands that
aggression if left without being stopped can become a pattern of
international conduct. And there will be no little nations left.
The powerful will consume the small and the w; eak.
So the United States of America and others, our good friends
here in Australia, stand shoulder to shoulder. Not because there is
an immediate threat to Australia. Not because of an immediate threat
to the United States. In our lifetime we could maybe forget this and
be buried in the knowledge that nothing had hit us as yet. But men
in public life have a greater obligation than to think about the
immediate. You must take a look at the future.
And if there is any one lesson in history that should have
been drilled into the minds of contemporaries it is this that you
can never let the aggressor have his way. If he has his way then
there is no way for free people except the way of despair and
destruction. So, my message to you today is the old simple message that we
must work together and we must work together not only militarily, but
we must work together in the good works of mankind. We're not
warriors. My country does not want to be known as a nation of
warriors. We want to be known as a nation of healers, of educators,
of engineers, of builders. We w-ant to be known as strong in spirit,
not in flesh. We want to be known as a nation whose wealth and
power is not for luxury or self-indulgence, but rather for service
and for protection for the weak.
That is the purpose of power, and that is the -purpose of wealth.
We're blessed in our country with wealt' and with power. And I think
that the real tribute to the United States of America and to Australia
is that with our high standards of living we seek not to keep it just
for ourselves. We ve abandoned selfishness and indulgence, and self
indulgence. And we have recognised that there is a brotherhood that
needs us and we need them. So we engage in the good works and that
was the purpose of the Honolulu Conference.
President Johnson went to Honolulu to revie. w, indeed, the
military situation, but more importantly he went there to work with
the leaders of South Vietnami in designing a social revolution for
South Vietnam. To heli rebuild the villages and the hamlets that
had been systematically decimated and destroyed by the Viet Cong
the communists. To give the people hope the politics of hope.
To lift their sights from the battlefields to the construction of
new homes and villages and schools and hospitals. And it is in this
part of the war, this other way, against man's ancient enemies that
we need a great deal of help. 
Everywhere I have been I have found Australia. I found Australia
in India. I found Australia in the Colombo Plan in the Colombo Plan
countries. I found Australia in Pakistan. I found Australia in
Vietnam. I found Australia in the generous contribution to the Asian
Bank. We have found Australian docLors and hospitals in Vietnam.
' ie found Australian soldiers on the battlefield.
And, may I say to you Australians ve are proud of you-proud
of you as friends and allies. You imake our hearts grateful and warm
and lad because this is real international responsibility. This is
the real strength of a nation.
The strength of a nation is not in its armament alone. The
strength of a nation is in its people and their purpose. And, you
have demonstrated that strength of people and purpose.
Now I come away from this tour with what I said this morning
was restrained optimism.
I cannot say that all is going well because all is not going
well. But, I can say in Australia that in the year 1942, in the year
1941, you could not say that things were going well either, but you
did not quit. As a matter of fact anyone that was looking at the
realities of the time in 1940, just the sheer dark realities, would
have said we are whipped.
The difference was in spirit and determination. The English
did not have a chance after Dunkirk logistically, in equipment and
supplies, but they had a chance because they refused to give up.
The Australiarsdid not have much of a chance either after Pearl
Harbour, but you did not give up. And we did not have much of a one
either but ve did not give up.
So, to the doubters and we have plenty to those who feel
somehow or other that this struglo in Vietnamo cannot be won I say
to you it can: What is m. ore important I say to you it must.
You cannot afford to lose it, because the first time that Free
Nations lose a con. test with militant coim1munist aggression, the first
time you retreat, the first time that you fold up your tents, the
first time that a people are sold out on that day no one will over
believe free men again.
If I seei to be overly enthusiastic a I'm sometimes accused,
may I say that I have history on my side. History on the side of
human spirit. History on the side of people w ho love freedom.
If you love it enough and if you stay united; if free nations
will understand across this whole underbelly of Asia, and throughout
the : orld, that there are poweful forces that would destroy every
institution in which you and I believe, those powerful forces that work
the free nations : ill understand that we have a coi7mmon cuse, and we
have a coimmon purpose; that we need each other those forces of evil
and destruction cannot win.
The Indians in India have tasted communist aggression across
their borders in the movement of armies from Communist China.
The Thai are tasting infiltration and subversion now as even
I speak to you.
The Laotians have been plagued by the Pathet Lao now fortified
the North Vietnamese regulars. 
And Vietnam has been going through fire and devastation for
years. lWhat more do we need to tell us that there is a great effort
being made on the part of the Cormunist Chinese to exert its influence
and its power and its control over the rice fields, the grea. t natural
resources of the sub-continent, and South-east Asia, and the people
thereof? Either direct control by conquest or control by fear and
terror. And yet, this force need not win and it : ill not win and I will
tell you why. Because the United States of America, in concert with
its allies, will not let it win.
And this is why freedom loving people everiyhere have a stake
in South Vietnam.
Maybe your contribution will only be a laboratory; maybe it will
only be a Doctor, maybe it Jill only be a few people to help with the
refugees. But in South Vietnam there ought to be on the part of
freedom loving people some symbol of the unity of free nations on the
part of every nation that loves freedom. If that symbolic unity is
there, mark my words that Communism, the communist juggernaut, will
be halted just as it wlas in wejt Europe when free nations banded
together when 1IATA was designed, when the Marshal Plan went into
action, when UN. Pii was applied, when one operation after another was
brought to bear to unite the people to rebuild a continent and to
revitalize nations. And it did not bring on a world war it saved
a world from a world war.
I conclude in this thought: Many people have said what we want
is peace. May I say to you that the President of the United States
is a man who believes in peace with a passion politically,
spiritually, morally.
But we wanted peace in 1939, in 1940 and in 1941. We did not
fight Hitler for conquest or Tojo, nor did you. You fought in
World War II for peace.
We arc not fighting in Vietnam for conquest or for territories.
We are fighting there for peace and we are prepared for peace. We
have offered peace negotiations for peace, and conferences for
peace. We have offered economic assistance to friend and foe alike
if there be peace. We have been rebuked. We shall pursue the
course for peace. We shall not be restrained because Hanoi and
Peking have arrogantly cast aside our offers of peace. We shall
pursue peace relentlessly and we shall also pursue the enemy relentlessly
because I happen to believe that you will gain peace when the
enemy finds out that he cannot gain his objectives by brutality and
force. And as soon as it is crvstil clear that force is not to
achieve the objective, then the hope of peace is all the better.
Until that day peace will be elusive if not impossible. So
may I thank you once again, our comrades in arms and our comrades in
peace in Australia. Thank you for what you are. Thank you for what
you've been. Thank you for what you will be, because your leadership
in the Pacific, your leadership in the Indian Ocean area, and your
leadership in Asia, is vital and may I urge upon you to work diligently,
ceaselessly with those of like mind, wherever they may be, try to find
the paths of peace and make those paths of peace the paths of the
hearts of men. Thank you. 



t LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF 1IT. HUBERT HUIVPHmEY,
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE U. S.
AT CANBERRA 19th FEBRUARY, 1966
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER MR. HAROLD HOLT
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Vice-President, your Excellencies,
1Ministerial and Parliamentary Colleagues, Distinguished Visitors
from the United States and any ct. 1, ers of you tL-hat I may have
omitted: It's a very great pleasure and privilege for the
Head of an Australian Government to welcome to this country
a distinguished leader in the Administration such as we have
here today in the person of Mr. Hubert Humphrey. It is, I -think,
more than ten years, 11r. Humphrey, since we had a visit from one
of-ycDux Vice-Pr esiderri's. In fact, it w I tUhink the only visit
we had ever had at that point of time from a Vice-President of the
United States. In a sense, therefore, it's been a long time
between Vice-Presidents, but if today's talk is any indication
I think vie will be seeing each other much more frequently in
future than perhaps wie h-ave in the past. Because, as is evident
enough, your country and ours are fi. nding each other increasingly
involved in the problems of Asla and in particular of South*-East
Asia There is no occasion to dwell at length before an
Australian audience or public on the close and warm relationship
between our two countries. We have inherited a common tradition,
a common democratic-tradition from the 1Ilother of Parliaments in
the United Kingdoi7., you adapting in your own wvay the Parliamentary
system to your own needs, we in Australia with a Parliarnuntary
democracy serving ours. And we have in the space of the last fifty
years fou-ht together in the cause of freedom, twice together in
two great world conflicts. We were the first country to declare
ourselves with you in the cricis of Korea, and we are one of the
few countries serving with you in a military capacity in Viet Nam
at this time, and the warmth of our friendship has cemented the
mutuality of interest which exists for us in this part of the world.
We across the other side of the Pacific Ocean have
watched admiringly the growth over the years of the mightiest power
that the world has ever known. It has been something of an
inspiration to us. We have a great land mass to develop, roughly
the size of the United States itself if you leave Alaska out of the
picture; and we recall that it was only twelve years after your
own Declaration of Independence that Australia had its first
suttlement. What is not always realised in this country is that
you were only four million people when our first settlement
occu-rred in Australia, but over the intervening years you
have grown to something over 190 millions of people, establishing
the most powerful nation that the world has ever seen. We
believe that by the same principles, by the same encouragement
of enterprise and initiative which has marked the American story,
we too can grow to be a great sister nation in the Pacific and
we are heartened by the example that wie see in you and we are
assisted very greatly by the encouragement, by the flow of
American investment and citizens to this country from time to time.
But more immediately, of course, we are caught up together in the
problems of South-East Asia, and for our part, recognising the
contribution you made to our own security in the darker days of the
Second World War, wie are grateful again for the firmness of
purpose and the resolution which your President and the American 
people are showing in relation to the issue in Viet Nan~.
We, with you, view this as part of a great international
conflict. We see this as one of the critical struggles in the
history of the free peoples everywhere. This goes far deeper in
our judgement than the preservation of the people in South Viet Nam
against intrusion and aggression from those who would wish to
destory the integrity of that country; important though that is,
we see this as part of the menace of Communist expansion throughout
the world and what happens in South Viet Namn is in our eyes not
merely of interest1, to the people of that country, niot merely of
interest to us in relation to our own security here in Aistralia
although I believe that too to be involved, but we see it as
of significance for the cause of free peoples everywhere, and I
know that is how your President and your Aidministration see this
struggle. Nowi, Sir, we have watched with admiration, too, the
way in which your President has looked upon this not merely
as a matter of military achievement, not merely as a goal to be
gained by military means and then the rest of the story forgotten.
He has, from the outset, and you have devotea so much of your
own energies to this aspect, seen the necessity for social and
econz: mic aasistance which wul bring to the peoples of this
area and, in tine with an improvement in standards throughout
the area generally, victory also over those age-old enemies of
mankind to which you referred on your arrival in Australia
yesterday. We know that these great evils of hunger, of disease,
of illiteracy, of lack of employment opportunities, that these
things in an enlightened community can be met successfully and
conquered. It has been an enlightened and imaginative attitude
on the part of the President and members of his Administration
like yourself that they have seen * the totality of this problem,
that they have seen its relationship to the world scene generally,
and we would hope that as this becomes more clearly perceived
around the rest of the free world that others will join with you,
as we in our own small way have done, not merely to give moral
support to your cause but to assist in a material way either in
a military capacity or perhaps more generally in terms of
economic assistance throughout this area.
You, Sir, come to us as a very welcome visitor and you
bring with you the most distinguished and influential delegation
from the United States, I think, that this country has ever
known. iewelcome w,, ith you an old friend in Ambassador Harriman.
I would like you to know that he has given us great assistance
from the information and advice he is able to bring so freshly
from discussions himself in various parts of the world. Whenever
any of us go to Washington, we know that we have a warm friend
awaiting us there in the person of yourself, Mr. Ambassador.
And speaking of ambassadors, we would like you to
report to your President that we arc grrateful to him for sending
to us that splendid representative of your country, the Aimbassador
of the United States here in Australia, M. r. Ed Clark. He and I
established a warm basis of friendship from the outset. I know
this has been a general experience of any who have come in contact
with him and America could not wish for a more effective represen-
tative in this country nor we for a warmer friend of Australia.
You in the various capacities you undertake, Mr.
Vice-President have interest in space research and aeronautical
matters and you will be aware that here in Australia there is
another tangible link of our friendly cssociations with you -through
the tracking stations which have now been established at various
points in Australia. But just as in -this and in so many other
ways we find it useful to maintain together the friendly and
fruitful links of co-operation, we believe that it is in the years
ahead perhaps that our greatest contribution together will be made
to the welfare of a significant area of the world, and through this
a contribution to the peace, the stability and the prosperity
of the world as a whle. 
We, for our part, in A'ustralia would welcome early
talks and discussions with you and with Great Britain and Novw
Zealand on somo of the problems of the area. I don't mention just
those four countries in any excluding sensec in trying to keep
anybody else out of the discussion, but to face the matter
realistically in the sort of problems that vie have to meet here
in the years ahead. Here are countries which can make a significant
material contribution together and I believe it is of first
importance that we should be able to co-ordinate efforts to
discuss together problems which arise and to which, by mutual effort,
we may be able to bring some assistance or somc solution.
This is particularly true in the economic and social field.
We in Australia frequently can perform a useful service by the
technical advice v.' c can bring to countries that are themselves
passing through a developmental phase, and in those and other
ways, Australia, limited though its resources may be in a country
of less than 12 million people, Akustralia can make its own valuable
contri but ion.
Sir, you have come at a difficult time through a most
arduous and exacting journey in key areas of South-East A* sia
and A.' sia generally, but I am quite certain that if the Australian
people had been a~ ble to share our experience of this morning when
xhad the most stimulating and heartening and illuminating talk from
you, they would have no hesitation in their mind as to the justice
and good sense of our cause or the strength of the support they
would bring to it. I believe, Sir, that you will find in this
country support as strong as you will find anywhere in the world,
even perhaps including your own country, for what you are doing.
I can speak to you as not merely the Head of the Government, but
as the Leader of one of the two Governme~ qnt Parties and tcll you that
there isn't one member of the Government Parties who does not
subscribe wholeheartedly to the policy which the United States is
adopting in relation to Viet Nam. I think, Sir, I can claim that
that is a rather bctter scoring record even than the Congress can
deomonstrate for you.
Well, gentlemen, you are not here to have me speak at
length and we are all anxious to hear from the Vice-President.
We have established already, I would hope, in your minds, the
warmth of the welcome here in Australia, and shortly I shall be
asking all to join me in honouring the toast of our distihguished
guest, but as ovidence that that warmath of welcome is general
throughout Aiustralia, I san going to ask Mr. Calwell, the Leader
of the Opposition, to join in supporting me in the toast which I
shall shortly be submitting. Arthur, would you please speak. 



LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
BOX HILL, VICTORIA FEBRUARY, 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
( Introduction not recorded)
and in full dignity of robe and office have given
me this warm and cordial welcome to the Municipality of Box Hill.
I don't think that the Mayors of either Malvern or Uaulfield would
have done it with any more grace and dignity than you have done.
( I had tn get in a plug for Higgins. Even Prime Ministers have to
watch their electorates, ladies and gentlemen:)
Mr. Chandler I sat enraptured while I heard you
introduce me to this audience. There is only one problem about
hearing delightful thirs said about yourself and that is that
somehow you are expeoted to live up to them and it is not always
easy to measure up to the specification which one s friends
expound on your behalf. But I do appreciate what you have said
about my long service and apprenticeship in this party service
to this party and apprenticeship to that very great man who in
the judgment of all of us here, has been the outstanding political
figure in the history of our nation. And what a model for any
successor to have before his gaze and in his mind as he goes about
the tasks of government.
Well this particular task this morning is a very pleasant
one. I left Canberra and its rain and cold and here we come into
this beautiful late summer morning in Melbourne amongst friends
and colleagues serving together the principles we hoid in common
as fellow Liberals ann oining for the common purposes of policy
that we have presented io the nation. And so I take advantage
of this opportunity to talk over with you some of the things cf
course not more than a selection of the things which could be
discussed mn an occasion such as this, but some of the things in
which we have a mutual interest.
Now first, the Liberal Party itself. Its strength
vigour and vitality I think, is admirably reflected here. It's
not every party that could hope to secure on a Sunday at 1 p. m.
the sort of attendance that I see stretched out before me in this
hall. It's not only a very acceptable tribute to myself I don't
place that by any means at the top of the list-but it is certainly
a reflection of the strength and of the vitality of the Liberal
Party. And this is as it should be because the Liberal Party
carries tremendous responsibilities for the Australia of today,
ad perhaps even more importantly, for the Australia of the years
Ours is a young party as political parties go. It is
only last year that we were celetrating our 21st birthday, We
came into being in 1944 at a time when the non-Labor par ies had
fallen into a sort of state of decay which we see reflected in
the Labor Party at the present time. Sir Robert Manzies and
others of like mind assembled together and they built what has
become the greatest arrty on our side of politics in the history
of the Federation and a party which is as yet in its infancy in
relation to the contribution it is going to make to the national
development, the national strength. But here in the 21 years, / 2 
-2-
we have occupied 16 of those in national leadership and this has
been associated with the grofitest era of development and national
qowth and growth in international influence and prestige that
his country has ever iknoan, and of course the thin s have gone
together. it is the leadership under the distinguished head of
the party, Sir Robert Menzies, that has carried us to this
situation. But Australia has need of the Liberal Party. We had
reached a point in our affairs when we needed a party which
would stand for all sections of the Australian community which
would cast aside once and for all, the old hitter concept of
class warfare tAe stru le between employer and employee; that
would see in the needs of Australia a neea for a party of unity,
a party which could develop a co-operating democracy, with the
national Parliament linked in friendly co-operation with the
Parliaments of the States; not trying to make a Federation work
by imposing authority from the centre or by so construing the
Federal powers that the States were reduced to nothingness, but
a true Federation based upon a spirit of co-operation rather than
on a strict definition of powers. And I believe that we can
claim in Australia today that no country can present a picture to
the world of closer national co-operation at al levels of
government than will be found in the Commonwealth of Australia.
There was a need when we took office for a party which
would lead the country into a reat era of growth. Here we were
in Australia with something under 8 millions of people with a
land mass approximately the size of the United States of America,
if we leave Alaska out of the picture, and with tremendous tasks
if with this small population, we were to develop the resources
of the continent and to set briskly about the business of
populating a country by immigration as well as our on natural
inorase agan is a storyof etrendou3 succesa, the
way in which dooSTe ail I i cul. a bsTe n
fliictu. tin of Io tune 7hich inevitbly . ffic a7 country which
depenL muchh-on . he fortunes of the sraorn, filict at, hs of
pries os : xr any rone st&gt; eadily ahead v; with o.: r : reyramme
of ana wi: l. i. rluc. turautitonn s
wiith ; i rcee f na;-crai grCw1t h. ind tlid , Dacv ohich was
bcorno g:-ret t phhiil c phy of freedom to enbhrine in
policies incntI% f-or t'e Indlvi. dua, encouragement to enterprise
and a freer way of life for a peopie which had through the years
coaf rrwiaerd etxhco; aonr errtiineee cdy! e aar sr eogo : ; iepvn atLic . Thtehseey dwJii; dedr e nnototht e wwic-esisaha steso wsvee ewere
creeatec&gt; ser b . dn .1 bll-avu f: e tafly, after this
21 y,. irs of lite a Liberal Paty tht cojectives have been
largely realised and the kind of Autralia we set about to create
has been brought into being and suZ-tined.
owi' whether we can SUtin2l iso into the future
depends very largely onr, the co. ntribution, the akill, the judgment,
that you and I as your national leader of the party can comoibne
together to effect. I confidently believe that we of the Liberal
Party are going on to geater strength in the years ahead. Our
best years are ahead of us not behind us, proud though we may be
of the achievement of our hirst twenty-one years.
Now one of the encouragin'. ti ngs for someone in my
situation is to see ho; this Autraian torv of Liberal leadership
is now, reachin: into t he pain. 1cw loeg-er ation of people in
other part of the wld and n in quite receLt \ 7eeks, it
almoot Sems as though tnere has been a fresh discovery of this
country of ours. S* */ 3 
I could perhaps illustrate this process for you by my
own experience of the latter part of this week. I spent a great
deal of time at the United States Embassy because it is through there
that these visitors have been passing, but on Thursday night I dined
there with the management group of " Newsweek", the geat weekly
journal in the United States which ranks with the " Time" publication
as one of the mass circulatin weeklies of the world, and " Newsweek"
is following in the wake of " Time" in setting up its own edition
published in Australia for this part of the world. And the next
day at lunch, there was the management group out here, top-ranking
people from " Time", " Life" and Fortune", and they having established
te " Time" edition in Australia are now turning, I understand to the
publication of an Australian edition of " Life" as well. The following
day, there was the visit of Vice-President Humphrey and this is only
the second time in our history that the Vice-President of the United
States has come to this country. The very fact that he chose to do
so, after the most strenuous tour which he had just undertaken, aain
is a mark of the importance which the United States attaches to what
is occurring out here. On Monday I shall be meeting the Chairman
of the largest bank in New York, the First National ity Bank.
Now I mention these things just as topical illustrations
of the sort of process that is goin on week by week in the Australia
of today. The Ambassador of the United States put it to me this way.
e said, " It is as if our people have just discovered the existence
of Australia and all that E can mean in terms of potential".
My Press Secretary tells me that there are fifteen
interviews with the foreign press lined up when I can get round to
carrying them out, so the interest is not confined to the United States
of America. Now contrast the situation of our own party in all its
vigour and vitality with the unhappy and dolorous situation of the
official Opposition. It is not easy at the moment to sort out just
what form the Opposition takes. Is it an Opposition of the Right or
an Opposition of the Left or just a general scramble? I ask this
question because I was interested to notice that when Mr. Whitlam was
so elaborately pointing out the Kind of Labor Party that he would be
leading, he said he wanted to make it clear that he sought to lead a
radical and socialist party. Now he was making a bid for leadership
somewhat to the right of the Left ' ing, the Left Wing having installed
some of its Parliamentary colleagues, not themselves supported by
the Caucus for those positions, into posts which others who had been
supported by the Caucus posts from which others had been displaced
as the result of the action of the Federal Executive of the party.
The group, not described by me but described rather unkindly b
Mr. Whitlam as the " twelve witiess men", yet I understand two of them
support.. him quite strongly. But those who took up or were supported
to these new posts are said to be men of the Left. Now Mr. ' itlam
by deduction would be regarded as a Labor leader of the Right but
even a Labor leader of the Right feels that the offer he should make
to the electorate is that of leadership of a radical and socialist
party. Now does anybody in their senses, looking arnund the
Australia of today, believe that what Australia wants is a radical and
socialist party. If only the Labor Party would proclaim that quite
frankly and firmly and I was indebted to Mr. Whitlam for doing so
because it hasn't been easy to sort out of their own disarray just
what it is that they do stand for at this time. But if the Right
Wing of the Labor Party declares itself to be for a radical an
socialist party for the Australia of these times, then it is as well
that the Australian public should realise this and reject it as
opportunity offers, as I am quite certain they would wish to do / 4 
-4-
Well, I don't intend to spend a great deal of time this
morning on the problems of the Labor Party. I don't rejoice in
a weak Opposition but certainly I am very glad to have the current
majority we enjoy in Parliament, and it will be my objective when
we come to election, to increase that majority as handsomely as
I can succeed in doing. But it is for the Labor Party to either
make its own omelette or unscramble the eggs as best it can.
The incident through which we have * ust passed however,
or are passing, is illuminatng in one important respect for us,
and that is the demonstration it has given to where the centre
of authority lies in the Australian Labor Party under its
Constitution. Now when we spoke in the last election about
" 56 faceless men" di6tating to the Parliamentary Caucus as to
what lines of policy they should follow, we were attacked for
misrepresenting the position as the Labor Party saw it; but we
were clearly right because immediately after the election, Mr.
Whitlam got busy himself in trying to effect some improvement
in the oosition. He has returned to it in this last week or so
and has'gone even further in outlining the embarrassing position
in which the Parliamentary party finds itself. And can any
Parliamentary party in the history of this country have ever been
treated so contemptuously or in such humiliating fashion as the
Parliamentary party of Labor in the Federal sphere.
Now I am glad to report you know it I report it
publicly that from the outset inside our own organisa ion we
adopted firmly the principle that it was not for any outside
organisation to dictate to the elected representatives of the
Australian people as to how they should record their vote inside
the Parliament. Policy discussion certainly; and we have inside
the Liberal Party our own important annual Council meetings and
we have the meetings of the Joint Standing Committee on Policy
and from these discussions and from discussions with the State
Council meetings and the Branch meetings there flows up to the
Federal leadership recommendations of policy which the
Parliamentary Leaaer is able to take into his consideration and
bring before Cabinet as in his judgment he deems it desirable to
do. But nobody seeks to dictate to him or to his Parliamentary
colleagues. The proper role of a Parliament in a democracy is
fully recognised inside the Liberal Party and completely safeguarded
by our Constitution.
Now let me turn from the Labor Party to the problem of
development and defence. I put these two together because they
are linked and it is important that we should clearly see the
relationship the one has to the other. This gives me the
opportunity to state the position in my own terms to a great
audience from the Liberal Party itself and I welcome that
opportunity because, perhaps from the distortion which occurs
when statements are abbreviated in the press I have found that
repeatedly over recent times what I have said on this matter
has been interpreted as a statement by me that there can be no
increase in the Defence vote. Well that, of course, is absurd.
We have increasing obligations as our own resources grow, so
our capacity to do more will grow and we are already currently
co ing with a build-up in the Defence vote a doubling of the
budgetary provision over a four-year perioa and a sizable
increase ahead of us in the next financial year. So we are not
talking in terms of no increase in the Defence vote. What I am
trying to ensure is that the process of development, having so
painstakingly been got under way and sustained through all the
difficulties we have encountered, that this process shall go on
strongly and firmly and itself make, over the years, a contribution
to our capacity to do more by way of defence or to do more
by way of international aid and in the kind of world in which
we live, these things are also linked together. 
The talks we have had in recent times have been
extremely helpful to us in helping to form our own ideas as to what
we should be doing. First there was our discussion with the
Minister for Defence in the United Kingdom, Denis Healey, and there
had been rumours that you would have read about in the Press; there
had even been a statement somewhat along these lines from the
shadow Minister for Defence in the Conservative Party to the effect
that the British were withdrawing their forces East of Suez. We
were not prepared to take final decisions about our own defence
planning until we had a clearer view of the British intention and
also a clearer view of the future as seen by the United States in
respect of Viet Nam. But the talks of the last few weeks have
cleared our minds on both these matters and now enable us to go
forward firmly with our own planning. And the discussions that
have taken place over recent weeks in relation to the contribution
we can make in one theatre or another these will be pursued now
quite speedily to a conclusion and I hope then to be able to make
some early announcement about them.
But we were able, as a result of these discussions
with Mr. Healey, I think, to have some substantial influence upon
the British thinking. We were able, as I know the United States
felt it desirable to do also, to emphasise the importance we
attach to a British presence in that area of the world, not
merely for purposes of military security or making a military
contribution against such a matter a, Indonesian confrontation,
but for the moderating influence which the British presence has
there in a restless undecided and uncertain area of the world,
and for the strengthening of morale which results from all this
throughout the South-East Asian area generally. If there were to
be a British withdrawal in this area, I am sure it would have a
quite seriously damaging effect upon morale and, indeed upon the
general security of the area as a whole. Well, fortunately, that
view has been accepted by the United Kingdom. We have been assured
that they will remain in Singapore for as long as they find it
practicable to do so. But it flows from this that with the kind
of contingencies that have to be guarded against it is a sensible
thing to be planning against the possibility that other arrangements
may have to be made at some future point of time. So our
Service people are exploring these possibilities and will be
canvassing them in due course with the representatives of the
United Kingdom. Now in the case of the United States, the value of
Mr. Humphrey's visit could hardly be exaggerated. I don't know
whether any of you had an opportunity to hear him speak yesterday
but his was one of the most powerful and moving public statements
that I think I have heard in a political lifetime. For any
waverers as to the need for us to be in Viet Nam or any who
retain some naive notion that what is going on tAere is some sort
of a civil war which we should be keeping out of and minding our
own business, then the powerful statement of the Vice-President,
has set the record straight. He clearly brought home the
circumstances under which Peking direction, Hanoi direction, are
influencing the course of events in Viet Nam the supplies, the
infiltration, the troops that are moving from The North into that
area the discovery of the underground trenches, cells fully
stocked and equipped with weapons of communist origin and obviously
requiring some years of construction in the thoroughness with which
they have been prepared these things mark the purposefulness, the
determination to expand communist influence throughout that area
of the world. And we believe that not merely is the security of
South Viet Nam involved in this issue but the security of the
whole of the South-East Asian area anA, indeed, properly understood,
this forms part of the challenge, the world challenge which in one
form or another free people have had to meet repeatedly over the
years since the end of the Second World War. To meet in Berlin, 
-6-
ti meet in areas of Greece when the civil war, so-called, was
being waged there. As the Vice-President ointed out, it was a
remarkable thing that when Yugoslavia cease to be an area through
which supplies could move to Greece, the civil war collapsed.
Here was a war which in substance was a reflection of the communist
programme of infiltration and subversion which so skilfully has
een carried out in so many parts of the world.
And so we have a clear recognition, in the minds of
the Governments, anyhow, of the United SYates and of this country,
that in Viet Nam is being fought one of the criitical battles for
free peoples throughout he world everywhere. I would hope that as
this real isation spreads amongst those countries, they would find
themselves able to do more than they are doing now if not in the
military field, then in making a contribution to tAe second phase
of the programme there, that of building up in a positive and
constructive way, the community so that there can be a peaceful,
stable and prospering South Viet Nam in the years ahead of us.
Now, the United States has undertaken tremendous
responsibilities in this area. It has felt at times the loneliness
of leadership and I know that it has valued the Australian presence,
the moral support which Australia has brought to it, the comfort
and assurance that Australia sees this issue in the same fashion
and with the same clarity that the President of the United States
has seen it. We are all indebted to him, or should be, for his
resolution, his firmness of purpose his determination to see this
thing through, when in his own country, as in ours, and indeed in
any iemocracy the voice of dissent can be raised. There have been
the critics who have sought to undermine his position because he has
made his own clear decision as to what has to be done in relation
to this threat. Now let me just mention in passing that this small
country of ours we are small in terms of population; sometimes
this tends to be overlooked by nur friends an allies outside. The
Americans tend to see what we are doing in Viet Nam but not pay
very much heed tc what is being done in relation to confrontation
in Malaysia. The British are conscious of the effort we are making
in collaboration with them in respect of Malaysia, but know comparatively
little about what we also in one form or another, are
contributing in Viet Nam. NeitAer of them seem to be very well
aware of what it means to a country that has to develop its own
resources, what it means in terms of national effort to house and
give the amenities of a modern community to the larger population
growth rate that Australia possesses. Uur population is growing
at an increase of 2 per cent. a year. The United Kingdom .8 of
1 per cent. The United States 1.3 er cent and I have been pointing
out to our friends from the United States that if our rate of
population growth were occurring in their country at this time,
hey would Fave tn add to the number of houses built year by year
mnre than 500,000 additional houses. In the United Kingdom, they
would have to add 170,000 additional houses. So that these are
facts of life for us. We can't afford to overlook that growth;
population growth and development create domestic problems for us
ana make heavy demands upon our resources.
Now why we believe that we must go firmly ahead with
this development, this process of population must be regarded as
fundamental to the policies of the nation, is because Australia
has not always enjoyed these opportunities for growth. We sustained
nearly half a million casualties in two world wars. ie encountered
the disastrous depression of the thirties and it is only over the
last twenty years that we have in recent history been able to
embark on a period of sustained growth which must continue if
S. / 7 
-7
Australia is to build its own strength and from that strength,
make an increasing contribution to the security and well-being of
others. And we want to have this clearly understood by those
with whom we are associated in friendly alliance in our treaties
and in great tasks together of a humanitarian kind in the various
directions in which we undertake them. Australia has not looked
to a relativity between its contribution and those of its allies
when it comes to international aid. We are a capital-importing
country. Despite this, we rank about fourth amongst all the
countries of the world in the per capita provision we make for
international aid.
Recently there was established an Asian Development Bank
and capital sought was $ 1,000M. to get this institution going so
that finance could be available for projects of a helpful kind
in the countries of Asia. The United States was to contribute
200M.; Japan $ 200M, and Australia is contributing $ 85M., a quite
disproportionate commitment on our part, measured in terms of
population or resources. I mention these facts because we need
not feel when one looks at the record that Australia is failing
to respond in the variety of directions in which around the world
today, people expect to see us making a contribution.
Now when we were established as a nation in 1788, the
United States was then twelve years after the Declaration of
Independence. At the Declaration of Independence, there were
less than 4 million people in the United States of America so
that just 12 years before Australian establishment occurred, there
were less than 4 million people in that mighty country. Today,
while we have been growing, struggling along to get to our 12
millions of people the United States has grown to 190-odd
millions, constituting the most powerful and prosperous nation
on earth. And they have done it by taking in people, taking in
capital down through the years until they are now at such a
position of strength that they in turn have been sending capital
out for investment around the other areas of the world.
We have had a lot of argument in one form or another in
Australia about overseas investment and I hope that at least in
the Liberal Party, we have a clear mind on this matter. I believe
we do from the discussions at the Council Meeting in Canberra
I think it was in the course of last year. We recognise that there
are problems that come when you bring in capital from overseas,
but there are great gains for this country in the diversification
of industry it brings us, the additional techniques which come in
aid of our industrial rowth in the capital equipment which comes
in as part of the capital inflow, and finally, if the enterprise
is successful, and quite apart from the addition to job opportunities
which are created in this way, finally if the enterprise is
profitable and successful there is an Australian dividend from
he taxation of the profits thus earned.
I can illustrate it for you by pointing to the fact that,
say, $ 1M. of profit would carry taxation at the ordinary company
rate of the order of $ 425,000. Of what remains, if the normal
practice were followed and this is how it averages out over the
field of companies about half the remainder would be ploughed
back into that business, providing additional job opportunities
for other Australians or for the migrants who come here seeking
jobs in their turn. And of the balance that might be remitted
overseas then except in the case of the United Kingdom there is
a withholding tax to be paid which on the most favourable basis
would be 15 per cent., and for many companies is of the order of
per cent. And so you can say that out of this $ 1M. of profit,
we the Australian people, have our dividend of just on half a
million dollars, which goes to the purposes of government defence / 8 
8-
social welfare, education any one of the many tasks which
governments have to undertake, and as tomost of the rest, it is
tloughed back into Australian industr~ widenfing our industrial
aeas the process goes on. iihen I Low of the pains that other
countries go to in their endeavours to attract capital investment
into their economies, I marvel that our own Australian people
aren't the more appreciative of the benefits which this process is
conferring upon us.
We shall be a stronger nation, a better-equipped nation
as a result of these processes than if we had to rely entirely upon
our own savings. We go save and save well, Ninety per cent. of
all the investment in Australia is of our own internal generation,
but the remaining ten per cent. i~ s a very welcome addition and
provides some of the key industries some of the major projects of
a mineral kind. Take th field of the search for oil here it is
the oversea investment; when Australians would be reluctant to
lay nut funds in any dimension in such chancy propositions, it is
this oversea investment which is helping to resolve whether
Australia has the fuel oil resources to sustain itself over the
years ahead. Now I hope when the arguments develop, as they do fiom
time to time, these facts can be kept in mind by our own supporters
in the Liberal Party. It would be very pleasant if we could do
all these things for ourselves but if we try to rely solely on
what we can do for ourselves, t~ hen we must be prepared to accept
a much slower rate of growth and defer for greater peripds of
time, the widening and strengthening of the industrial base of
the nation. Now the final thing I wish to say, Mr. Chairman, is
that just as I mentioned earlier, there seems to be a new disco ery
of Australia taking place around the rest of the world, so also
I believe that par of the reason for this is recognition that we
are on the threshliold of a new chapter of our national history.
WNe have seen the beginnings of it in the dramatic growth of our
trade with Japar and in the view being taken by so ma-ny overseas
industrialists tAat Australia is to be looked to not just as a
domestic market for the suipply of the goods of their manufacture
but as a launching place in order to penetrate the markets and
the customer capacities to be found in the countries of Asia.
That is why many of these overseas concerns are establishing
themselves here. A market of a prospering 12 millions and upwards
is a comparatively small thing against the potential as Asia
industrialises, as the standards rise, as consumption capacity
increases; then here in Australia is a stable base which can be
looked to as a launching point for the markets of this excitin new
area of the world. There is a focus on Asia today such as has
never existed before and in that spotlight Australia is showing
up the more clearly the significant role it has to play.
It is certainly flattering in our ejes, but it is a
reflection of the judgment they make that the Heads of Government
such as the United Kingdom and the Uhited States maintain the
closest contact with us. They honour the Head of an Australian
Government not only with warm friendship but with the closest of
communication and we are in reyular and continuous communication
with the Governments, both of Ce United Kingdom and the United
States. I stress them in particular because quite clearly those
are the countries of the geatest significance for us, and we can
all take some comfort in the strength of our friendship and in
the effectiveness of our co-operation; but for Australia this
opens up a new era of opportunity, a new era of responsibility.
With growing nationhood, we have growing obligations
( Next portion lost while tapes were being changed) / 9 
9
the more determined we must be that the job of
national leadership will be performed effectively and as the
nation would have it performed.
Now here, you, and those of us in the Parliamentary
party come together for the formation of policies for the
development of a national teamwork which will enable this great
country of ours to take full advantage of the exciting vista that
opens up ahead of us. I for my part feel completely confident
that the Liberal Party will eamsure up in full degree to the
responsibility that falls to it and look forward proudly to
carrying the banner of Liberalism as your leader for many
successful years ahead. 



FIRST ANNLUAL CONFERENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN DIVISION
OF THE INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS
SYDNEY N. S. W. 24TH FEBRUARY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME IINISTER TIR. HAROLD HOLT
Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Ministerial and Parliamentary Colleagues,
Ladies I understand there are some brave ladios with us here
tonight and Gentlemen;
I don't know what the scene appears to you in the
background there but I can assure you that this is about as
impressive a gathering that any public loader in this country could
ever hope to address and I confess to being singularly impressed
from the outset. I am sure that our two distinguished visitors
from the United Kingdom, Sir Paul Chamnbers and Sir Richard Powell,
both of I hav:: had th-: plcasure of mo ting at gatherings of the
Institute in London, also fool stirred as I am by this spectacle
of what Australia is able to contribute in the way of distinguished
directorial talent. But I gather there are something over 600
directors here tonight and, looking around the room, I think there
must be at least 500 who are personal friends of mine from my many
years in public life at least I like to think they are personal
friends of mino, and certainly they have exhibited the greatest of
goodwill to me this evening, and for the most part, the greatest of
goodwill through the long period of apprenticeship I have served.
After all, it says something for the charactorictic Australian
quality of tolerance and m-toship that after seven years at the
Treasury I can still face you, looking to you as friends and
receiving such a respectful and attentive hearing as I am, at least
up to this point.
Gentlemen, we are getting used gradually to the idea
in Canberra that there has been a change of management. Every now
and then my officers and I refer to my distinguished predecessor
and say, " Well, the BI is doing so-and-so" or " the EI is doing this
or that". I do it. My officers do it. After sixteen years'
association with a great political leader, it is not easy to adjust
one's thinking to the fact that he is not there to carry those great
responsibilities that face us at this time. But in a tremendously
busy month, we have been rapidly accustoming ourselves to the fact
that we have to stand on our own feet now and exhibit to the
Australian people that Australia is able to produce leaders,
and as one great leader moves on, then we hope that the team that I
have assembled around me will enable me to continue to give Australia
the sound, progressive, imaginative government that we have been
favoured to enjoy for so many years under the Prime Ministership of
Sir Robert Menzics.
No Australian Prime Minister could take office at a
more fascinating or interesting time in the history of his country.
I am sure that even those of you in this room who have had to
accustom yourselves to the rapidity of change in the years of
phenomenal growth we've known since the end of the Second World
War will have been struck by the rapidity of these changes
around us, not only in the domestic scene but more particularly in
the international scene in our own immediate neighbourhood over the
period through which we are now passing. To us in Canberra, they
are occurring with almost dizzying rapidity. Where once in my own
political lifetime, Australia was an isolated outpost down under,
now we are invaded in hordes almost with people who have discovered
Australia perhaps for the first time but who are learning that here
is not only a country of tremendous resources -nC creat potential,
but here is one of the significant landmarks in thi2 aerea of the 
* world capable of exercising a significant influence upon the destiny
of this area of the world. Nov': that may bc rather a large mouthful
to claim, but even in my own short term as Prime Minister I have
been conscious of the fact that great national leaders in the United
Kingdom and the United States are -2nxious to hear what the Government
of this country feels about the particular developments in
which we have some special knowledge in this area of the world.
And not only anxious to hcar but giving respectful weight to the
views that we put to them, and this, of course, imposes a tremendous
responsibility upon us, not only a responsibility for careful and
considered thought and judgment but the sort of responsibility which
has us vweigh where we come out in all of thse situations. And at
times, although it is rather flattering to be treated on a bcis
of equ. rlity, one ondors whether the larger countries with which
we enter upon discussions still realise that w; e are loss than
12 million people trying to build a grant continent when they,
in their turn, arc countries of great population and with many
decades of national development behind them.
Vle in Australia have boon jolted by events to adulthood
in circumstances of such complexity as to call for a maturity and
understanding pc-rha-ps has not been ex-ected of us in earlier
periods of our history. So the for. mation of this body of which you
are euicL nd v---ry one of you, is not only i-orta. nt in
the national sense, but in my view could hardly be more timely
because Australia will have to form a judgr'nt, nationally, upon
many matters going well beyond our shores, matters which will involve
us in some exercise of responsibility, some provision of military
assistance, some provision of international aid or guidance,
technical capacity and equipment, a whole host of matters which
would have been foreign to ea rlier governments in Australian
history. It is true we have been doing something along these
lines over recent ycars. It is quite obviously the fact that more
will be demanded of us, expected of us, end indeed needed from us
as the years go on. Nowv it struck me so many times during my own
long period in public life as rather strange that we hadn't
developed amongst the leaders in commerce and trade and industry
a greater willingness on their part or might I say your part
to participate in the national dialogue on these great questions
of policy which arise from time to time. I am not suggesting or
hinting that you should involve yourselves in the day by day material
of party politics; perhaps that can be left to those of us
who are in the political scene as your Parliamentary representative.
But I don't think we can afford to go on indefinitely without views
being put quite vigorously and frankly and clearly, not necessarily
in an organised sense or by the organisation represented here
tonight, but by individual public loaders in their own field, and
by public I mean men who have achieved stature in the eyes of the
public in the fields of industry and trnde and commerce.
There is a great need in Australia, a gap in our
structure from this absence of participation in the national
dialogue. It has been increasing, of course, to some degree
over recent years, but time and time again as we have sat around
the Cabinet table in Canberra and sought to appoint some person
to a particular public post, one which calls for a man with an
industrial or commercial background, but also which calls for
qualities which go beyond the tasks of his own particular organisation
or section of industry. And I assure you, you would
be rather shocked to know how narrow the field of selection proves
to be when we come to this task, and it perhaps explains why you
find familiar figures bobbing up in a number of tasks of government.
We feel almost cmbarr. as.: ed when we go back to the same
familiar figures and ask them to do a job for us, and if we do
that it is not because we want to load unanocessary burdens on their
back but because there hasn't been this general participation in
affairs going beyond the immediateprroccupation of the executive
or the director in particular industries and sections of the
economy which would provide us with the recruits we need for 
3.
public service sometimes honorary sometimes of a more
pormrnont character, but contributing to what has been as Sir
Robert Webstor recognised in hi: notable address the other evening,
Sconsiderable and significant increase in the participation by
government in the affair-of industry. Not psrticip. tion, I would
hope, in the sonso that w; e are going to -ntrude irare deeply
thani-s been the case in the past; but participation in the
sense that there is a growing need it has been there for a long
time, and we have done 0rsomething bout it but a growing need
in the times in which we find ourselves for temmwNork between
government and management so essential if the country is to
progress as we would all wish a: a great co-operating democracy.
And so, gentlcmen, here is isk for the Institute
of Director, and it is hc-rtening to us all to feeol the need for
a more co-oerative Australi, an 4u'tral that has devclJped
a close national unity, to sec evidenced by your presence here
tonight the signs thet in the field of top director-ship and exccutive
strength in this country, we will find a greatcr co-ordination
of ideas and activity than ve hrve in the paSct. This will be a
tromondous national a: ss:: t for utra. lic.
No! w w, 0s a Govcr-: mnt, have encounterod, or at leonst
are the inheritor of a combination of important development5 ; hich
era produein5 c1halle:--ing sitnations for us in a nuzabcr of dietions.
I mention first, however, the : noroal picture bcenuse I nt
to como to com of these dovelopOnts in a momnt, but as ono looTe
at the Au: traolian scone g -crwalltyhe, task doesn't look as formidable
in the internal domestic sense, the economic sense, Mr.
President, as perhaps you have pictured it here tonight. That may
be the viewpoint of an optimist but I think it is one in which Lriy
colleagues of tha Cabinet wculd agreo. That doesn't meancn that thr
won't be problems in the futura, of courso. , Anybody living in a
country so Cubject to the ha zo: rd: z of t( he Coson, the fluctuation
in ". utput year by year, a: the result of either drought, flood or
some other advorse fr'ctor, the quite snoartionr. l fluctuations
which occur from time to timo in iwhat we receive overseas for our
products, when you are fr0c!, ith that set of circumstances, noone
can claim that the course aheod is ever likely to be ecsy.
But for those of us that h". ve to sit and evolve continuing policies
of a national kind, it doesn't look so formidable as it did in
earlier periods in the last twcnty years because we have had the
good fortune in this c-ountry to come through a long period of stable
political growth and policy formation with no interruption and with
a continuing stability of conditions here. ' Not many countries
around the world could point to that kind of stability whilst they
were forming policies of an enduring kind. ind I believe that
over these years we've established a pattern and a structure for
the Australia of the future which will endure for very many years
to come, a basic pattrn and structure of policy and national
endeavour. Non let ma just illustrate it in a few directions. We
have launched and sustained a vigorous programec of migration
which we have every intcntion of continuing on as larg a scale
as we can contrive. Secondly, for miost of the period I speak of,
Australia has enjoyed Nhat would be described in realistic terms
as a full omployrnnt situation. Noiw although there have booeen here
some minor fluctuations, no-one with any recollection of the
pre-war Australia or of the more dreadful days of the 1930' s could
describe what has he: pcncd over the last twenty years as other than
a full cmploymont situntion for the country and that situation
continues. There will be odd pockets of weakness here snd there
which we shall have to attcnd to, but by and larg the achievoment
has been recorded through ycars of considerable fluctuation, come
of them years of stress, and ne have beern able to sustain, broadly
speaking, a full employmn; ont situation.
Then we have had a high capiitl fornotion in this
country. I wonder if everyone here realises juct how high this
has been. I was interested myself to discover recently that there
is only one country recorded in the official interna! tional statistics
that can point to a higher level of capital formation, or porcentage 
of capital formation than Australia, and -that is Japan. Ours
stands at abcut 27% of gross national expenditure. That Compares
with 17% or 18% for the Unitcdl Kingdom and tho United Sta-tes, and
this, too, is not n pssinE pha sc. It is rattributb] c, oif course,
to oIur oral jnterl crqap), acity -c vvcvc, fo high onc. by o
parativo stand zards around the world and also to the strong cpital
inflow v. hich has been sustaincd cven over these recent pcriods when
official , olicies would appear to have produced some reduction of
it. Ard I mcntion another fcctcr rtable govcrnmcnt something
we tend to take for grantod in this country, and . ri are lucky
pcople to be ble to do so. 1Ve havc-had enoDugh recent exa" mples
around the world to ill. uatr: atet for us that thcse things are not
either inevitablo nor favouring the rm'-srta of the or. dIs propulation
at the present time, a2nd only tonirht flash has bon
-eccived to the cfct -tht i: GL:: nr te army hs t-ak-I over the
govornment there a. nd appr -ntly deposed the -dministrc. tion of
Procident Ykrw arux. h. WeVoll, this ha-ppening so recently agninst the
events in figria, which w,. s regrdeda about the r. ost stable of
non-uropean cttes in A'frica, is an-ther illustrL-tion of the
re tless and violent world in ilhich i-e stand as an isand of
stability and security. Anc this, of cours, is the factor wrihich
one finds cropping up renotedly in the tnlk I hve with those , ho
come here looking , ustralii over ana ing away frem thiis country
more convinqced th-r. they h Od over been bef_, ore that thic is a. country
in which they should have some otake for the future, joining w ith us
in the building of a Croat notion, a stabilisin, -trcngthcning and
prospering factor in t-his significaint area of the orld.
But I have -mntioned the elements which are illustrative
of whnt I speak of as the established structure and pattern for the
Aastr: lic. o1f th fte. I don't b-liecve that even if there ;, wore
a chane of goveriment, dspite the fa ct th. At I know there is
and I not : nnting to turn this into a political occasion
despite the fact that there is a pr. ofession of demccratic socialism
on the part of VMr. Calwo ll, a rdicl and socialist party on the pa rt
of Mar. 7Yhitlair; my own belief is that these patterns tha-t I mention
are now co solidly cetablishod in ustrlia that even if a Labor
Govcriin-t catnc int.-office. it wold soon find that the electoraite
would rejcc-t it if it sought in any w! ay to lltcr what h-d becoe
establiched national policies, serving utralia .' ll.
So I say, ladies rnd gentlemcn, that I don't expect an,,
fundamcntl or drastic policy changcs even from our politicl
opponcnts; wh-tevcr their rish-sn i-hbte in this direction, I
-am sure the cight of -lctor7l opinion would be aga-inst it, and I
don't sc the need for them an the pa: rt of our on governiment, in
order to deal ;: tith the domoetic situa7tion as e view it. There will
be some marginal action re * uirecl in perhaps a variety of directions,
but any one in this ream who is trying to pla-. n for the future of
their own organisction in ustra-liai canli, I belicvc, rely upon those
fund. ntls. ill CoI industrial rroith Vill
continue, the full emloeycnt situati-) n w-: ill be a. steoady nd continuous
one in this cou~ ntry, n6 there will be a continuing stability
of political a: ffairs in ustrlia ao a btasis of our owin
national groth. Tow I believe this to be true : and I am , ure this is the
view taken of it by these who come from overseas to observe
our scene and they claim something else which I was going to
mcntion in another connection a little later, but perh-. ps it is
apposite to introduce it here, and this is sonrething we don't talk
about ourselves. A6gain, we tae it for ranted. But they include
in their cntcgory Cf the assts they discover, the character and
qulity of the ., utr-lia n popl. There may be less than 12
million of us but in the eyes of those who come to observe us,
we -re poople of character and. quality. nd how-essential this
is if weo rre less th n 12 million peop--le; ', ith ri contincnt of the
size of the Unitcd Statcs to develop, then e cn't -: afford to have
second-2atQ people or people lacking in chcarnctcr nnd quality. 
, The most valuable export that Australia can send abroad is the
Australian who goes as a technician or a professional man into
one of these countries to our North to give guidance and training
a proj-ection of Australia as a helpful kindly country
with people of character and quality who can make a contribution
to security and progress in this part of the world. It will be
one of my own tasks as your Prima Minister to encourage this process.
I can believe that Australia can do a great deal by the positive
constructive type if diplomacy using that word in its widest
sense where Australians go out and make Australia better known
in a constructive and helpful way around the world and in particular
around the world to the North of us.
I Now I have mentioned something about the established
economic situation but let me say a word about the prospects.
I said a word or two in this direction but my friend, Charles Court
ought to be taking over this part of what I have to say because he
is the best national salesman in political circles that I know.
You will be discovering this in more detail, no doubt, tomorrow
but having established the pattern and structure that I have
mentioned, forward prospects continue to read most attractively.
We have oar own good population growth rate and we have a good
growth rate with population and productivity going together.
But our population rate I have bean pointing this out to some of
our distinguished visitors, in particular Denis Healey, the British
Minister for Defence, and Vice-President Humphrey; we have a
population growth rate something of the order of upwards of 2 per
cent, the United Kingdom .8 of 1 per cent and at the last year of
record, the United States 1.3 per cent. Others may choose to
ignore this, but we can't ignore it. It is a fat of life for us.
It imposes considerable burden and stress upon us to provide the
hotsing, the schools, and the hospitals, as I am sure my State
COllo n. s here will beer -i-ness, . ui-te convincingly. And so
here is itself a factor for economic growth in the future.
the
Then we add to thistotory which Charles, I imagine,
will be expanding for you, of the exploration which has produced
the fabulous mineral discoveries in our North and in the W. est and
indeed in various other parts of Australia as well, not to ignore
the natural gas so far discovered which csan make such a contribution
for economic development. But these are things which in the
mineral field alone, could on a not over-optimistic estimate bring
us, within ten years' time, an export income equalling or surpassing
that which we will be receiving or are receiving concurrently
from our wool production. So this means quite a striking and
indeed almost fabulous addition to our resources.
Then there is the element, as yet I believe in its
early stages, of our trade with Asia. Who would have imagined
in his wildest hopes that Australia would have built up in these
last ten years or so the kind of regular trade not flukey trade
but regular and growing trade that we have with Japan. The
figures may interest you. In 1951/ 52, Australia's exports to Japan
were $ 97 million in value. Last year, which was not the highest
on record, they were $ 441 million. In other words, a 350 per cent
increase on the figure of 1951/ 52. This, I repeat, would not
have been dreamed of ten or fifteen years ago, and yet as we see
it, we know it is only the beginning. In respect of Japanese iron
ore contracts alone, and Charles correct me if my total is too low,
we have contracts, I understand, completed for the sale of Australian
iron ore to the tune of $ 2,320 million. So that we can
face, I believe, our future in economic terms confidently.
As Japan develops its own standards and grows with its
own internal demands, it will supply an increasing part of Asian
demand. This will be a demand which, with a more sensitive
world conscience on this issue of rising expectations and the
under-privileged areas of the world, there will be gradual but
increasing as I can tell you from our own provision of international
aid there will be increasing ossistance being given to
other countries which in turn will want their demands satisfied by
foodstuffs, raw materials, industrial equipment, all of which
Australia is well placed in this area of the world, with the 
resources we know about, to assist in supplying.
And we have, as part of this story, the determination
of President Johnson and his Administration, reflecting, I believe,
the views of the Amorican people generally, that thoir great
concept of he gr~~ at society ic not to bc limited to the United
States alone. He has already indicated that he is willing to
provide a billion dollar fund for Asian TDvelopment. inerica
has come handsomely into the Provision of capital for the Asian
Development Bank with $ 200M. We, recognising the importance
for the whole area of such a bank, have accepted a much higher
than our proportionote share of contribution by a comrmitment of
( American). Now as those institutions, these Funds, get under
way and make their worth felt, we, in turn, must derive some commercial
benefit from this; whether it is in the area of foodstuffs,
minerals, raw materials or a graowing volume of manufactured exports,
this is something which Australia will be able to do.
So let us turn now for a moment or two to the challenges
which show up clearly in the international fields and the most
urgent , and the most worrying of these, of course, is in South Viet
Nam. We, as an Australian Government, have been firm in our own
views and conclusions about this situation from the outset. We
have seen this, as we have seen o many othor of those critical
challenges of the post-war years, as further evidence of the
communist determination to spread its philosophy, its doctrine
through the world so far as this proves possible for it, probing
here and there, finding a weak spot, trying to build up the
pressures. We see it currently at its most manifest-. in South Viet
Nam, but I have boon talking yesterday and today with the rc-prooontatives
of Thailand end they would be telling you of the pres ures
to which they are being subject on their North, on their East, on
their ' ost from the Communist influence, and we have seen this,
as I am glad to say the President of the United States and his
Administration have seen it, as another challenge to free peoples
throughout the world.
Now gentlemen, if this is your view, and I think it would
be, because I know that in our own Parliament in the two Government
Parties, there is not one member elected to represent the people in
those two Government Parties who does not subscribe wholehoertedly
to the Government's policy of support in South Viet Nam and a
backing for the nmerican policies there. But I don't want you
to feel that you can just leave it to your Parliamentarians, if
on a great national question such as this, touching the very
security of the nation, touching the security of free peoples
everywhere, we can afford to allow the politician only to persuade,
to convince, to argue on this issue in our national community.
Here, if you believe these things is scope for you individually
in the positions of leadership that you occupy, and we can't
afford to allow a situation to develop in which the only voices
heard are the voices of dissent. You and I might believe, and
indeed know, that this represents only a handful in the population,
that its influence is not groat, but if you allow it to go, of
course, uncorrected, or unchallenged, a small influence can become
a larger:., cnc. This is what the President is finding. This is
what we, for our part, are finding. And if there is any doubter
in this room of the essential character of the challenge, the
critical nature of it, in South Viet Nam, I wish he would write
to me and toll me. I shall send him by the return of post, the
copy of the speech which Vice-President Humphrey made on this
matter, one of the most compelling and moving public speeches I
have ever heard. And if anybody remains unconvinced after the
evidence that be brings forward, then he lacks the capacity for
conviction. And we've seen, gentlemen, this challenge; how many
times does it have to be levelled before we recognise it in
whatever particular form it emerges. We saw it in Berlin. We
saw it in the so-called Greek civil vmr. As Vice-President
Humphrey pointed out, what a remarkable thing that when 
' Yugoslavia fell out with the Soviet and cut off that supply line
from the Soviet to Greece, the civil war disappeared. An in other
situations, whether it is in Cuba, whether it is in Berlin or in
Greece, or in Korea, or now in South Viet Nam, or in the probes that
are going on in Laos, Thailand gnd other countries in South-East
Asia, this threat to free peoples has to be met. And what an
extraordinary thing it is, illustrating the confusion of mind
on this matter, that you will get a groat paper like the " Now
York Times" which will urge the Administration to defend Berlin
to the last American soldier that can be sent there and yet next
day will write a powerful editorial and go on doing so, urging
them to pull our of the issue in Scuth Viet Nam.
We are told sometimes that we oversimplify the problem.
I am afraid there arc far too many people around the world who overcomplicate
it. And of course you can point to very sincere people
amongst the Viet Cong. No man offers his life unless he believes
quite strongly in what is happening around him, but there have been
people before that the communists have steered for their own
purposes. They have got on the popular band-waggon and nll the
evidence that comes to us is overwhelmingly convincing that here
is a challenge which is guided from Hanoi and which in turn is
masterminded from Poking. Well, there in brief is a reference to
Viet Nam, but we mustn't brush it out of consciousness as something
that isn't vital to Austrnlin's own security. If we can't hold the
line in South Viet Nam with all the weight of imerican strength, if
we can't hold it there, who can tell me where it con be held nywhere
in South-East Asia.
I would like to just mention a word or two to you
about our talks with Mr. Healey because these were fundamental, and
indeed quite historic, because uhat was involved here wvs a dialogue
about the British role in the world. You hove noticed even since
the publication of the White Poper one of the Ministers has resigned,
giving as his main rocson for the resignation that he disogrecs with
the strategic concept, that in his view Britain should withdraw,
should not have forces enst of Suez, and this view was advanced by
the shadow Defence Minister on the Conservative side, Enoch Powell
some time ago. I have reason to believe thnt it is not a universally
held view in the Conservative P: nrty or even in the Shvdow
Cabinet of the Conservative Party, but it nas put forward publicif:.
by their Shadow Minister, and so this is more than just editorial
stuff or liternry criticism or debating society material. These
issues are urgent topical, vital issues for the security of this
country. Mr. Hoaloy, quite obviously from the recent actions of
his colleagues, has been under much pressure to adopt the line of
withdrawal East of Suez and when he reached us, I think he felt
there would be a very limited life to their occupancy of the
base in Singapore. Well, at least one value which came from those discussions,
and there were several important conclusions which
we were able to reach together, but one at least was to impress
on him our view of the importance of the British presence in this
area of the world, the importance of the retention of the base
in Singapore for as long as this was humanly possible, an assurance
that in our view, a British presence there far from being resented
by the peoples of Asia, would be accepted by them as a moderating
and stabilizing influence, contributing to their security rather
than a source of disturbance and restlessness and turbulence amongst
their people... I am glad to say this view was endorsed when he reached
Singapore and Kuala Lumpur and it was a view which was endorsed
by the representatives of the Thai Government with which
we have been holding discussions in thcse last two days. And so
has emerged this quite notable decision of the British Government
to remain in effect a world influence, not to withdraw and adopt a
quite narrow view of their international responsibilities, but to
maintain a global role, to maintain substantial forces in this area
of the world and to remain on in Singapore for as long as that
proves humanly practicable. 
8.
! hat did flow from it also was acceptance by us of the
vicvw that althouh they might docide and h! ve now decided to remain
thcre, it rny prove, as a recult 1of ovelomonts which no-one can at
this time foreseeo, that a base in Singapore cannot be suctaincd.
Well it put in that blu. rt and frioadly fa. shio2 that r. Healey
has that if Britain couldn't stay there, it had nowhere :. lso to
go and had to go homo unless it could come to Australia. So we
shall, in our planning of our own brze facilitics for the future,
and indeed taking into account this contingency, be bringing our
attention to the possibilities which could develop here, and conducting
discussions at the Service lovel with reprosentativos
of the British Government.
iNow, remember, he was talking about problems which might
r. ric in the 1970S, cvven the 1990' s. Our on situation is not
going to be tr'nsfonncd overnight, but what we will be doing in
the yeors rhead will be planning, rill be acting in such a way
that wc guard against the sort of dangCer which your own judgoments
will conjure up for you.
7hat flows from all of this, from the talks with the
United States which has become so hcavily committed in terms
of manowcr and military equipmcnt and unLdrtrkings to conduct
a constructive, positive programme of peaceful economic development
in thrat are of the world, was that it obviously involves for
Australia a growing commitment over the years. The lesson is
there, or the writing is there for us, that we must become more
self-reliant to meet the varo. cty of dangers which can threaten
us in the future. I spoke a little oerlior of our trcdo with Jrpan.
We h: ave irmmodi-tely to the North of us 100 million people in Vwhat
has become a virtually bonkrupt and disorgniscd economy, with
turbulence of a political kind, the outcome of which no-one at
this point can foresee. Austr,. lian trade with Indonesia in the
same ycar that I mentioned with Japan ( 1951-52) was $ 8M. Last
year it was $ 7M agmainst 4; 44.11 for Japan. Eighty million of people
well organised with a strong, buoyant oconomy, industrialised with
rising standards in one direction; 100 million people subjected
to this turbulence, this economic failure which one sees immediately
to our North, and here is a country with which we have a
common boundary in New Guincea.
So Austra. ia., l'dica and gentlemen, has been jolted
ot merely into adulthood but into r maturity of attitudes and
approach; a requirement of maturity of decision which we have
not known in the degree we have to confront it today at any earlier
point in our history.
I don't mention those things to you in any pessimistic
spirit because I bclieve that this country has a destiny in
Asia which should excite us all. Indeed, one of the heartening
things is to discover amongst the lenders of the countries
of AsiC how much Australi, is respected as friend nd d lly, as
donor of international aid, and it is not the big costly
things that matter so terribly much in their eyes.
One of the most significant elements of aid that the
Prime Minister of Thailand was mentioning to me was a military
training school we have in his country for technical training
of people who go into the services. Those now going to the
school are being approached by private omployers before they
are through their training, wanting to get them for the
industry of Thailand. Well, at least there is a gain in
an industrial sense. And hero, by this kind of provision, he
pointed to come road construction that we were carrying out.
I am sure Pat orton could suggest a few place-around his own
State where roads could bc built. 
But this sort of thing, not hundreds of millions of
dollars of aid but friendly, technical advice with the man
on the spot, whom they can see, whom they can talk to and
regard as a friend. In these ways, I believe, we are helping
to strengthen our neighbours to o nr North. In these ways,
eventually, I believe, we will find the means of knitting more
closely together the countries interested in this area.
Now my concluding point on all this is that we
see in what faces us in the future not just Australia, but all
those of like-minded ideas in relation to the future we see
a tremendous need for the United Kingdom, the United States,
Australia and Now Zoaland to got together, to co-crdinate what
they are doing, work out together what our objectives should
be, what cur goals are, how we see the future, what we feel we
can do together. Our resources arc not so vast that we can
afford to squander them and we feel that it will be by our
joint efforts, facing common tasks, that we shall achieve most
effectively what lies within each of us to do.
Finally, here we have in this country of ours another
great asset in the co-operating democracy that we have established.
You can go to Darwin, or Perth or Brisbane; people
will be listening to the national news at about the same time,
making due allowances for the time changes in West and South
Australia, but here we have a remarkably homogeneous people of
very much more similar outlook than you will find even in the
British Isles or any other country that you could name. This,
itself, is a tremendous national asset, and at the various levels
of Government Commonwealth, State, Municipal I believe we have
a closer teamwork today and a battor-willcd one, more cordial and
co-operative teoomwork than I have known at any earlier point of
the Australian Federation. And when we look out from government
to industry, I know that next week we shall be conferring ag: in
with many of you, some of you anyhow, who are in this room tonight,
some of the leaders in the field of manufacturing, export advice,
and the leaders of industry, who will see us as a particular group
in the course of the afternoon.
Now this has become a regular exercise twice a year,
trying to get into the minds of industry, talking to those who come
to us freshly from the market place, trying to get the best
picture we can before we launch into major economic decisions by
the Government. So I mention these things. They are taken by so
many for granted, Here we are at this point of time having
established as very few countries in the world can claim to have
established, a co-operating deoocracy in which the rights of
minorities are safeguarded, as they must be in any true
democracy, and in which the national effort is channelled the more
successfully because of the teamwork we have produced.
Now, of course, we haven't reached perfection, and
we never will, but your organisation will be a step along the
road to a better result than we have achieved in the past,
and I would hope that in the course of your own discussions you
would spare a thought for the Parliament as an institution.
In this country, the Parliament doesn't enjoy the
respect it does in many other democracies, although I believe
the quality of service is just as high and the quality of
representation and membership is as high. One doesn't develop
any inferiority complex after participating in Parliamentary
Conferences with others around the world. Your toughset
competition is right back home, in my experience, it is
in so many other directions. But gentlemen and I exclude
the ladies on this because I am sure they give the Parliament
the respect it deserves anyhow but,, gentlemen, a community
which can't respect its Parliament really can't respect itself
because we are drawn from the community, we are there to serve 
the comunity, and if you don't like us, please replace us by
something better. At the moment it doesn't seem to be on the
horizon but one can never be sure!
Well, gentlemen, one could, of course, go on at much
greater length but I am appalled at my own affrontery when I
recall that in the course of this day you have been addressed
with such skill at such length bythe distinguished spokesmen
of whom we heard a little earlier. But 6an I say in my last
sentence to you that to an Australian leader it is a tremendously
heartening thing, not only to feel the good will which has been
radiating to me from all gathered here tonight, but to feel
that from people of the quality that I see represented here
will be moulded the Australia of the future, and in that I have
every confidence and great pride. 



FIRST CONVENTION OF THiE YOUNG AUSTRALIAN
FOUNDATION
WILSON HALL, UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE,
MELBOURNE. 11TH MARCHi-1966.
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Good Evening to you all, and that includes our dissident group
outside. This actually makes me feel very much at home because
the first campaign I ever took part in was in the electorate of
Yarra against the then Labor Prime Minister, or former Prime
Minister, Mr. Scullin, and I remember that night, which was in
the middle of the depression, coming to the hall and finding
that nobody there was prepared to hear what I had to say.
And thinking about tonight as I came along here, I marvelled at
the contrast in circumstances which this generation faces
compared with the generation of which I was a part in my own
university days at this institution. Now I don't know whether
our friends outside arc--students of the university. I hope
not because thoy have not yet learnt that noise is no effective
answer to argument not logical argument, in any event. And
I would hope that as time goes on because my stamina for these
matters, assisted by these mechanical devices is very much
greater than theirs they will learn a few things which will
be of interest to them.
Now ladies and gentlemen, I suggest that you ignore
the people outside and just concentrate on what I have to put
to you because you can hear me and, thanks to this instrument,
I can get over to you, and I came here tonight to speak to you,
or those who are willing to hear what I might have to say.
And I thought quite hard about accepting this invitation because
it came in the first week of the Parliament. It was a particularly
heavy week and normally I'd have been disposed to say,
" Sorry, there's rather too much to do this week. Perhaps we
could try another time". Then I remembered back to my own days,
of which you are the corresponding generation, and I recall how
hard it was to get young people interested in the comm~ unity and
political affairs of their country. The only reason, I thir~ k,
why I came into politics when I did was that this country was
in such a state of economic disaster, a condition which nobody
of this generation, I think, could even visualise. There has
been only one month in the last sixteen years when the registrants
for employment exceeded 3 per cent., and that was in the normal
low seasonal demand month of January some years ago 3 per cent.
In the year of which I speak, the registrations were 30 per cent.
Thirty out of every 100 trade unionists registered with the
various unions were unable to get any regular paid employment
at that time. And every generation has to face up to its own
set of problems and challengus and we in my day had to face up
to the problem of economic organisation. We had just come out
of a war, and the dislocation of war was still upon us and the
clouds of the next world war were gathering ominously above us,
but we learn through our expceriences how to master, very
considerably, the economic problems. 
It's true we have fluctuations. People get concerned
about recessions as they see them appearing or disappearing in
the economic field, but here we have had a remarkable experience
going on now for the best part of twenty years in which Australia
has known this full employment situation, this condition of what
is termed in modern times, the affluent society. That doesn't
mean that your generation doesn't have the same set of tough
problems which you have to face. And it is a heartening thing
to somebody who has given more than half his own life in the
service of the National Parliament to find that a new generation
of young Australians is prepared to come together as you are in
this organisation and face up to the possibilities of service
which lie open to you, face up to the task of analysing as calmly
and sensibly as you can, the national problems, those affecting
you directly, those in which you can play some part in helping
your country along. And because I believe that is the essence
of the objectives that you have outlined for this organisation,
I felt that here was something to be encouraged and here was an
organisation which could at least feel from its foundation that
it enjoyed the warm approval and commendation of the government
of its own country. And so I am here to demonstrate that.
I am also here to tell you something which I found of
interest to myself and that is that there are so many of you.
I don't know whether you realise it but more than 50 per cent.
of the Australian population is 30 years of age or under, and
so the young Australian represents the majority of Australians,
and it is about time, I thought, you saw another Prime Minister.
Most of you have only seen one in your lifetime. I suppose I
am now the second. I can assure you that you will have an
opportunity to see a third. I have no intention of establishing
any endurance records despite the encouragement of Herb Elliott's
presence with us here tonight. In fact, I had looked rather
enviously at Herb because he combines in himself, speed, stamina
and lightness on his feet. Now what better combination could
a politician hope for than that set of qualities, but while Ican't
guarantee that I shall remain for any length of time
corresponding to that of Sir Robert, nor would you probably be
wishing that, I find it difficult to predict at the moment whom
my successor will be.
Here we are concerned with the great problem of which
we have had an echo from the attendance of our friends outside.
I have no desire to convert this gathering into a political
occasion but I think that you are entitled, having regard to the
obligations that the Government imposes upon you, to hear an
explanation at first hand as to why these things have been
believed to be necessary, and so while there are a few other
matters I would like to mention to you tonight, perhaps it
would be useful if before we get the whole issue clouded with
emotion anC political propaganda, I could just give a few facts
about this issue first of Australia's participation in the
campaign in South Viet Nam, and secondly to tell you the reasons
why we found it necessary to adopt a particular method of service
in relation to the army and the incidence of this, how it works
out. I say I believe this to be necessary because I have little
doubt in my own mind that given the facts, the Australian community
is quite capable of coming to a sound and sensible decision,
but if people refuse to study the facts, then who can foretell
the kind of decision that they in their public judgments will
find themselves coming to. 
I don't think that anybody who has made a study of
contemporary history could really be in much doubt or remain
there for a long time about the issue in South Viet Nam. I
know that there are some people who profess that this is a civil
war and that the rest of us should keep out of it and let the
citizens decide this issue for themselves. But anybody who
speaks in those terms has either q~ jpletely ignored or forgotten
contemporary history in relation/ Malaya, Korea, Taiwan and
various other parts of Asia which even at this moment are currently
feeling the pressures and probes of the Communist expansion.
Even India, peace-loving India, is finding itself at this moment
confronted on its boundaries with thrusting Communist pressures.
Even in Thailand, which offers no threat to China or any interest
of China's, I learned from the mouth of the Prime Minister of
that country only a week or so ago that they are at the present
time under pressure in their north, in their east, and in their
west from Chinese communist expansion. And when one knows
these things and has all the evidence of what occurred in Korea,
the fact that but for the strength of American resistance, Taiwan
woulO have been overrun by the Chinese communists also. And
now here in this critical area of South East Asia, a great
struggle, a struggle involving your freedom and my freedom and
the freedom of free peoples everywhere throughout the world is
occurring. Now, I would have thought that this was plain enough;
whatever one might decide as to what ought to be done about it,
the broad fac* t-s surely are plain enough and the evidence surely
has accumulated sufficiently to convince the most doubting that
whether you like it or not or approve of it or not, the thrust
is the thrust of the communist movement inspired and directed
from Peking and carrying through its campaigning the ideological
challenge of Peking, the challenge of its philosophy of world
domination for a world that is given to communism.
Now we can understand people differing from our own
ideas. We happen to believe in the virtues of a free society
and of people having the maximum freedom available to them under
laws of their own making. You and I enjoy that kind of democracy.
Our friends outside here enjoy that kind of democracy. otherwise
they wouldn't be here tonight. And a robust democracy doesn't
discard or repress its minorities. It gives them the opportunity
for expression and so I, ladies and gentlemen, believe that as
the facts unfold, the Australian people will realise as I am sure
they do now, the essential character of the struggle that is
going on in South Viet Nam. Have we all forgotten quite as
quickly as would seem to be the case with some that this country
and the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries had to
maintain a campaign for, I think it was, 15 years in Malaya in
order to suppress Communist guerrilla activity in that country.
If you go to Malaya, or Malaysia as it is called at the present
time, you will find a well-ordered community, a people functioning
under a Parliamentary democracy, steadily improving their own
economic and social standards. Now this country was saved, as
South Korea was saved, as Taiwan has been saved from communist
domination because there were people who were prepared to join
with those who were under threat, who were facing aggression,
people who were prepared to join with them in resisting that
aggression. 
And you~ know, there are people even in this country
who have plenty of cause to be grateful to the United States
for the defence given to freedom throughout the world but who
either refuse to see that it was the critical United States aid
in Korea when the United States stood alone which saved Korea;
but for the United States' willingness to resist agression, if
it came to Taiwan, there would be no Taiwan, or Formosa as we
used to name it, and there would be, had America not stood firm
in its resolution, no South Viet Nam.
Australia has a proud tradition of service beyond its
own shores in the cause of freedom. In two world wars, this
country sustained nearly half a million casualties, fighting
for the issue of freedom in those great contests. We lost more
men in casualties, killed from war action, in the First World
War, than did the whole of the United States. So we don't
take an isolationist view of life. Where the threat exists,
there the threat must be resisted and we have joined freely and
willingly those of like mind to ourselves in resisting that kind
of threat. And this is why we are in South Viet Nam. We
believe that if South Viet Nam were to fall, it would only be a
matter of time before the whole of South-East Asia fell and
Australia came directly under physical threat itself. These
are not fanciful beliefs but they are the views of the most
experienced men in the public life of your country, acting on
the most expert advice that they can secure from their
diplomatic sources, from their military sources and from the
senior administrative personalities who conduct the government
of this country through the Departments of State of this country.
And I ask you to bear that in mind as you gather in some
newspaper editorial and are asked to accept the judgment of
that particular paper. The judgment we ask you to accept is
the judgment of yoar freely-elected representatives, many of
them with many years of experience of government, acting, I
repeat, on the best advice they can secure and the best
information they can obtain, and they being in a better position
than anybody else in this country to secure that advice and to
obtain that information.
Now we in Australia have remained secure. Secure far
more so than most other countries of the world because of the
alliances to which we are a party. We entered, some years ago,
into an alliance we and New Zealand with the United States
of America. It is a mutual pact against aggression on any one
of us, and so long as that pact endures, Australia enjoys the
guarantee of its security against attack by the forces and
strength of the mightiest power in the history of mankind.
And when we know this, and we know that the issue
which the Americans are facing in South Viet Nam is an issuie
which involves Australia even more immediately and directly than
the United States of America itself which isn't under the same
physical threat that we would be, then I wonder what our critics
have in mind as an alternative policy for this country. I have
yet to hear it. I have yet to hear a clear, coherent alternative
put to the policy being pursued by the government of this
country. And who do our noisy friends outside expect to do
the fighting for Australia? Do they want to fight to the last
Crop of American blood or do they expect Australia to carry its
own share of obligation in resisting these challenges which 
involve us as they involve our Allies in this great cause.
And I wouldI have very much mistaken the generation of young
Australians to which you belong if I concludeOd that this
generation had no wish to play its own part in the defence of
its own country andL for the common cause of freedom throughout
the world. But it was so unlike the generations of earlier
Australians who gave their service in meeting these challenges
that it wasn't prepared to face up to the obligations which
came to it in its own day and age. Well, I don't believe
that for a moment. I believe that this generation of young
Australians and I don't say this because I am at such a
gathering tonight; I have said it publicly on more than one
occasion I say that this generation, I believe, is the finest
generation this country has produced. You are a better
educated lot, you are a better trained lot, and in many respects,
despite current evidence to the contrary, I think you are a
better mannered lot than my own generation at the university.
But now, having just said something in outline of the
issue there, let me take up this matter for a few minutes, of
the National Service obligation. This country has fortunately
not found it necessary in the past to call on people conscripted
into service in time of war except, of course, for the limited
operation in the Second World War to a defined area around
Australia, and in both the other Services, in the Air Force and
the Navy, we have secured all the volunteers necessary. This
is rather contradictory to those who say that there can't be
very much interest in the issue facing the Government at this
time. Both these services are up to their complement, working
on a voluntary basis of enlistment.
Now with the Army, although the conditions of service
in the Army and the pay are by no means unattractive indeed
in the lower paid ranks of the Army I believe I am correct in
saying that the rates are the highest of any army in the world,
not excluding the United States of America and it is of interest
to know, and I report this to you, that our Army personnel have
been displaying a very high rate of re-engagement. They enlist
for six years and they have an option of re-engagement at the end
of that time, and 70 per cent. of those who have come to the end
of their period of service have offered to remain on on a reengagement.
So there is not a picture there of a people
dissatisfied with their lot or finding conditions outside so much
more attractive that they hasten to leave the Service. On the
contrary. But the Army I think very properly has insisted
on a very high standard of physical condition and mental capacity
on the part of those offering to join the Army, and you will have
heard of the very high rate of rejection, so that I think only
about one in five of those volunteering has actually been
enlisted and trained in the Army.
Now in order to maintain the strength in what is not an
expeditionary force in time of war in the sense we knew it in
World War I and II when people enlisted for the duration and had
no idea of how long they would be away for, and in the result were
away for four or five years at a time, many of them, the
obligation of National Service is clear and precise and its
termination is clearly known by the National Service trainee when
he is taken into the Army. on the expert advice of our Chief 
of Staf f of the Army, we were told at the time that this was
the oniy effective way in which we could get the numbers of men
of the right quality for our own regular army service. And the
Government took its decision very responsibly. We made its
implications quite clear.
When Mr. Calwell says now he wants a referendum on
this issue, he overlooks the fact that at the time the bill was
introduced into the Parliament, the conditions of service were
made amply clear, and so he said at the S-,-nate election which
followed, " We'll make that the issue of the election" 3 and the
election was largely fought around that particular issue. So
the Australian public has been well aware of what is involved
in this. But propaganda can create a quite misleading picture.
I heard over the news tonight for example that some 81,000
registrants were involved this year in the scheme. Nobody went
on to say that the total to be taken in to the Army from this
80,000-odd would be just over 8,000. In other words, one in
ten approximately of those of that particular age group, would
be finally taken into the ranks of the Army. Nobody went on
to say that so far as the obligation to serve in South Viet Nain
is involved, the total force to be sent is under 4,500. The
National Service component would be of the order of 30 per cent.
In other words, out of more than 80,000 young men of twenty at
this time, not more than about 1,350 would be in service in
South Viet Nain at any one time, and the period of service being
in total two years and the period of training occupying from six
to nine months, the tour of duty in South Viet Namn being limited
to one year, the National Servicemen there at any one time would
be of the order that I have mentioned, just about 1/ 60th or
1/ 70th part of the total of young men of that age group and a
period of service limited in the result to one year in that
particular theatre.
Now, nobody likes a policy of this kind, of course,
but having regard to the issues for one's own country, can it
be said that an Australian Government is placing an unduly heavy
burden for the security of the nation upon any particular
section of its citizens. However, that is our view of the
fairness of it and of the limitations of numbers and of period
of service imposed under the scheme and I hope that these facts
will remain clear in the minds at least of people like yourselves
when the propaganda and the emotion which will be such a feature
of the coming months has served to obscure in the minds of most
people just what is involved.
Now I really feel I should apologise to you for spending
so much time on these particular matters but they are of great
concern to your own generation and they are of tremendous public
interest to Australians as a whole, but that wasn't what I
expected I would be talking about to you when I first accepted
your invitation because I felt that here was an opportunity to
explore together for a few minutes the other directions in which
a young generation of Australians can these days make an
effective contribution to the national welfare and to the national
security because while we have been talking about the grimmer
side, the military side of facing the threats we see around us,
there is a positive side to the opportunities which lie ahead
in which an Australian nation can serve the area of which we are
a part, an area in which Australia is finding itself increasingly 
of growingT prestige and stature and of growing interest to the
countries around us. And this interest proceeds partly from
the fact that we have had to face up to a tough job of
development and most of the countries to our north are
themselves going through periods of development of their own
resources and struggling with the fundamentals of economic
organisation. Now they see here a country of less than 12
million people who have built up one of the highest standards
of living in the world, a country in which less than 12 million
people are developing a continent the size of the United States,
and they are turning to us for guidance in various ways. We
get a request for technicians and professional people in all
manner of fields. At one time we were asked to supply, for
example, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malaysia. We get
medical teams in the field, technicians going up to help with
agricultural ( next portion lost while tapes were being changed)
increasingly services by intelligent young Australian men
and women who are going into the public service of Papua and New
Guinea, helping to build the country up with standards of
education, help that will enable the people to lead civilised
lives in a modern well-organised community.
And so there are these fields of service open for the
young Australian. We are, as I have stressed, and is so evident
to you from your own studies, increasingly involved these days
in the affairs of Asia and we have to learn to live sensibly in
a friendly and helpful way with people who have different habits
of life from ourselves, different attitudes, different religious
faiths, people who in some ways are very unlike us but in other
ways share with us the great objectives in terms of human
principle that we have established here in our own country, and
so here in our own day anO generation, we face our own particular
challenge. In my day, we looked to the United Kingdom and the
strength of the British Navy. People thought in terms of the
British Isles as home. Here, while our affection remains from
the lands of our kith and our kin for most of us that has been
the situation we have now realised that Australia has a
national independent entity of its own and that Australia faces
problems and has obligations which are quite unlike anything
the earlier generations of Australians had to meet. And so
we can't offer you a tremendous amount by way of guidance because
a precedent hasn't been able to serve us for the kind of
situations we now face. But what we and I speak now for the
older generation of Australians do offer to you is a comradeship
together as we face the difficulties and at the same time the
fantastic possibilities that we see ahead of a growing nation.
Over the next ten years, there will be vast mineral
projects opened up on this continent that will focus the
attention of the world on what is going on in Australia. We
have a vast treasure store of basic minerals in quantity excelling
that certainly of most other countries and in some instances
ranking among the highest sources of supply in the world our
bauxite, our iron ore, which up to a few years ago were not even
known to us for their existence. And as these things open up,
as our own great resources expand, we in Australia will be 
sharing in the growth of a nation assuming an increasingly
important part in the affairs of the world. Even today we
have an influence out of all relationship to our numbers and
our material strength. We can take pride in that. It is an
inheritance that the service of Australians i'ho have gone
before us have built for our enjoyment and for our strength and
you in turn must accept the obligations as you accept the
opportunities of this wonderful country in which we live.
I would hope from time to time to be able to follow
the development of the work of this organisation but at least
your objectives commend themselves so highly to us that you have
the warmest good wishes of the members of my own Government for
your future success, and we hope from this Foundation there will
be a growing body of responsible Australian men and women able
to play an increasing part in the various fields of national
leadership, in the politics of the nation, in the professions,
in the public service and in the economic and community life
of Australia. It is to the people that you represent here
tonight that we look to carry on the tasks and the opportunities
which open up such a great and promising vista for all of us to
enjoy together the privilege of Australian nationhood. 



PUBLIC MEETING,_ KOOYONG BY-ELECTION
KEW TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE 28TH MARCH 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
I have heard a lot of people here tonight calling
out " Let's have a referendum" but you know they are the same
people who won't even let us have a meeting. There is not
much point in having a referendum if we can't have a meeting.
My purpose here tonight and I won't, of course, be
deterred from it by the noise of those who come here to break
up a meeting is to speak in support of our Liberal
candidate, Andrew Peacock, who has been selected by the
Liberal Party to succeed a very great Australian who represented
this electorate with great distinction for more than thirty
years. Kooyong has a reputation for returning to the Federal
Parliament very great men. You gave us Sir John Latham, who
proved to be one of the outstanding figures in the history of
our Federation. And then followed Sir Robert Menzies who
established an all-time record term of office as Prime Minister
of this coantry. And so when it came to find a worthy
successor to Sir Robert Menzies, the people of Kooyong, in a
democratic ballot, selected from those who were offering a
young man who had already established his political wisdom and
capacity to a point where at a comparatively early age he had
been selected as the State President of the Liberal Party in
Victoria. Now a young man who enjoys the confidence of his
fellow citizens and members of the same party sufficiently to
be selected as their State leader in what has been a stronghold
of Liberalism in Australia is a young man quite clearly who
possesses exceptional political qualities, and that is the
candidate that we are offering from the Liberal Party to the
electors of Kooyong on this occasion.
Now tonight, ladies and gentlemen and I am speaking
now not only to those of you in this hall but the many thousands
of you who are listening to the broadcast of tonight's
proce. edings the issue in this campaign is not whether you
have a change of government; this is a by-election but this
by-election provides not merely the opportunity to return a
very able man to the national Parliament but it does provide
an opportunity for an Australian electorate to offer a view on
what is clearly the most outstanding public issue of this time.
And the public issue can be divided into two parts for tonight's
purposes. One is whether Australia should or should not be in
South Viet Nam with troops, and a considerable section of
this audience, not all of whom I suspect come from Kooyong,
has indicated very clearly that they think Australia should
not be in South Viet Nam, and in adopting that view they are,
of course, echoing the view of the Australian Labor Party and
its Parliamentary representatives in Canberra. Well at least
then, we have that much established. Those who are making
the noise are supporters of the Australian Labor Party and they
oppose our being in Viet Nam. 
on the other hand, the other three parties
represented in the National Parliament the Liberal Party,
the Country Party and the Democratic Labor Party, all
believe that Australia should be represented in South
Viet Nam and should be engaged in assisting the communist
aggression which threatens the people of that country.
So here tonight we have a number of people, supporters of the
Labor Party, the one party represented in the National
Parliament which is opposed to Australia's participation in
South Viet Nam. Of course there is one party outside the
National Parliament, and I suspect that that party is well
represented here tonight also; that, of course, is the
Communist Party. It too believes that we should not be in
South Viet Nam.
And so, ladies and gentlemen, here is a national
line-up. Three political parties saying Australia should
be fighting communist aggression in South Viet Nam, and two
parties the Australian Labor Party and the Communist Party
saying that Australia should keep out of South Viet Nam.
All right, if that is one of the great national issues on
which the Labor Party wants to fight an election, then this
government accepts that challenge quite gladly.
Somebody says " What about a referendum?". Of
course this wasn't Mr. Calwell's story when we passed the
legislation. At the time when we passed the legislation on
National Service, the Labor Party then said that the forthcoming
Senate election was going to be the testing election of the
Government's policy on National Service, and that election
was held in 1964, and in only one State did the Labor Party
secure a majority of the votes on that occasion. And so,
having fought the Senate election of 1964 on this particular
issue, the Labor Party refuses to accept the verdict given
at that time. Well, then, let that be the case. For our
part, we welcome the fact that this campaign provides yet
another opportunity to examine I would have hoped to
examine calmly and carefully the issues which are involved
in this campaign, but unfortunately there are some who have
come here tonight determined to prevent a clear and coherent
account being given of what is involved. However, thanks
to these mechanical aids to good sense and to good government,
I shall be able to speak to many people outside this hall who
will only be affected to a minor degree by the species of
entertainment which have been provided around various sections
of this audience. Now Sir, Mr. Chairman, the reason why Australia is
represented in South Viet Nam is first because we and our
allies have resisted communist aggression wherever we have
found it. We resisted it in Berlin. we resisted it in the
threat from Cuba. We resisted it in Korea. We saved Taiwan
from being overrun by Chinese communists. And we have
resisted it now in South Viet Nam. We know fully well that
if Chinese communism succeeds in South Viet Nam, then Chinese
communism will spread unchecked through the mainland of
South East Asia and we can surrender the whole of this vital
area of the world to communist overlordship. 
3.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, this issue has been
clear enough to the Australian people f or a very long time
and they have given the Government staunch support in the
action which it has taken. The Government does not take
its action as if somehow the members of the Cabinet lived
in a vacuum. We act, not only on the soundest military
advice we can secure, we act on the advice and the
information reaching us from a wide variety of sources, from
our own diplomatic sources, from the governments of other
countries, from thB Defence Committee which includes in its
membership not merely the Chiefs of Staff but which includes
in its membership I am afraid this lady is behaving in a
very unladylike fashion. It is not often that a lady
intrudes where she hasn't been invited. I hope that nobody
tries to treat her with other than sympathy for obviously
there is a quite imperfect knowledge of the issues involv-2d
for this country and the action which should be taken
regarding them.
Now, I am not surprised that here ton ht in what
we are assured by the Labor Party is a democracy and of
course they may well believe that to be so, because when
Mr. Calwell spoke in this campaign, he wgas given a very
attentive hearing. May I repeat that When Mr. Calwell
spoke in this campaign, he was given a very attentive hearing.
I wonder why his supporters deny to the candidate here
tonight, Andrew Peacock, and to myself a reasonable opportunity
to put the Government's case. I mean, what are they afraid
of? Can't they stand up to the facts? Aren't they
prepared to hear the case which the Government is quite able
to give, convincingly enough, I think, even to shake those
who have come here with the most rigid Labor support in their
minds. And I want them to give me just this opportunity.
I heard one or two calling out " All the way with LBJ". Yes,
there he is. " All the way with LBJ".
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I would think it was
well known to the meanest intelligence that Australia, a
country of less than 12 million people, inhabiting a continent
the size of the United States, could not hope to defend
itself against aggression entirely from its own resources.
That should be quite obvious I should think to the meanest
intelligence. And the action which contributed most to the,
security of the Australian people was the action of the Menzies
Government in negotiating the ANZUS Treaty and the South East
Asian Treaty. These two treaties contribute more to
Australia' s security than anything else that could be named.
These treaties assure us that should we be attacked by an
aggressor we can look to powerful allies to bring us the
strength of their support in resisting that aggression.
Now, once this fact has been grasped, and I hope that you are
able to grasp it quite firmly, then the Labor platform
becomes all the more significant and I am going to read to
you for a moment the Labor Party platform on defence. I
wonder whether our noisy friends will at least allow me to
tell this audience the Labor Party platform on defence. Well
let me read it to you. Now allow me please. 
4.
This is taken from the official printed platform
of the Australian Labor Party under the heading of Defence
" Australia's national policy must be to ensure her
territorial security, the security of her overseas
trade and her development as an independent but
co-operative nation. The nation's defence must
be so arranged that the intention of Australia to
defend itself to the limits of its ability is clear
beyond all doubt to our own people, to our allies
and to any potential aggressor. The development
by negotiation of a regional defence system of
United Nations Member States within the South East
Asian and Indian sub-continental areas for mutual
defence consistent with the requirements of the
United Nations Charter and not inconsistent with
the general provisions of Australia' s existing
defence treaty commitments. Labor's defence and
foreign policies are based on the conviction that
war can and must be prevented and Australia has a
part to play in its prevention. Australia demands
the right to consultation in the great decisions
of peace and war."
Now this is the final sentence and I want you to listen to
this final sentence
" Labor will honour and support Australia's treaties
and defence alliances."
Now that is a very now wait a minute. That is a
very important sentence, but the significant thing is that
that sentence appears in the platform of the Labor Party
for 1963 and 1964, but it has been dropped from the platform
of the Labor Party in 1965, and I say, Sir, that this
Australian Labor Party under its present leadership has no
intention of honouring Australia's treaties and alliances
with those with whom it has engaged This provision
that I have referred to was deliberately dropped from the
platform of the Australian Labor Party and I suggest to
Mr. Calwell and to Mr. Whitlan, his doubtful deputy, I suggest
to Mr. Calwell and to Mr. Whitlam that they occupy the
remainder of this by-election campaign explaining to the
Australian people why the Labor Party has dropped from its
platform the sentence which says " Labor will honour and
support Australia's treaties and defence alliances"
Now, ladies and gentlemen, if this by-election has
done nothing else it has at least brought out into the open
that the Australian Labor Party, without any flourish of
trumpets and without the Australian public being fully aware
of this matter until it has appeared in this rather obscure
way, the Australian Labor Party has dropped from its platform
its undertaking to honour and support Australia's treaties and
defence alliances. All right, we now know where the Labor
Party stands on South Viet Nam. They don't stand with the
United States and the Allies and the South Vietnamese and they
don't stand by the treaties and alliances which we, for
Australia's protection, have freely entered into. 
4. ( a)
Now let me move to the next point. The next point
that I want to deal with is why did we find it necessary to
introduce a National Service scheme. As is well known,
the Australian Government decided some years ago that
Australia should establish and maintain a well-equipped,
highly mobile Regular Army, Navy and Air Force. And over
recent years we have increased the strength of the Navy,
the Air Force and the Army. In 1964, after a period in
which Indonesia had embarked on a policy of confrontation
against Malaysia, a country to which Australia had given
an undertaking to assist in its defence, and at a time when
Communist pressures were increasing in South Viet Nam, in
Laos, in Cambodia, in Thailand, in other parts of South
East Asia, the Government decided that Australia should
increase our Regular Army components. Now at that time the
target was 22,500 men, and a decision was taken to build
this total up to 37,500. S. 
Now, Sir, at that time we were engaging on an active
campaign of advertising for volunteers. We were offering
improved conditions and terms of service, and no one can
seriously argue that the conditions and terms of service are
unfavourable or unattractive because the fact of the matter
is that Army men who come to the end of their period of
service are re-engaging at what is a very high percentage rate.
The figure at the moment is higher, the percentage of reengagement
is actually higher in the Army than it is in the
Air Force or the Navy. It is a percentage of 70, and 700%
of re-engagement is one of the highest figures in the history
of the Australian Army. And so this defeats any argument
that there are not sufficiently attractive pay and conditions
offering for the Regular Army.
So you look for the reason elsewhere and the reason
why we are not getting all the volunteers that we require is
to be found in two directions. The first is that in a fully
employed society, with plenty of opportunities offering for
our young men, in a country that doesn't have a military
tradition, you don't have a great number of young men offering
for an Army career, and the number offering over the last
three years has been in the neighbourhood of 8,500 young men.
But the Army if it is maintaining a small Regular Army has to
have a highly efficient Army, a very fit Army, a well-trained
Army, and people who can measure up to the demands of the
various and varied diverse circumstances that a mobile Army
group will have to meet in various parts of South East Asia.
And so we found in practice that out of some 8,500 volunteers
less than 2,500 were regarded as measuring up to the standard
which the Army required. Now this operated right through
the three years leading up to the changeover to National
Service and when the decision was and it was
a decision taken against a background of the highest advice
we could secure, the strategic advice of our own Defence
Committee, the Defence Committee consisting of the Chiefs of
Staff of the three Services, the Chairman of the Chiefs of
Staff Committee, the Permanent Head of the Prime Minister's
Department, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Permanent
Head of the Department of External Affairs. Now these people
are the top advisers that the Government can secure and based
on their strategic view of the worsening circumstances and
situation in South East Asia they recommended a substantial
increase in the Armed Services and the equipment available
to the Armed Services.
The Chief of Staff of the Army pointed ( obt to us
that if we wished to increase our troops from 22,500 to 37,500
then the voluntary system would give us merely an additional
750 people a year, and quite obviously we wouldn't build up
to the desired target on the basis of 750 people a year.
And it was at this point, Mr. Chairman, that a Government
which has the responsibility for the national security of the
Australian people decided that a system of National Service
was essential in the interests of our people. 
Sir, could any party, has any political party in
the history of Australia been humiliated and treated with
such contempt as the Australian Labor Party's Federal
Parliamentary Party was by the Federal Executive of that
Party. Never in the history of the Australian people has
a political party been treated with such contempt and been
publicly humiliated in the way that the Federal Parliamentary party
of the A. L. P. has over these recent months and this, Sir, is
the Party that says to the people of Kooyong in this campaign
elect us, put the Government out and put us in, put in a
Party that has no defence policy, that has no foreign policy,
that goes along with the noisier members of this audience in
attacking Australia's alliance with the United States. These,
Sir, are the people that ask the Australian Government and
people to allow them to govern the Australia of today. Sir,
there cannot be any doubt as to where Australians come out on
this particular issue.
Now you have a chance to show your support for a
splendid candidate who will represent Kooyong ably and for long
in the years ahead. I would have liked tonight, ladies and
gentlemen, to have given you the positive side of the
Government's programme in the domestic field. I would very
much have liked to have had the opportunity to tell you of the
positive side to the campaign in South Viet Nam because, as
President Johnson pointed out in Honolulu when he met the
courageous leader of the South Vietnamese people, we are
determined that out of the struggle in South Viet Nam will
come a reconstruction, a rehabilitation, a new economic and
social order which will be a model and example to other
countries in South East Asia. Now, Sir, this becomes possible
if Communism can be resisted. This is what has occurred in
Korea, this is what has been done in Taiwan, two countries
rescued from Communist aggression and this is what can be done
in South Viet Nam if we are able to hold in check the cancerous
scourge of Communism.
Now Communism is a cancerous scourge you either
check the cancerous scourge of Communism, you check it, you
eradicate it, or your victim goes under as it spreads its
deadly poisonous effect through the victim concerned, and this
is what has happened in so many of the enslaved countries of'
Central Europe and this, but for the strength and resolution
of the American people is what would be happening in South East
Asia today. Ladies and gentlemen, it is a significant thing that
in addition to all the countries which are giving their military
and material aid in South East Asia, three distinguished
Presidents of the United States, President Eisenhower,
President Kennedy and President Johnson all have taken the
same view of the necessity of resisting aggression in that
country and we in Australia can feel deeply grateful for the
resolution, the strength of purpose, the firmness of mind of
the President of the United States, President Johnson, for
his determination to see these issues through in South Viet Nam. 
Now,. Sir, there are some 80,000 odd young men in
the 20-year age group. And the total of National Servicemen
required was some 8,400, approximately one tenth of the total
number of people who reach that particular age arnd
incidentally, it is of interest to know that in the task
force that will be going to South Viet Nam there will be
approximately 30% of the membership of that task force drawn
from the National Service component.
Now, right from the outset, it was intended that
the National Service trainee should go into a Regular Army
unit and in that army unit serve on the same pay, the same
terms and the same conditions as the Regular Army Servicemen.
But, having then gone into that Regular unit, they should go
wherever that particular Army unit was placed some will be
placed on various duties inside Australia, some will go to
Malaysia, some will go to Viet Nami. If any trouble develops
in our own Territory of Papua and New Guinea then others
would be required in Papua and New Guinea. But where assisting
the Regular Army troops, the people who represent Australia's
contribution to our own security in this part of the world,
they, Sir, will be supported by this comparatively small
component of National Servicemen.
Now, Sir, those National Servicemen are required to
serve in regular service for a period of two years, and, as
to overseas service in South Viet Nam, quite obviously just
as only a fraction of the 20-year-olds will ever be called up
for National S,:. rvice so also only a fraction of those actually
called up will be required to serve outside Australia, whether
in Viet Nam or elsewhere. The tour of duty in South Viet Nam
is one year, after which they would retuirn to Australia.
That in essence is the scheme and the reason why it was found
necessary to introduce that scheme.
Now the Labor Party has offered no alternative.
What is the alternative policy of the Labor Party? First of
all it says pull our troops out of South Viet Nam. it
dropped from its platform the clause which says it will honour
its treaties and its alliances, so it leaves Australia without
treaty assistance and it leaves Australia without the
friendship of those who would feel some obligation to us
because in their time of peril we have given them assistance
to resist the communist aggression directed against them.
Now there in essence, ladies and gentlemen, is the issue on
which the Labor Party chooses to fight this campaign. They
cloud these issues over of course with an emotional smokescreen.
They try to tell the mothers of this country that
their boys are going to be taken away for indefinite periods
of. time, that this is something which is going to apply to
the young manhood of this country. They paint the most
harrowing picture and, Sir, if I thought that the Australian
Labor Party represented the feeling of the Australian people
then I would despair for this country, but I am quite certain
that this Australian Labor Party will go down in history as
the weakest, the most irresponsible, the most unrealistic of
all the political parties which have ever carried an honourable
name in Australia. 
Mr. Caiwell tells us that this is an unwinnable
war what sort of national leader when we know we have
on our side in this issue the United States of America, the
people of this country, the people of other countries who
are giving military support and the South Vietnamese
themselves who have more than 200,000 regular troops in the
armed forces of that country what manner of national
leader is it who tells the Australian people that this is an
unwinnable war. This is the man who wouldn't even support
his own Labor Leader, John Curtin, when John Curtin thought
it was necessary in the interests of Australia to call up
national Servicemen. This is the man who now comes before
you and says that he would be the leader of the Australian
people at a time when the pernicious, corroding, erosive,
influence of Communism is spreading through Europe and is
spreading through Africa and is spreading through the
countries of South East. Asia. Yes, but unfortunately
Arthur Calwell is not. This is my deep complaint.
Our friend here thinks that times are changing.
Of course they are. They have changed since the days of
the conscription of 1916/ 17. Arthur Calwell has never got
outside the atmosphere of that campaign. They have changed
since the days of the depression period of the 1930' s, when
a Labor Government couldn't cope with the economic situation
of that time. Here most of you in this room, most of those
of you screaming here tonight, have never known anything but
full employment thanks to this Government. No government
in the history of Australia has ever kept its people employed,
fully employed, in the way this Government has done. No
country in the history of Australia has given the standard
of living that this country has done. In Labor's last year
of office they provided œ 9014-$ 18014-for social welfare.
That was Labor. We, Sir, in our last Budget, provided
$ 940M4 against $ 180M4 for Labor we provided $ 940M, so this
Government has built the economy of Australia so that we
can support a considerable defence effort, we can support
the most rapid rate of development in the history of this
nation and we can support the highest level of social welfare
that this country has ever known.
Why is it that around the world Oh, I
know, they don't want to hear this, they don't want to hear
it, of course they don't want to hear it but they cannot deny
that these are the facts and these are the facts that Mr.
Calwell and his parliamentary colleagues are not prepared to
stand up to. This is why, although there are many issues
on which this campaign in Kooyong should be fought, they want
the smoke-screen of the one issue. They won't fight the
election in Kooyong over the broad fields of government.
policies they want to concentrate on the one item of policy
and they organise this kind of undemocratic demonstration,
this kind of demonstration worthy of the totalitarian countries
for which their sympathies have been so plainly evidenced.
Sir, does Mr. Calwell who was given an uninterrupted
and attentive hearing in the meeting he opened in this
camnpaign, does Mr. Calwell and that notable democrat, Mr.
Whitlam, the dagger man, does he believe that this is the
way in which Labor supporters should show how a political
meeting should be conducted. I am quite certain that those 
who came here to disrupt this meeting have gained many
supporters for the Liberal cause. If there were any doubters
in this audience tonight as to how their vote should be cast,
then after tonight's performance there will be no doubt that
they will be voting for a government that can maintain order
at home and order abroad. They are not going to hand this
country over to the rabble supporters of a rabble government.
The Labor Party in Canberra today is a rabble party can
anyone who has witnessed the events in the last few months
describe it as other than a rabble party desperately trying
to find a leader that they can support with any species of
loyalty. They cannot support Caiwell they don't believe
he is the man for leader, they cannot support Whitlam because
they don't think he is a man that they can trust, and they
cannot find a candidate inside the Labor Parliamentary Party
that they are prepared to back for their leadership. And
so a rabble party which offers Australia a rabble government
turns to its rabble supporters and says go out and wreck the
meeting of the one government that can conduct Australia to
security and prosperity in these difficult times.
So ladies and gentlemen, I think most of us tonight
have got the essence of the message that we have been trying
to get over to you. You don't have to hear from Andrew
Peacock because you know that this young man has shown the
qualities of character, of intelligence and of leadership
which at this age have brought him to the election in the
position of President of the State Division of the Liberal
Party of Australia, and this young man in a first class field
of candidates which offered themselves for the s~ ection for
this notable seat he had the handsome votes which brought him
here as your candidate tonight.
Now Kooyong has been notable for its illustrious
representation and I am quite certain that following Sir John
Latham, Sir Robert Menzies and the men who preceded them will
be a splendid candidate who enjoys the support of a most
charming, gracious and attractive young wife. These young
people will not only be an ornament for the electors of Kooyong
but they will be assets of great value to the National
Parliament in Canberra. I wish, Andrew, continuing success
to you in the years ahead. I know that you will be a welcome
addition to our ranks in Canberra. You are typical of the
young vigorous, able and intelligent young men and women who
are rallying in their thousands today to the Australian people.
And not only are the young people rallying to us, but tbe,
trade anionists of this country are rallying to us in increasing
numbers. The Labor Party used to claim to represent the trade
unionists of this country but, Sir, we would not be in office
here today unless hundreds of thousands of men and women in
the trade unions of this country voted for us regularly,
election after election.
And this party, this Liberal Party, this great
national party, can claim to be truly representative of all
sections of the Australian people. We are not a class conscious
party envisaged by the memories of long ago struggles which
seem to have poisoned the minds of Mr. Calwell and so many 
of his supporters. This is a young party with a young
outlook for the great future of a great country and it is
with the help of able young men of courage and character
like Andrew Peacock that we shall build a great Australia to
which the Liberal Party will have made a notable contribution
of leadership and wise political guidance and policy
development. Ladies and gentlemen, give this young man, this
very able and very courageous young man, a flying start on
a long and notable political career by a bumper vote not
merely victory, we know he is going to win but give him a
vote of which he and we and all of us can be proud when he
comes to the poll in the next week. 



SETT'ING PZ THM F( W3NATION STONE
OF THE N4ATIONAL LIBRAY CANBERRA 66/ 085
31st March 1366
Speech by the Prime Minister.-Mr. Harold Holt
As you have been told by Mr. Anthony, I shall
shortly have the privilege of introducing to you the best
known man in Australia. I shall be asking him then to
perform a task for which I think he has had more practice
than any other man I could name-in the public life of this,
or any other country; and those two facts alone as I
give them to you indicate the significance of the occasion
for us and of the part of leadership and wise guidance which
Sir Robert has himself played in relation to the building
behind us. 3 e is fortunate, I think he would agree, at least
in this respect, that most people who lay a foundation stone
have to go through a long and rather uncomfortable period
of waiting as the weeds build up around it and the time
marches on before there is much visible sign of achievement
imposed upon the stone which has been laid.
But here we see a building well advanced along the
road to completion and already signifying to us in its lines
the distinction which Mr. Anthony has referred to so
eloquently as he has addressed us in the course of his own
speech. I know that there are many people to whom thanks
and tribute should be paid on an occasion such as this,
and I shall mention them in a minute or so. But, Sir
Robert who has had such a leading part to play in the
development of this beautiful Australian capital which in
every year that passes unfolds itself in greater beauty
and distinction for the observer he would be interested
to know that not only is the N~ ational Library project quite
obviously so well advanced but another great interest of
his was advanced a stagc further this week when I received.
from Sir Daryl Lindsay as Chairman of the Advisory Committee,
the report on the proposed National ZArt Gallery for the
N'ational Capital. Sir Robert had a large part to play in the
decision to establish here a National Art Gallery and to
set up tiic Committee which would do the preliminary thinking
on that matter for us.
vie all know, ladies and gentlemen, that a building
such as we find behind us or you, in front of you does
not just happen and my colleague the Minister for the
Interior has told you something of the planning and toil
which has gone to make it.
lHe has also paid proper tribute to those involved
and I would like to add the thanks of the Government to him
because he has had a very active part to play in the overall
project; and to Mr. overall ( no pun intended-by that
previous reference to Mr. Overall and to all those 
associated with them in What clearly will be a notable and
enduring addition in what is already a very handsome Capital
City. The building will allow the library to bring
together for the first time in Australia a collection of
more than a million volumes and its vast collections of maps,
manuscripts, pictures and films, this will make it possible
for these great resources to be put to their best use.
The Government has appreciated the difficulty of providing
a satisfactory service from the past and present widely
separated temporary buildings and it is grateful to the staff
of the National Library for their dedicated services in
these circumstances. I would like to add a word on what the building
means to the Government and to the Nation. It marks the
fulfilment of processes which~ began with the first Australian
Prime Minister in 1901, and which have had the warm support
of successive governments and parliaments since that time.
I mention the Parliament because, of course, the
National Library grew out of the Parliamentary Library, and
until separation of the two libraries was begun in 1961, the
National Library was developed by the presiding officers of
Parliament and the Parliamentary Librarians of the day.
They were advised by successive Library Committees representing
both Houses of the Parliament and all parties in the Parliament.
I recall with pleasure I had the privilege of serving as a
back-bench member of Parliament on the Library Commtittee in
earlier years. Special recognition is due to my Colleague,
Senator the Hon. Sir Alister McMullin, President of the
Senate who presided over the Library Committee from 1956-1961,
this was during a period of great development and has smoothed
the process of separation since.
The growth of the National Library has been further
accelerated since its act of 1960 under the guidance of the
Council of ninu members with the National Librarian as thieir
Executive Officer. The Govrernment is grateful to these men
and women of wide and varied experience from throughout.*
Australia who have given their services freely in the national
interest. Their Chairman, Sir Archie Grenfell Price, well
known to most of you present as a scholar; is recalled by
me as a very valued parliamentary colleague during some of
the years of War.
The National Library Act of 1960 was a recognition
by the Government and Parliament that a strong National Library
was essential to the research and inquiry neoded to support
Australia's unprecedented National growth. It will
supplement what has been done by Government and others for
universities and research workers generally. As Sir Robert
said when introducing it, the Act did not create a new
institution but would define the functions and role of an
institution which would increasingly play a National role
of the greatest importance similar to that of the great
National Libraries in other countries. 
4V It is perhaps significant that the countries
which have shown the greatest development in this century
are those with the greatest collections of Library material
for research. United States is, of course, perhaps the
most notable example to which our own National Library
owes a great deal.
What should the Australian people expect of their
National. Library It is the, place whiere they should hope to find
the most detailed information about their own cbuntry and
the most important facts and opinions about-other countries,
and especially about those with which our future is likely
to be closely linked. The National. Library is assembling
the records of the past, as well as those which will
reflcZ, current activities. For we cannot-understand the
present or plan for the future without a knowledge of the
past. This is especially important where Australians in
relation to themselves and in thcir growing association with
other countries whose civilizations are so mucil older than
our own. It is well to remember that these older civilizations
include our Asian neighbours and therefore the Library is
actively collecting material in many A sian languages as well
as in English and European languages.
All this will be of great value to the Parliament,
to the Departments of Government, to the Universities and to
research and enquiry where ever it takes place. Through
teleprinter links and inter-Library loans and new communications
of the future, the resources of the Library will bewaailablo,
as they should be, to Australian people everywhere.
And before I turn to my task of calling on Sir
Robert may I on behalf of the Australian Government and indeed
I believe I can say on behalf of the Australian people, pay
a special tribute of thanks to Mr. Harold White who has given
such distinguished service to the Library through so many
years. He has become if not a Canberra institution
certainly in our eyes a Parliamentary institution in his own
right and I speak in warm terms of the gratitude which we
Members of the Parliament, whether in Government or in
Opposition, or whatever individual status may be, foel for
Mr. Harold White and through him for the very able staff
which assists him so pleasantly and agreeably in the service
of the parliament as well.
Now I have earlier paid some quite inadequate
tributc to the role of leadership and guidancQ exercisud by
Sir Robert M4enzies through his record tcrm of leadership as
the Prime Minister of this country.
It is therefore, I am sure everyone will ngree,
entirely appropriate that the Foundation Stone of this
building should be set by him and that he should be today
looked to as the loading figure in a celebration which will
be long remembercd in Canberra and which will by virtue of tho
distinction of the building which it touches and the purposes
which that building serves, mark as one of the more_ notable
days in tho development of Australia's National capital.
I ask Sir Robert Mvenzies if he will lay the
Foundation Stone of the National Library. 



IPTR-PPLIK 1 TRYU1ION
SPELCH OF ' JELCOIE, BY THE P-RIME I1INISTER. MR. HAROLD HOLT
AT PAFIJIMENT HOUSE, CA1U1BERRA 12TH APRIL. 1%
Mr. Chairman, Mr. President, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and
Gentlemen: Thank you for that very encouraging reception.
It is a much more enthusiastic one than I usually receive in this
Chamber. Indeed, as I look around the Chamber, I was a little
discomfited at the outset to see how crowdod the Opposition benches
had become, but as my gaze wanders further afield, I see that quite
notable members of the Opposition are scattered on the Government
side, so that itself is an encouraging sign.
I am very happy to be able to add the w-arm welcome
of the Australian Government and the Australian people to the
meeting of the I. P. U. here in Canberra. ' 4c feel that not only is
this most timely and opportune, having regard to circumstances
unfolding around us in this area of the world. But that it is an
honour to Australia which vie value, I assure you.
You were speaking, M11r. 4) eaker of the symbolism of
the Chair, and could I just round off your story because there is
one chapter which I think would be of interest to our fellow
Parliamentarians. As Er. Speaker, our Chairman has told you, our
Chair, a replica of that in the House of Commons, was presented
to us by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Branch there.
In the period of the blitz, the House of Commons was bombed, and
the Speaker's Chair was destroyed, so we were able to build a
replica of our Chair and send that back to the House of Commons,
and so the Parliamentary tradition, despite wars and threats to
peace, can continue through the centuries if men and women of good
will only have the determination to sec that this is so. And I
believe that there is some happy symbolism in that for us.
I hope you will find in the warmth, the sunshine
and the tranquillity of the Canberra scene also a suitable setting
for this gathering and that there in that warmth and tranquillity
there will be a symbolic atmosphere created for your discussions
in the days that lie ahead.
I said that we Vlere gratified that you had chosen
Australia. This is, I believe, the niost representative gathering
of Parliamentarians ever to have been held in this country.
There have been conferences here of various kinds in the past,
some largely attended by 1dembers of Parliament and our Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association has met here more than once, but I
question whether we have had so representative a gathering from
all parts of the world, all the continents, and from so many
differing conditions and habits of life as we find represented
in this gathering. Surely it is a hopeful sign for the future of
mankind that men and women from the Parliaments of the iworld
can meet togother in friendship ; u-ith a detormiration to find a
better-ae understanding of ea. ch other, to become better informed
0 090 .12 
-2-
about the countries of the world and to take advantage of the
conference meetings to learn something in more detail of the host
country itself. And this is an aspect, of course, which is
particularly prized by us.
We in Australia want to be better known and better
understood because it is through that better knowledge and
understanding that friendship ripens and the causes of animosity
or dissension tend to disappear. And here in this area of the
world, I believe it is the first time that you have met for your
Spring meetings which, as Mr. Speaker pointed out comes in the
Australian Autumn, but the first time that you have met outside
Europe. The first time, therefore, that you will have met in this
Southern Hemisphere. And we believe that here are to be found
and by " here" I mean in the total area of Asia some of the most
compelling and difficult problems that the world has to face at
the present time, and I shall say a word or two on that in a moment.
But another reason why I welcome your presence here
is that we become so conscious that we are living in turbulent,
troubled, restless and rapidly-changing world, and I think we
become over-conscious of that fact because it is thrust upon us
every day by our newspapers, by the modern media of communication,
the radio and the television. Bad news travels fast and good
news tends to be no news so far as the journals of public dissemination
are concerned. The sensational, the challenging and the
troublous, these are the things that hit the headlines, and I
believe it necessary for people in public office, for their
national Parliaments, to get a more realistic and balanced
perspective from time to time of what is oing on, certainly in
their own country, and so far as the rest of the world is concerned,
what is going on in the rest of the world. If you have a daily
diet of trouble and strife, then you begin to think that this is
the sort of world we live in, but of course it always has been
a troubled and difficult world.
Ours happens to be the generation which is told of
these troublous occurrences within minutos virtually of their
happening in almost any part of the world, and each day as we
listen to the latest bulletin of news, we are made conscious of
these things. And then, of course, we can't always rely, as
faithfully as we would wish to do, upon the information which
reaches us. In a world which is highly competitive as to its
political systems and its ideologies, there tends to be in the
propaganda directed from one country to another again a distortion
of fact which makes honest and objective assessment the more
difficult for us. And so hbo valuable it is to have people
coming together in a spirit jf friendship, informed minds capable
of assessing an argument or a situation, and in this way adding
to the sum of human understanding and human knowledge about one
another, and as you go back to your Parliaments, capable of
faithfully and objectively reporting what it is that you have been
able to learn. And so there should be a good dividend for a world
that is striving for peace and social justice from the meeting of
so many representative minds in the di scussions of this week. / 3 
-3-
I thought Mr. Chairman, that it miht be useful
if for a few minutes I tried to sketch in something of the country
in which you find yourselves not to act as a sort of travel
agent or a tourist organisation but because certain things have
been attempted here which may be helpful to others, just as we in
turn are helped by what is achieved in other parts of the world.
No country has a monopoly of achievement or expertise. Science,
fortunately, is more international than politics and so we can all
profit from the achievements of each other.
This is a country in which we have had to call very
heavily upon science and upon skill. Most of you, unfortunately,
will see comparatively little of it. As you probably know, it is
the oldest continent geologically; the largest island approximately
the size of the United States in area if you exclude Alaska
from the United States, but we don't enjoy the same favourable
terrestrial conditions throughout the whole of the continent that
the United States would. There is a coastal fringe which is
reasonably well watered, but ours is largely an arid continent
and we have to struggle over much of our areas with a harsh,
unyielding soil which calls for the skills we can bring, the
application of science, the addition of fertilisers, trace elements
in deficient soils and the development of legumes that can flourish
where otherwise the lack of water would destroy any herbage at all.
This is the sort of problem which challenges our attention, and: so
water conservation, irrigation schemes, the supplementing of the
soil, these are some of the tasks to which a country which has been
one of the great suppliers to the rest of the world of foodstuffs
and rural production must turn if our production is to continue to
increase. But we have found also that it is necessary for us
also to accumulate the resources out of which development can
oroceed and so we have become one of the highest savers per capita
in the world. Just on 27 per cent. of our gross national prodpct
represents savings and our expenditure on capital equipment is
exceeded, I believe, in per capita terms by only one country in the
world and that is Japan. But fortunately, in addition to our own
savings resources, we have been able to create a climate favourable
to. enterprise and to capital and Australia has attracted investments,
risk capital, from many parts of the world and this has brought
with it new skills, new techniques, new industries, and as a result,
a country which before the Second World ' Jar was thought of largely
as a country of rural production its wool, its wheat, its meat,
butter and sugar known around the markets of the world has so
diversified and developed its secondary industries that to no doubt
the surprise of many of you, we have fortunately now in secondary
industry about the same section of our population that you would
find in the United States of America. In percentage terms to
population and work force, it is approximately the same as in the
United States. Now the most recent development which makes for a
more significant and important Australia in the eyes of the rest
of the world has been a series of quite fabulous mineral discoveries.
It is only a few years ago that we maintained as a Government, a
prohibition on the export of iron ore because we couldn't see
reserves that seemed to be more than was needed for our own
Australian steel industry. Then came the discovery litarally of / 4 
-4-
mountains of high-grade iron ore and in WIestern Aistralia, one
of the States of the Commonwealth, there it has been assessed
that some 15,000 million tons of high grade iron ore, of a
percentage of 65; any of you who are knowledgeable of these
things will pick up the percentage and its significance but all
I am told is that it is very good iron ore, and already firm
contracts have been arranged between Australia and Japan for the
supply of this iron ore, I think I am right in saying to a total
value of2,360 million, and we have been told that there will be
other markets, even markets in Europe for this iron ore despite
the problem of distance because of its quality.
Then bauxite, a basic material for aluminium, has
been found in what may prove to be the largest bauxite deposits
anywhere in the world. But when ou add to this Pandora's box
of mineral treasures the copper, he lead, the zinc, new
discoveries of nickel and manganese, you will, I think, gain some
concept of the basis for our confidence that not only will the
country continue to grow in strength and prosperity but that in
the years ahead our export income from mineral production will
probably match and exceed that which we derive from our largest
export item, that aell-known commodity, Australian wool.
Now, I have mentioned these things because they
have been achieved in a comparatively young country, ( our first
settlement was in 1788) and with a comparatively small population
of people making the most effective use that we could of our
work force and applying as effectively as we could thC mod6rn
aids which mechanical equipment, electronic and other engineering
development can produce for us. And so wc have been able to
sustain a high rate of growth, a high rate of population growth
by the standards of Europe, although, of course, not by the
standards of Asia or South America. But for any of our United
States or British friends who are here today, it may interest them
to know that if their population rate were to be geared to the
sme rate of increase as that of Australia, in the United States
you would need to build annually more than half a million
additional homes above that which is now proceeding and in the
United Kingdom about 170,000 homes. So you will see that when
you add to the problem of the home construction the need for
schools and hospitals and modern amenities that go wiith an
increasing population, then you have an indication of the total
problems that we face in this country. I could qrhaps sum it
up by saying that our broad objectives are those development,
of what are still relatively undeveloped national resources, to
build population for these purposes, to give full employment to
our people, not only because this is a cardinal aspect of national
policy for any well-managed country these days but because a
country of loss than 12 million people must make the most
effective employment of its labour force of w'hich it is capable.
Then, because we are a country of small population
in a troubled and restless are-of the wrorld, we must apply
rather more of our substance to the build-up of our defence
capacity, more than we wJould crish but certainly no more than the
hazards that we feel , e must face in the years ahead would require
of us. And so with development, defenco, risin72 standards for our
people and a rising programme of intornztional aid, we are trying
to behave responsibly and as a good neighbour in this area of the
world. 
I am able to tell you that Australia has not shirked
its responsibilities in the field of international aid and that
we rank per capita fourth in all the countries of the world in
relation to the aid distributed through a variety of channels
and organisations. Now that, Mr. Chairman, gives a very sketchy outline
of what is occurring in this country. It may interest you to
know further that our system is one based principally on free
enterprise but one job in every four in Australia is provided by
the Government through one of its many utilities or through one
of the many Government services. So in a sense we have a mixed
system with the Government attending to the sort of public utilities
which don't normally call for a competitive system. Where
competition is desirable, we try to arrange matters so that there
will be competitors in the private field, ensuring an effective
and satisfactory service for the public.
You will have noticed those of you who have had any
time in the country that we don't go in so very much for
apartment dwelling in the way that you find this in Europe and
in parts of Asia, and indeed in most countries of the world.
The general run of Australian likes to live in his own home with
his own car and a small garden to look after, able to get away
to one of the pleasant places that can be visited in what is for
most of Australia, a temperate and very agreeable climate.
And we are glad to be able to report to you that as you fly over
the cities and see the tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands
of homes that you will see underneath you from the aircraft in
Sydney, Melbourne or one of the other capitals of the States of
the Commonwealth, the homes will be occupied by homo-owners.
Seventysix per cent. of the houses occupied in Australia are
occupied by people who either own that home or are in process
of acquiring it.
Now I have said sorething on the economic side, and
turning perhaps to something more agrecable, a lighter feature of
our national life, we enjoy in this continent a remarkable range
and variety of experience. I mentioned that it is a country in
which much of it lies behind a coastal fringe and most of it is
very arid indeed. But it is a country of contrasts and paradoxes
in that in the North of Queensland, quite recently I was met by
a body of people who at a time when I had taken deputations in
the South of Australia wanting financial relief against some
drought which was occurring in their part of the world, in the
North of Queensland, I had a deputation of people wanting
financial assistance because they had had so much rain that they
couldn't plant their sugar crop. So we have a country, as
described in one of our documentary films recently ' e run from
the tropics to the snows". In the north of Australia you have the
sort of rain forest which is typical of tropical countries, and
rain forest so thick and lush that it is attractive to botanists
from all parts of the world. Then by contrast, you come down
hero to the Australian Alps and we can show you more snow than
is to be found in Switzerland. So you have a country in which
tropical production and temperate production can be achieved
making the nation very largely self-sufficient in the production
of items of this character. / 6
L 5 
6
As to production, we have been able to make a gesture
quits recently which I hope the developing countries will find
helpful. We have provided a preference for the entry of their
oroduction into Australia and this was examined closely recently
by the GATT and the GATT approved of this arrangement and we are
hopeful that what we have provided in that direction will spread
by way of example to other countries.
Now I don't want to dwell too long, Mr. Chairman, on
Australia, but it is not an easy country to discover in a matter
of days. Some of you may have already come in contact with our
decimal currency. It is only about two months February 14th
since we made the changeover from pounds, shillings and pence
to a decimal system of dollars and cents. Those of you who have
acquired a range of the coins will find that on the side of the
coin opposite the effigy of Her Majesty The Queen will be reproduced
an Australian animal, and each of these animals is unique to this
country and will not be found anywhere else in the world;
geologically the oldest country with some of the strangest and
weirdest of animals. In fact so weird that somebody has written
a book about us calling us " They're a ' Jeird Mob". You may find
that so in your experience of us as the week prococds.
But here is an exciting country, and having at a period
of great change in the circumstances of the nations of Asia,
a role , we believe, to play of increasing importance in the years
ahead, a role as a bridge of understanding between the countries
of the West and the countries of Asia, a role as a groat supplier
of foodstuffs, of raw materials, of minerals to the growing
industrialisation of Asia. Here we arc situated with a handful
of people in an area of the world in which there are 650 million
Chinese more than 400 million Indians, some 110million Indonesians,
' 100 million. Pakistanis, Itink it is-altogether some 1,500 million
people in Asia .: ith a birthrate which should, if it maintans its
present trend, see a doubling of that population, if this is humanly
practicable and possible, ( this, anyhow, is the way the curve is
proceeding) by the end of this centur e. ll, quite obviously,
if this hungry world, and so much of Asia is a hungry area of the
world, is to be fed and supplied, growing industrialisation calling
for the raw materials and the more sophisticated equipment of
a developing economy, then quite obviously Australia has a part
to play in that developing process.
But there is . the darker side totho problem of Asia,
and here perhaps are to be faced some of the greatest hazards
which mankind has to meet in the years loading to the end of this
century, and it will be the firm intention of this friendly
country to do what it can to make an effective contribution towards
the attainment of peace and justice, social justice, justice as
between countries in our own area of the world and indeed throughout
the world as a whole. To some of us when we look at the problems
which confront us in government, the picture looks so dark at times
as almost to encourage despair, but we must recognise that despite
all these problems and difficulties, however painfully slow the
process may appear to be, there is developing a more sensitive
conscience around the countries of the world in relation to those
less favoured, there is a growing acceptance of responsibility to
do something about those things. In my own public life, I have
participated in discussions in such bodies as the International Bank,
/ 7 
-7
the International Development Association, the International
Monetary Fund. We have contributed to the recent discussions
of UNOTAD the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
There is the United Nations show, SUNFED, which also is doing
good work in its own direction. And out of these processes, some
dividends occur from time to time. join together on an Indus
waters scheme or we are able to help on some constructive project
of one kind or another. e in Australia have a tremendous
responsibility in relation to Papua and New Guinea, trying to leai.
there virtually a Stone Age people to a viable independence within
the earliest practicable period of time consistent with their own
wishes, and if any of you have the opportunity to travel through
that part of the world before you return home, I think you will
find it a splendid examiple of what enlightened government is able
to achieve with the co-operation of a people seeking better
standards of literacy and of health and of economidc independence.
These are some of the victories of peace which perhaps
are even more glorious than those of war.
tr. Chairman, I have no wish to detain you from tour
important discussions. It has been said by some wise man that
it is better to travel hopefully than to arrive, but as in most
statements of this kind which are superficially attractive, there
are of course the exceptions. I hope that your visit to Australia
proves one of theim. I have no doubt you travelled hopefully,
looking to the experience of discovery of a new continent and
perhaps for many of you a new and somewhat strange people. You
will find us a very friendly people and wie would have no better
Uish than you would enjoy your stay with us and find it of
increasing and helpful interest to you and that from the discussions
of the I. P. U. hero in Canberra will be a contribution to the better
understanding among peoples whaich will be the best foundation
of the peace and social justice to which vie all aspire.
I hope that you enjoy your stay vi th us and that you
return feeling that Australia is a continent which must be revisited
not once but many time s. 



JAPAN/ AUSTRALIA BUSINESS CO-OPERATION COMMITTEE
FOURTH JOINT MEETING-HELD) AT CANBERrA. A . C. T.
l') th April l) 66
Speech by the Pri~ iie Minister. Mr. Harold Hlolt
Sir Edward Varren, Mr. Adachi, Mr. " Nagano, my
Ministerial colleagues, David Fairbairn, Mr. Anderson,
Ministerial colleagues and Parliamentary colleagues that
I see around the room and members of the Australia/ Japan
Business Co-operation Committee, Ladies and Gentlemen.
( I think that should just about cover it).
This is one of those happy occasions when, if
the politician speaks with two tongues he is applauded for
it rather than condemned, and with the help of my very able
assistant on my left, I shall try to tell you some of the
thoughts which come to the mind of an Australian Prime
minister on so felicitous an occasion as this. And I
assure you it is a very happy occasion for the Australian
people; and on behalf of the Australian people, speaking
for their Government, I extend to all of you who have come
to participate in the important work of this committee a
very warm and friendly welcome. We hope that you will
enjoy your stay with us and that your discussions will be
fruitful and con,; tructive.
This Committee iv a very happy manifestation of
what I regard as a great peacetime achievement, a positive,
constructive co-operation which has worked, ao Sir Edward
WJarren has so graphically outlined to us this morning, to the
mutual advantage of our two countries and indeed to '% he
advantage of world trade in general.
Sir Edw-. ard Warren has given us the figures which
illustrate the dramatic growth in trade which has occurred
between our two countries. It has been quite phenomenal
by the experience of Australia in its trading with any other
country in the world, and as he forecast, we confidently
anticipate that in the years ahead, Japan will assume the
leadership in the role of the largest customer for the
products of this country, and we, in turn are, on the
evidence of the growth of trade in recent years, an
improving and increasing customer for the products of Japan.
It is the essence of good negotiation that all
parties to it feel that the outcome of the negotiations has
been of advantage. It is a bad negotiation when one party
feels that it has't worked out fairly in its case. But
ever since the treaty was entered into between Australia
and Japan, trade relations have been harmonious and
co-operativie. There have been, of course, occasions of
difficulty, but these have, as a result of friendly discussion
and negotiation, usually produced a satisfactory result for
us and we confidently anticipate that in this spirit we can
advance the interests of our two countries as trade grows
between us. 
2.
We are on the threshold of another important
phase in ) ur trade relations, as the vast mineral projects
now getting into production in various parts of Australia
come to supplement the already large volume of trade between
US. I believe that this growth in trade will have a
dramatic impact upon the economic thinking of other countries
observing the development of trade, the strength of
production whichi will f low from this from Japan to other
parts of the world. And so, although our achievements up
to this point of time have been great, he would be indeed
a pessimist who did not see in the future a tremendous
growth and increase in the volume of trade between us.
When Therc is such interdependence as has developed
between our two countries, and interdependence of trade on a
scale which has become important to us both, then inevitably
problems arise and even some dangers to thc economy of each,
because we have developed so strong an interest and
participation in the economic development of the other,-that
whatever happens to one country is of consequence to that
othce" country. And this gives importance to the e:: istence
of your own Committee. The closer our interdependence
becomes, the wider its scope, the more important it is that
we should have at a high level of consultation people from
both countries who can help to iron out the difficulties,
who can inform each other as to economic developments in the
other country and in this way develop a more constructive
and harmonious teamwork which will produce the most favourable
results for each of us. I believe we are fortunate and
I speak for the Government and our people in that there
should have been from the outset such a high level of
representation in this Australia/ Japan Business Co-operation
Committee. Those from Australia, of course, are well known
to you and as you have no doubt already discovered, they
include some of the outstanding figures in the industrial
and commercial life of this country. Of those who come to
us from Japan, most of you I know only by repute or of the
vast organisation which you represent. But I am glad to s
see in your company today, a very old friend from my own days
as Treasurer of the Commonwealthin the person of Mr. Honie.
I give him a warm welcome, and he is, I believe, a
representative of the high calibre of membership of this
Committee which means so much to the prosperity and to the
strength of our two countries.
lie have a mutual interest as two great trading
countries you, I think, ranking seventh in importance in
world trade and Australia ranking twelfth we have an
important interest together in the development of satisfactory
international trading relationships, and so we wish to see
come out of taie KennmV Round of negotiations a further
liberalirsation of the trade of the world.
We have also a mutual interest in seeing the
restoration of peaceful conditions in the countries of Asia
and in particular in war-torn South East Asia. We have
been able to demonstrate in our own trade one with the other 
what can be achieved under conditions of peace, and we share
a vision of the growth in trade anid prosperity and wellbeing
which could occur in the countries of Asia if conditions of
peace could be re-established there. There is a growing
willingness around the world, particularly from the United
States where PreLident Johnson has undertaken to outlay
at least one billion dollars in peaceful reconstruction
and economic development in South East A; Aa if peaceful
conditions can be re-established There is this willingness
to help, and we with you in Japan, have a mutual interest in
promoting to the best advantaga that we can causes which will
assist in restoring peace in this troubled area of the world.
We have in A-. ia a population today of some 1,500
million. It is an awesome thought that by the end of this
century that population may have doubled and all the
indications are that this will occur. I believe myself
that not sufficiont thought as yet is being given by the
more advanced industrialised nations of the world to the
problems which will be presented to the world by this quite
dramatic developmient in the population structuie of Asia in
particular and the world as a whole. Japan and Australia
have an important part to play in meeting both the
opportunities and the challenges which will develop from
this remarkable economic phenomenon of our time.
One of the happy recent developments has been the
creation of the As~ ia D -, velopmnent Bank, and the importance of
this is clearly recognisud by your country from the evidence
supplied in the major contribution of $ 200 million which you
have committed yourselves to supply to the resources of the
bank. Australia, too, has recognised the opportunity here
for constructive assistance around the whole of the Asian
area and we have, as you know, subscribed, or committed
ourselves to the extent of $ 85 million to the planned total
of $ 1,000 million ( American) to be the initial capital of
the bank. This ia a hop
we expect to see emerge in this part of the world.
It may interest you to know, gentlemen, that of
the prospective investors who come to Australia front
overseas, an increasing proportion, as they discuss these
matters with me, are looking to Australia these days, not
merely as a market for the products of their manufacture here,
but are seeing in Australia a base or launching place for
their own increasing trade in the countries of Asia. And
so we become, as a result of these processes, an even more
important trading partner with Japan. Vie can only
anticipate favourable omens for the future in the light of
opportunities that we see ahead of us.
No doubt we will have many problems to meet along
the road but our two economies are so clearly supplementary
or complementary to each other that we would be lacking in
any normal spirit of optimism if wie did not foresee a
tremendous~ growth of trade in the years ahead between our
two countrie. s, contributing to a more peaceful and prosperous
Asia and indeed, we would hope, contributing to the trade
of the world. 
4.
It is with that background to your discussions that
I now formally declare your meetings open and extend to you
my best wishes for fruitful diucussion and a valuable outcome
from talks together which I assure you, on behalf of the
Australian Government, we regard as being oi great
importance to this country.
My best wishes to you all. 



PRIE HINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA 661/ 067
The following is text of Speech by
Vietnamese Prime hinister Ky and the Australian
Prime Minister, Mr. Holt's reply. 22ND APRIL. 1966
Speech by Prime Minister Ky
On behalf of the Government and the people of Vietnam,
I have the honour of welcoming you to this country.
Your visit of today has a very special significance
since it takes place at a time when we exert ourselves to repel
Communist invasion and build a new society for Vietnam with the
staunch support and assistance of your country especially with
the participation of the gallant Australian soldiers.
It is more than an evidence of friendship, or a reason
for strengthening unity between cur two countries.
Your visit has the value of a pledge a pledge to
stand in the forefront of the cause of justice, freedom and human
happiness. Such a pledge is all the more valuable since it has
come voluntarily, is fostered by a vigilant spirit and motivated
by altruism. The people of Vietnam will never forget what the former
Prime Minister Robert M1enzies once said: " The Republic of Vietnam
is one of the frontiers of human freedomn', and therefore to
abandon that country now would mean a Communist takeover and
imperil neighbouring countries in South-East Asia.
Also, your Excellency, allow me to say that the five
points that you yourself defincu recently concerning the problem
of Vietnam are indicative of the chivalrous spirit of the people
of Australia. The valiant and brave soldiers that Australia has
generously sent here to share the fighting and 1, ictories with us
for the past year and who will be strengthened soon let alone
Australian aid under various other forms are the materialisation
of the ideals I mentioned earlier.
' Je, the Vietnamese people, very highly appreciate such
friendship built on sacrifice and generosity.
, Ve will never betray the friendship of our friends and
allies. With the trauitional and indomitable spirit of the
Vietnamese people, with the resolute determination to win of the
present generation, with the strong support of our allies, we will
fight to repel invasion, tc achieve entire freedom, to give our
people a new and happy life ana also to bring a substantial
contribution to consolidation of world peace.
This, we believe, will be the most efficient way of
showing our gratitude to our friends for their support in this
critical hour of our history. 
Speech by Australian Prime Minister,
Mr. Harold Holt
Your Excellency, I am very appreciative of this warm
welcome that you have given me on behalf of the people of your
country. Australia's friendship with your country is well
established and I think you know of our admiration for the gallant
resistance which the people of South Viet Nan have been making
against the Communist aggression which has threatened you for so
many years. have seen this not merely as a resistance in order
to preserve your own national integrity, but we have seen it as a
resistance which is in the interest of a free people, no: t only
throughout South-East Asia but indeed free people throughout every
part of the world.
I For as long as Communist aggression persists, as long
as the Chinese philosophy of Communist domination persists, then
free people everywhere throughout the world will be threatened,
and you have been in the forefront of this resistance.
r e, with the United States which is making such an
enormous contribution for security here, and other allies who are
lending assistance to you are proud that there is an Australian
force and other Australian elements here in your country making
the contribution of which you have spoken in terms of such
appreciation. we hope, your Excellency, that as our enlarged force
reaches your country that we will be able to join with you not
| merely in the military tasks, of overriding importance though they
be, until peace and stability has been restored here, but while
our troops are with you we hope that they will be giving you
assistance also in other important fields of civic administration
S-in health and sanitation, in education, in transport, in road
construction, in a variety of positive and helpful ways which can
enable you or assist you to build that better South Viet Nam
which I know is your own personal aspiration and the objective of
the people of your country.
It is perhaps of interest to your people to realise
how close we have become to each other as a result of the
improvements in modern transport.
To me it is something of a revelation that I could be
answering questions in the House of Representatives in Canberra
yesterday morning up until 11.15 an. here I an the next day in
company with you and able to convey our greetings directly to the
people of your country.
We recognize with you that the tasks ahead here will
be difficult anc. they may be long, but we share your own determination
and resdlution and that of the United States of America, to
see that freedom is preserved in this country and that by tne
force of that example the forces of freedom will be encouraged to
make their own resistance wherever Communist aggression may
threaten. WVe believe that you are performing a great service to
the free people of the world, and I express on behalf of my fellow
countrymen our gratitude and appreciation to you.
* i 



PRIME MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST AS:
SPEECH BY THE PRIIE MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT,
TO THE AUSTRALIAN 105 FIELD BATTERY AT BIEN HOA,
VIET NAM 23RD APRIL, 1966
Major, Gentlemen I have had an , pnortunity today to see our own
Australian servino men on the spot and I'am very lad to be
able to brin, to you not merely the good wishes o? your fellow
countrymen, ut the pride we feel in the reputation ou've
built for Australia by your service in this area of the world.
We regard this as a critical battle area. We regard
the issues for which you are fighting as amongst the most
important that any group of countries could fight for in this
day and generation. This is literally in our jud-ment one of the great
critical battle areas for the forces of freedom in the world
today, and Australia has madea valuable contribution.
Although our numbers have been small the assistance to morale,
the actual achievements in the operations of war in which you
have been engaged have been greatly appreciated by the people
and government of South Viet lam and certainly they have been
greatly valued by our Allies of the United States and of the
other Torces who are fighting in this area of the world.
I came here knowing that you had built up in the
infantry and the artillery a splendid reputation, but I can
assure you that the comments made to me by the Prime Minister,
by the Head of State, by the Head of the American forces, have
all confirmed the high reputation which we had gathered you had
established for yourselves here. You ha, e served with
distinction to yourselves and, of course for pride in your
own country. ; ie think of this area as one in which not only is a
' battle to be fought and win for the freedom of the people who
are wanting to live out their own lives in peace, but here is
an opportunity in this part of the world, through the civic
jobs that you have been carrying out, to establish that the
age-old enemies of mankind can be conquered. And this is perhaps
the most rewardin6 tart of your duties, other than those in the
actual military operations themselves.
I am going to s-ay a fe.' '.' ords to you on Anzac Day
so I ,. on't give you too much of a uash here this afternoon but
although I -' as a very poor gunner for a few months in the A. I. F.
myself, I think recognise a good regiment of artillery
when 1 see one and I conrratulate you. Maaor Tedder, and all
your men, on a first-class artillery oattery representing
Australia in South Viet Nam.
I know how much you are all lookin.' forward to getting
back to Australia. You y'il find a wonudrfuT welcome for you
on your return and until then good fortune in your operations
and a happy journey on your way home. 



PRIME MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
The Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt, gave
a dinner to return hospitality extended to
him during his visit to Saigon. The Prime
Minister of South Viet Nam Air Vice-Marshal
Ky, was the principal guest. 24TH APRIL, 1966
Mr. Holt said I would like to thank you again, Mr. Prime Minister,
for the warm welcome which you and members of your Government
have given me during my visit. I will leave Viet Nam with a
lasting impression of The courtesies and kindnesses which I have
received as your guest.
May I say also that this visit has been of great value
for the discussions we have conducted together and the information
I have gathered at first hand here.
As you know, Mr. Prime Minister, we in Australia feel
that the Vietnamese people's resistance to communist aggression
is of vital importance o free men everywhere. Until the
communists, especially those in Pekin*, learn that they cannot
achieve domination over others by their sinister techniques of
infiltration, sabotage and terror, there can be no lasting peace
nor personal freedom in Asia or indeed anywhere in the worl.
May I also say Mr Prime Minister, that the Australian
eople deeply respect ana admire the qualities of courage,
fortitude and resolute independence which are part of the national
heritage and character of the Vietnamese people.
We are proud, Mr. Prime Minister, to stand with the
Vietnamese people in their determined resistance to communist
aggression and in their efforts to achieve rising standards of
living. Mr. Prime Minister, Excellencies and gentlemen, I
invite you to raise your glasses to the Government and people
of Viet Nam to victory in their struggle for independence to
success in their efforts to achieve a better life in conditions
of security freedom and justice and to the deep bonds of
friendship between Australia and Viet Nam which have been
strengthened by our association in this common cause. 



PRIJE MINISTER' S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASI A
ANZAC DAY SPEECH M1ADE BY THlE PRILE h1INISTER.
IMR. HAROLD HOLT TO AUSTR', LI. AN AN-' ZE1;' JLNA' D FORCES~
AT BIEN HOA, SOUTH VIETNAM~. APRIL, 1966
It is 51 years today since Australian, New Zealand,
other British and allied forces stormed the heights of Gallipoli
and together wrote an imperishable chapter in the history of our
two countries. It wasn't a military success in that the objectives,
the military objectives, were not achieved, but it was a victory
of the spirit it revealed in young countries which hrnd not been
tested in a national strife of this kind before.
It tested qualities of character, of mateship of
manhood and the resolution to go on with the military task, and
because it developed so much significance for Australia and New
Zealand and because it ma~ rked our comradeship together in arms
and it crried with it the lessons for our couantrymnen of what the
cause of freedom can mean to a liberty-loving people.
Ye hove, from that time on, celebrated Anzac Day as
perhaps the most significant commemoration in our national
calendar, and wherever Australians and Nowi Zealanders are to be
found around the world today, they will be pauising and
commemorating this . nzac Day observance.
They will be commemorating the fallen, those who gave
their lives that we, in our turn, could know the blessings of
liberty. But they will also be coimmemorating the national
progress that we have mnadte, the progress that has bcen largcly
influenced by the inspirations that flowed out ol' the Gallipoli
tradition. And for you and for our own poople in our countries,
and those that are in other parts of the world, Anzac Day today
will be taking on a deeper significance in that here gathered
again on a field of battle remote from their own countries the
Anzacs are together again, fighting again, for the cause of
freedom. It is characteristic of this precious boon of freedom
that the battle for it is never finally won at any time or by any
generation of people: each generation in their turn have to take
up the challenge, the price of liberty is still eternal vigilance,
and our two peoples h! ave never waited for the battles to come to
them. They have clearly recognised the threat to liberty
when it has emerged and they have quickly responded to. the need
to come in resistance to it and again here today we see the
evidence that our two countries have recognised clearly in this
struggle in South Viet Nan a challenge to liberty not merely the
liberty of the South Viotnamese people, but to the liberty of free
peoples everywhere. 
That is one of the factors which makes this, in my
judgment, an historic struggle because if success can be achieved
here then that will influence the lives of literally hundreds of
millions of people throughout Asia and, perhaps, less ciirectly
but importantly, it will influence what occurs around the rest of
the world. So you may feel that you are engaged in an historic
struggle and it is historic for one other good reason: that is
that, on few occasions, can it have been said in earlier military
history thant those who were actively enga gcd in the military tasks
have at the same time regarded as vital to complete success, that
they should engage in the constructive, positive task of assisting
the people of the threatened country to build~ a better order of
life for themselves. ';-hat yo-have been doin.. in your helpful, friendly
positive and constructive way to assist the people of the area in
which y'e served towards a better life, itself becomes a mode.
on which we would hope there c'an be build a very much greater
structure. It has been an inspiration to me to iind that in the
Government of South Viet Nam, in the forces of the United States
and other friendly forces and in our own ranks, there is this
determination to make the military victory a supplement to the
victory of' peace in building a better standard for the people.
You in your own way have added another bright chapter
to the story of Anzac.
You have conducted yourselves in the finest Anzac
tradition. I have hcaru. nothing but commendation wherever I have
turnG-d for the contribution that the Australian and New Zealand
Forces have xna: Ze.
We may be snail in number but it is the quality and
character of m-anhood that -makes its impact upon the people who
observe what wie are doing anu you have mcasured up to those tests
and have come through splendidly.
Your fellow countrymen feel a pride in you that will
make for them this Anzac Day one of the brightest in our
celebration of that long series.
They will wish that you comc successfully through your
engagemnents and that you will in uue course return to your two
countries which we can tref, sure as countrics of liberty countries
which rank amongst the most splendid in the world for what they
can give to their people.
So good luck to you all and en behalf, not merely of
the Government and peoplc of Australia, but cn behalf of the
Government and people of New Zealand as well, we congratulate you,
we thank you and we are proud of you. 



PRL. -INISTR'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
at Government Hodse Dinner in Bangkok, Thailand 26TH APRIL, 1966
Your Royal Highness, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
I thank you, Prime K inister, for your kind expression
of welcome tonight and I thank your Government and people for the
warmth and hospitality which I and my party have enjoyed since our
arrival. It was my great privilege to have an audience with His
Majesty this afternoon.
I am delighted to pay this official visit to your
country so soon after your own visit to Australia on which you
were accompanied by senior 1.1inisters of your Government.
Your visit to Australia was a source of great satisfaction
and encouragement to my Government.
Although this is my first visit as Prime 1. inister, I
have visited Thailand on previous occasions and on each occasion
I have had the pleasure if I may use the words you have
employed of observing at close range the way of life and tiinking
of the Thai people.
Your way of life is indeed peaceful and freedom-loving,
in keeping with the beautiful environment of your country.
A visitor like myself sees something of your rich
cultural heritage in the beauty of form and colour of your
traditional building and works of art and handicrafts.
This heritage, there can be no doubt, lives in the
hearts of your people.
You have referred, Prime Minister, to the positive role
of Australia in this region.
VIe in Australia have come to expect from Thailand a
beneficial and deeply-informed contribution to regional affairs.
Your country, with its long history of sovereign
independence and its deep-rooted national life, has surely a
most significant part to play in the future.
Australia's origins and traditions arc very different
fron your own. le have no cor'parable background of long participation
in the affairs of South-East Asia.
Our two countries, however, work closuly together in
fruitful association. The friendship and close co-operation which Thailand
extends to us greatly enhances our feeling that we have a
constructive part to play in the region as a whole. 
As modern Governments we share the same goals of bringing
to our pcoples the fruits of prosperity and national development.
Our two countries both take a comprehensive view of the
problems of the region.
* 4e look outwa. rds towards regional co-operation and the
sharing of skills and technology.
Australia and Thailand recognize that the security of
the region is vital to the stability and progress to which we are
dedicated. Our two countries arc fully conscious of the critical
nature of the struggle now being waged to ensure the freedom and
independence of' the region.
, iec share the same conviction that through our own efforts
and in partnership with the effort of others this historic struggle
can be won. May I now invite all of you to join me in a toast to the
good health and happiness of His Excellency tV. i Prime Minister of
Thailand, tfo-the continued advancement of Thailand, and to the
further strengthening of the close relations oar two countries
now enjoy. 



PPP' PRI.. E INISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
at 1:-1alaysian State Dinner, Kuala Lumpur 27TH APRIL, 1966
Deputy Prime Minister, Ministers, Excellencies, gentlemen.
I am delighted to pay my first official visit to Malaysia
as the Prime Minister of Australia.
I am, as you may be aware, no stranger to the charm of
your country and the warmth of your hospitality.
My last visit was in September, 1964, when Commonwealth
Finance Ministers rc here.
Even in the limited time available for observation since
my arrival this morning it is readily seen that M'alaysia has
continued its solid progress and development.
My colleagues and I have greatly appreciated the
opportunity you provided to us to hold discussions today with
yourself and members of the Cabinet.
This has given us a body of useful knowledge and a
valuable insight into the policies you are pursuing.
My colleagues and I appreciated the privilege we were
given today of an audience with His Majesty the Yang Di-Pertuan
Agong. You Sir, and many of your fellow Ministers and your
senior officials have greeted me as old friends.
There is in our consultations and exchanges an intimacy
and an underlying mutual respect which has aeveloped over many
years of close co-operation.
This fueling of close friendship gives an aaaed depth
and value to the continuous interchange between our two countries
in so many fields.
M1alaysia has overcome many difficulties in recent
years. The successful way in which you have met and overcome
the challenges that have arisen is a clear indication of the
inherent strength and resilience of your multiracial community.
Hand in hand with the effort to preserve your sccurity,
you have made rapid advancement in the economic and social fields.
It was good to learn from you personally today, Tun
Razak, of your Government's rural development programme.
This importpnt activity clearly owes much to you for its
inspiration and its effective and purposeful execution.
The co-operation between our two ccuntrics is now a
matter of record and history having developed ovr a period of time 
in many areas affecting the national life of both of us.
We are joined along with other Commonwealth countries
in military arrangements for defence and security.
The relationship between the Armed Forces of our two
countries is a close one.
Our two countries share a determination to preserve
national independence, stability and freedom
; e are glad to assist you with technical assistance and
to have your young men and women at our universities and technical
institutions in substantial numbers.
Our trade expands steadily and thure is a growing
Australian investment here.
It is a refreshing experience to visit Kuala Lumpur with
its individuality, its atmosphere of modern progress and colourful
growth. For Australians, develcpment-minded as we arc, this is
a stimulating atmosphere.
We feel very much at hone too, in your democratic
environment and we admire the flexibility of outlook and the
political wisdom which , alaysian leaders bring to the country's
complex national affairs. 



PRIME MINISTER'S TOUR OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Speech given by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold f
at a Government Luncheon at Sjgapore in reply to a'
speech of welcome by the Singapore Acting Prime
Minister, Dr. Toh Chin Chye 29TH APRIL, 1966
Mr. Deputy Prime Minister, your Ministerial colleagues
and distinguished guests
Thank you very warmly, Dr. Toh, for your warmth of
welcome to me and to those who have accompanied me as we have gone
about this phase of our journey here in Singapore.
As you have put it to us, Australia has a long friendly
association going back throu h some of the dramatic episodes of
this uarter of a century which has now passed since the militar
operations in which we found ourselves involved at the time of I
Second World War. And that represented a watershed of history in
the life of the Australian people as far as this area of the world
is concerned. You have stressed the fact that the first major journey
I have made as Prime Minister has been to various centres here in
South-East Asia. I don't think this follows, that I have for the
first time realised the importance of the area.
This can I think, represent a new phase in the relationship
between Australia and the area, but of course we have been
actively interested in this area of the world at least dating back
to the lime that I have mentioned.
There was first our involvement with you here at the time
of the Japanese invasion. There was later our association through
the lon and difficult period of the emergency when the guerilla
activities had to be eliminated, we with other friendly Commonwealth
forces. And now, in association with other Commonwealth forces,
wteh ath avwee htahvies bpehaens e liofn kerde sitsotgientgh erth ei np rsoomcee ssoefs thoef mcoornef rsoingtnaitfiiocna, n tso
episodes and phases of historical development in South-East Asia
over these years in the military field.
But, of course, there has also been an active and regular
contact between us in the field of trade and commerce.
You have always maintained a very active entrepot trade.
lany Australians have passed through here, either as tourists or
en route to the United Kingdom and Europe, and you have come to be
known to us I think, better than almost any other country, and
certainly almost any city, in Asia.
More of our people are aware of what Singapore has to
offer this very colourful, rich and most exotic city which for
many Australians is the first point of contact they make with the
countries of Asia.
Now we find ourselves considering together some problems
which you have directly in your own economic efforts and your own
security, but we also find we have a common interest and concern
in developments in the South-East Asian area. / 2 
-2-
And it is in relation to these that my own visit has been
of considerable value to me, and I hope that as a result of the
discussions that I have been able to engage in with yourselves,
and with the other Jovernments that I have been in contact with
in recent days, our store of knowledge will have been increased
and we will be better equippoed to inform our own judgment as to
the courses we should be following in the future.
We are together in one of the critical periods cf the
history of mankind as I see it, and there will be in the period
ahead of us three factors which will not only make this a
critical area for the future of mankind, but which will involve
our omwn countries very directly.
The first of these is the revolution of change that is
going on in Asia generally; not merely a revolution in the expecations
of people, their hopes for a better order of life but
actual changes which are taking place in the way of life that they
have known for centuries.
And secondly, there is the impact which inevitably will be
made increasingly in the years ahead from the rapid growth of
population in the area. The better health standards, a higher
rate of survival and so, taken all round, such a rapid mte of
growth of population that it has been estimated that the fifteen
hundred million people of Asia will be some three throusand million
by the end of this century.
Now this quite obviously poses problems of adequacy of
supply, the need for efficient distribution, the removal of the
causes of strife so that the productive efforts of the area can
be rost effectively prganised to meet this situation. And yet
while we are facing these tasks, we have to contend also with the
cancerous growth of communism in certain parts of the area to
which I refer.
There is the communism of China itself. Well, we don't
contest the right of any country to make its own choice of the
kind of government or system of society by which it wishes to
live. What we do contest is the efforts made by the aggressors
to impose their systems on those who would prefer the system of
their own choice, and just as we have joined together in resisting
the aggression which threatened to dislocate your own country's
domestic and economic life, so we have felt bound to join with
others in resisting that aggression in Viet Nam.
I have come from there with a feeling of encouragement as
to the future, without understatin the many difficulties, both
of the political, economic and military kind that lie ahead.
But I think that daylight can be seen, and that there is a
prospect for stability in the not too distant future.
Now we are linked by our geography, by our history, by the
destiny which places us together in the midst of these quite
historic developments, and with a tradition and practice of
friendship between our two countries which should encourage us,
and indeed enable us, by our own discussions together, to make
some contribution to the future of this part of the world.
It is in that apirit that I have joined in the talks with
your colleagues this morning. It is in that spirit that I hope
That Australia's friendly association with your country will
continue through the years ahead.
Please convey to your Prime Minister, when you are next
in touch with him my own best wishes and those of my Government.
We hope that we sall be seeing him again soon, and that in the
years ahead, Singapore will find a way through its problems. 
I -3-
What you-rhave -said to us about your trade difficulties and
the need to ind some solution of that will be studied sympathetically,
as a good friend of the country should. And you wi1ll be
hear n from us on that matter after I have been able to discuss
these hings which we have had outlined together for us today and
which I know you already communicated on in more detail with my
own government. We shall discus', those when an early opportunity
presents itself.
And so, good wishes to you, and through you to the people of
Singapore and my thanks on behalf of my colleagues here with me
today and myselT for the generosity of your hospitality and warmth
of your greeting to us. 



OLD) WESLEY COLLEGIANS' ASSOCIATION CENTENARY 66 / 084
FOUNDERS' DAY DINNER
TOWN HALL. MELBOURNE 2nd May. 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Presicient, Many Distinguished Guests and Fellow Collegians-
It would be a wonderful thing, as so many of you
are finding, to be at the Wesley Centenary Dinner. A very
remarkable thing to be not only at the Wesley Centenary Dinner,
but to be there as guest of honour, and to be there both as
guest of honour and as Prime Minister of the country. Well,
I think even Ken Hadley and Maurice Sloman, with whom I have
had an occasional game of poker in my more leisurely moments
of past years, would agree that is a hand which takes some
beating. And so, Trevor, I feel a great sense of pride in
being here in those various capacities this evening. The sum
of their totality makes my own enjoyment and relish of what is
for me a notable and historic night quite a moving experience.
I listened with very great interest to your rather
detailed judgment. It has confirmed a suspicion I've had for
many years that the congestion of the courts is due to the fact
that the judges do not apply themselves to the business of law
but allow their minds to wander. Anyhow, I am certainly
indebted to you for your researches because I've been reminded
of so many of the happy occasions which slip into the limbo
and only reappear on very rare occasions if they appear at all.
You mentioned some of these unanswered letters and I apologise
to several hundred people in this company who were good enough
to send me congratulations and good wishes a few months ago
when the high office of Prime Minister came my way. I can
only say by way of exculpation that the list of unanswered
letters runs into the thousands mark and I do hope some tine~
to be given sufficient opportunity by my Cabinet and by
Parliament and the people to say a personal " thank-you" to you,
but at least this medium can be taken tonight to pass on an
interim and very warm-hearted acknowledgment to you all.
But one of the dividends that I secured out of
this appointment was not merely the host of letters of good
wishes but so many of those who wrote to me were school friends
of many years back that I hadn't heard of perhaps for a
generation or more. Included amongst them, although I had,
of course, been aware of his presence in the intervening period,
was a letter from Eddie Wells and Eddie had been at the Prep.
when I was there I think he was Headmaster of the Prep.
School but certainly he looked after all of us who were boarding
at Stella in those days. Eddie wrote to me to remind me that
in 1922 I secured 100 marks for algebra in each of the three
terms. Now I think you will agree, gentlemen, that for a
Treasurer that is a pretty remarkable achievement. Had it
come before the change in office, I would have taken even more
encouragement from it. As it was, I was very glad to slip
into the somewhat easier calculations of decimal currency.
But Eddie I encountered tonight, he addressed me as " Sir" 
It was the first time in the history of our relationship over
many years that I haven't been doing it that way from my end,
and so Prime Ministers do enjoy some privileges.
Gentlemen, it is for all of us tonight a wonderful
occasion. There isn't one of us in this room whoisn't proud
of what he still reg rds as the best school of all and I
exclude some of the philistines who have crept in by virtue of
that traditional Wesley courtesy which obtrudes itself from
time to time. But for those of us who have passed through,
or in the case of some of the senior boys who are still going
through the final stages of their studentship there, we shall
treasure always in a corner of our hearts and you made a
reference, Trevor, to that song I had to sing. Dickie Adamson
of whom I'll say a few more words in a moment or two, was a
very remarkable man, of course, in very many respects, but he
knew how to contrive a song so that the emotion desired from
the comparatively unemotional students with whom he had to deal,
came forward at the right moment. I defy anybody to sing the
leaving song, which is usually reserved on speech night for the
senior boys leaving the school I defy anybody at whatever
stage their voice has gone -contralto, breaking or baritone
or whatever the case may be -without an involuntary sob coming
into the voice, the music is so arranged. And so you sing on
the final day at the speech night actually this leaving
song, and in it we talk about the school still having a corner
in our hearts, and I am sure that is true of all of us. And
it is a warm corner, something to which we can turn when we
are amongst our contemporaries, when we read with pride and
satisfaction of what a fellow collegian has accomplished, or
find that some well known Wesley fnmily and I have run across
so many of them here tonight has sent on another son to carry
on the famous tradition of the father.
A great school makes a great contribution to the
national life. It gives, as the Headmaster has said to us,
qualities of character, and it brings an individuality which I
think every community finds of advantage to possess. we don't
want all to be cast in the same mould, and even when you are
a school inside a particular system of schools, as the Great
Public Schools are in this State of Victoria, each school
somehow develops its own atmosphere, its own character, and
Wesley undoubtedly can claim that individuality and Wesley
undoubtedly can claim that thanks to the men who have gone
before in the headmastership and who today stand in that office,
there are qualities of character which any Wesley boy worth
the salt will acquire and will carry with him through his days
wherever his tasks or his inclinations may take him. And this
for an Australia of less than twelve million people is a
tremendously important thing if we are to face the great
responsibilities and challenges of developing a continent the
size of the United States, if you leave Alaska out of the
picture, and we are trying to do it with our ll, 500OOO0; against
something over 200 million in that country, then the people
must be people of quality and people of character if we are
to make our mark and have some influence on what is happening
amongst the 1,500 million people to the north of this country
who are finding themselves in a dynamic period of rapid and
revolutionary change. It is not sufficient for us to produce 
people, we liave to produce leaders, we have to produce people
of character and quality. And I believe Australia is doing
just that. One of the lessons I've learned as I have gone
around in this last ten days, although it was a lesson well
perceived from many earlier voyagings, is that the best expoct
that Australia makes is the export of its own people I am
not recommending that we export them wholesale, because we
are busily trying to import people to build a nation around
us, but the Australian where he goes in the main is a person
I use that terms " he" generically because, as a matter of
fact some of the Australian " shes" abroad are pretty good,
too, and I met the daughter of orne of our most distinguished
old boys, Keith Reid's daugher, at the surgical unit in Saigon
in the last few days where she was doing a great job for
Australia also. But here Australia is making its presence felt by
the good Australians that have gone to serve in one capacity
or another, narticularly around the South East Asian arc to
our north. There are a couple of Australians in Cambodia, a
country of whose politics we don't entirely approve, but
there has developed a curious friendship between the government
of that country, and one of the reasons for this is that there
are two fellows there who have taught them how to mend the
buses when the buses break down. Now, other countries make
handsome gifts of hundreds of buses. They compete for the
favours of Cambodia. Some will come from the United States,
some will come from Russia, some will come from China or from
somewhere else, and that's fine. The buses are received but
when the buses break down, nobody knew how to fix them. well,
a couple of Australians are running a training workshop in
Cambodia and are amongst the two best known men in Cambodia
and they have built up a great store of goodwill for this
country. And that rather illustrates the sort of thing I
have in mind. You spoke, Headmaster, about this generation of
students I heard and what a wonderful thing it was, what
a moving thing it was to hear th voice of Dickie Adamson
tonight giving us something of the philosophy which we had
absorbed from him in which he talked of the criticism of that
particular generation of young Australians by their elders
and expressing his own view that it was a better generation
than the one before. I, having come in contact with a good
many of Ithe generation which succeeded me, endorse his
judgment as far as today's generation of young Acstralians
go. They are better educated, I believe, than wewre, they
have got more assurance and I believe they have got as much
earnestness and determination to do what they believe is the
right thing to do, provided their own intell!. gence can be
satisfied that this is the right thing. They have a more
challenging judgment, perhaps, than an earlier generation.
The slogans are under questioning because they find themselves
in a restless turbulent world in which the standards of the
past have come under increasing challenge. But the stuff is
there, and again I have seen this confirmed over the last ten
days by the quality of manhood and womanhood that I have
encountered in the various countries that I have visited.
We talked of Dickie Adamson and what he meant to
us, and I mention him because he happened to be my own
headmaster. Any generation of Wesley collegians who had 
another headmaster to guide them will think, I have no doubt,
in very similar terms about -the man who guided the earlier
years of their own lives. But a headmaster, a good headmaster,
has his own special brand of immortality. It is an
immortality of influence which goes into the hearts and minds
of those to whom he is giving leadership, and it extends from
them perhaps through their families, perhaps in the leadership
which they in turn bring to others, but it is a species of
immortality which is very genuine and goes very deep. I shall
never forget I am sure nobody who was at Wesley in my time
could forget the impact which the character and personality
of Lawrence Arthur Adamson made upon us, the precepts which he
gave to us, which have become embedded in our own make-up and
which have illuminated so clearly for us so many of the paths
along which we have had to proceed as we have made our own way
through life. I have no doubt that in my own public life the job
of assessing what was the right thing to do in a situation has
been greatly assisted by the clear perception which Dickie
Adamson brought to the great precepts of human conduct.
Perhaps I could illustrate by an example the way
he used to go about it with us. He was, of course, a man of
legal training and he sometimes thought in legal terms, but
on one occasion, I remember, we had some discussion with him
I was one of his prefects at this time, so was Spot Turnbull,
my old room-mate in the eyrie just the two of us, in one of
those towers in the older Wesley, and somehow or other I
couldn't have persuaded him adequately at the time as to the
political course he was to follow later but, still, you can't
achieve everything. We are still very good friends and I
did have the pleasure of introducing him to the young lady who
became his wife. I would have you know, Mr. Justice Rapke,
that this rather flippant reference of yours to the dancing
prize calls for some amplification because I was in that state
of bondage at the time which afflicts the boarder I don't
know whether there has been improvement since but the only
way I could escape from the prison was to go to dancing class
on a Friday night at St. Catherine's School. Naturally,
being there one developed a certain proficiency in order to
secure the more agreeable partners that one saw around the
room. The incentive was there and finally came the accolade.
I can't claim ever to have mastered the Charleston to which
you have referred. There are some people who would be unkind
enough to say in politics that I had learned the Twist fairly
early in my career.
However, we discussed with the Headmaster at that
time what seemed to us to be a curious application of the law
because two sets of of fences had been committed within quite
recent time of each other. A group of schoolboys returning
from Geelong, having no doubt conquered either Geelong College
or Geelong Grammar as the case might have been, felt that the
occasion called for some celebration and were found by some
intrus ive master drinking a bottle of wine in the railway
carriage and were duly reported to the headmaster. The other
episode concerned a group of boys who, no doubt, for good cause 
decided to ink the navel of one of their colleagues. Now
the headmaster administered a much lighter penalty on the
boys caught drinking the wine which seemed to us at school
by far the more heinous crime, than he inflicted on those
who had inked the navel of their follow student, and seeking
enlightenment we discussed this with him, and he explained
it quite logically and simply. He said the wine-drinkers
were engaged in a social misdemeanour, perhaps of some harm
ultimately to themselves but not damaging the interests of
others or interfering with the liberty of others. But those
who inked the navel of the schoolboy, that was an assault
upon the person and a grave interference with his own personal
liberty and course of action. Now, gentlemen, here was a
typical example of the logic, of the sense of principle which
Dickie Adamson had. We remember him with great affection.
I remember him with a very deep gratitude.
The generation which you now have to look to,
Headmaster, face challenges of even greater complexity than we
did in our time. We are in this restless rapidly-changing
world, but Australia is so peculiarly placed as in effect a
Western country in an Asian world, finding it of increasing
importance to trade, to collaborate, to join for purposes of
mutual security, tc confer on matters of mutual interest and
concern. And here is a test of the Australian qualities which
we believe are well enshrined at Wesley, of tolerance, of
character, of courage and of mateship, and when you think of
it that by the time this generation that I speak of the new
generation reaches its own maturity, the population of the
world, certainly of Asia will probably have doubled, and
Australia which today has this handful of people in the sea
of humanity of which I speak, will have to exercise a role,
a significant role in helping to shape the outcome of these
opportunities and challenges and problems as they open up to us.
Well here, I repeat, are claims upon the kind of
quality that a great school can produce. Wesley has a proud
record of achievement over its first one hundred years. The
purple and the gold those royal colours which we bear so
proudly and see carried so proudly by those who represent the
college will have to be again in the forefront of leadership
in the affairs of the years ahead. But the tradition is
secure. We here tonight, from those who were here in 1906
onwards, are all inheritors and participators in this great
heritage built for us by men of the quality and the character
and leadership as headmasters to whom I have referred. And
you, Sir, now have that trust and we know that in you the
Wesley tradition will be safely carried and that h: 74cI', t new
chapters will be added to the Wesley story.
Last night, I was turning over because I thought
there might be something there of interest to you the
publication, the very limited publication put out in 1921,
March of 1921, of the first 55 years of the school's history,
and it was clear that those who compiled the history then
were very much influenced by the proximity of the publication
to the school's contribution to the First World War, and we
as students honoured appropriately as the occasions seemed 
Fr 6.
proper, those who had served Australia in those years. And
each generation seems to have to face up to its own challenge
to freedom and the standards that it wishes to see preserved
in its own country and in other countries to whom we can
bring our own succour. And this falls again to the
responsibility of another generation of young Australians,
and I can assure you from what I have seen of the Australians
of this noew generation abroad, we have produced a breed of
men of whom we shall be eternally proud.
Gentleman, tonight you have done me the great
honour of proposing my toast. Trevor has gone through his
researches to a degree that has not merely delighted me but
has stimulated many happy recollections which I will mull over
for a very considerable time to come. I hope that in the
next 100 years you don't merely produce a couple more Prime
Ministers, but the judges, the doctors, the lawyers, the
teachers and all those who go to make a civilised cormmunity,
able to live the good lifb themselves but more importantly in
the kind of world in which we find ourselves, able to contribute
themselves to a better life for others. This will be the
product of the Wesley of the next 100 years.
And so to the best school of all, my thanks for
the great joy and the great reward of having served my seven
years there, for the host of happy memories whenever thoughts
turn back to a wonderful school. And the best wishes of all
of us, Headm~ aster, to you and the boys for an even greater
Wesley in the hundred years ahead. 



FEDERAL RURAL CONVENTION
" THE MAXIMUM USE OF AUSTRALIA' S RURAL RESOURCES"' LlIAy.
Sponsored by the Federal Rural Committee of the
Liberal ary of Australia
AT WAGIA 9AGGA. N. S. W. 23RD JUNE, 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Chairman Senator Sim, Your Worship the Mayor Parliamentary
and Ministerial Colleagues and Distinguished Guestcs and Visit', rs
Ladi---s and Gentlemen: First, Mr. Chairman, may I, through you, thank very
warmly the Mayor of this historic city of Ylagga for his very
pleasant welcome to us all. We wanted to come to Wagga for reasons,
I think, which can be readily established-, but it is nice to know
that the people of Wagga also wanted us to be with them, and you,
Mr. Mayor, have conveyed in the spirit of hospitality which is one
of the happy features of Australian life, that welcome to us. A
warm welcome on a crisp Wagga morning makes conditions entirely
comfortable for us; at least we feel well disposed to you and to
each other. I will have a good deal to say to you on the substance
of the Conference. It's not usual for me to speak on rural matters
and I am rather enjoying the novelty of it when I come to it. But
before I do so, I hope you will feel it appropriate for me to make
some reference to the dreadful occurrence in which the Leader of the
Opposition was so painfully involved.. I do so, conscious of the
limitations which are imposed on one at a time when proceedings,
court proceedings, are pending against a charged person, but I feel
bound in my responsibility as head of the National u'overnment to
make some comment and indicate some views to you.
First, I am sure I spoke for all right-thinking
Australians when I condemned the episode and expressed our
sympathy for Mr.. Calwell personally, when I pointed to the fact
that we in Australia had a democratic tradition singularly free
from episodes of violence. But the episode has at least served
the purpose of concentrating our minds not only on this particular
incident but on those matters which associate themselves with it
in our minds, and I am going to speak very briefly, for I have no
wish to intrude unduly into the work of the conference, but we do
in Australia zealously guard the democratic tradition of coming e ./ 2 
2-
% together,. exchanging our views sometimes dissenting, sometimes
criticising, sometimes applauding, but feeling free to do so in an
atmosphere, however turbulent it may become in the exchange of words,
has in the past been happily free of this aspect of violenoce so
strilingly demonstrated to us in this last couple of days. And I
suppose in any community, whatever precautions are taken, whatever
public attitudes exist, one can't eliminate or a community can't
eliminate entirely the danger that people perhaps emotionally
disturbed or in some other way having lost control temporarily of
their normal restraints, involve themselves in episodes of this sort.
But what the Parliament must do, I believe, is examine carefully the
question whether there has been significant changes in the Australian
situation which should call for some review by us, and I believe that
there have been, that they are identifiable. We must face the fact
that we have a more diversified community than at earlier points of our
history, that there will be people in our community who come from
countries where political violence is not as uncommon a matter as
happily it has been here, that these days we do have a much more
active interest in public affairs on the part of young people who are
in employment and who have resources of their own and who have rights
and liberties of their own. to safeguard. They in turn may b~ e
influenced by methods which in countries neighbouring to us have been
employed by young people to demonstrate vigorously, and at times
violently, against government policies. And I think we shall find,
if we make some reyiew of these matters, that the answer is not to
be found in putting in another policeman or two to a public hall
or having some sort of security protection imposed on prominent
public personages, but it is to be found in community C-ttitudes, the
judgments which individuals in the community form of the conduct of
those around them, and I don't elaborate because that is not the
purpose of our gathering here. I merely say by way of illustration
I think we have as a community to decide when, for example, a public
demonstration passes beyond the border of legitimate protest into a
process of harassment and intimidation, and other examples, of course,
could be quoted from contemporary experience.
I would hope that I shall be able to consult, not only
with my own senior colleagues, but with them, in turn, with the
Leader of the Opposition and some of his senior colleagues because
the implications of an episode such as this rise above the normal
party division which exists in this country and relates to the welfare
of the nation as a whole. In the meantime, a speedy recovery to the
Leader of the Opposition and may he sustain no abiding injury as a
result of this unhappy episode. 
-53-
Well, now, ladies and gentlemen, I turn to the business
of ffhe conference and my own participation in it, and I say how
timely I think this conference is, You, Mr. Chairman, were good
enough to say that I put myself to some inconvenience to be here
at this time, I am here because my own judgment is that the subject
matters that you are dealing with rank amongst the most important
that concern public men and women in this country.
The whole welfare, prosperity, security of Australia
rests squarely upon the health and vitality and prosperity of the
primary industries of Australia. This is fundamental to our Tery
existence. No good us talking about the manufacturinLg industries
if we haven't got the means of importing the requirements of
manufacturing industries. No good us talking about improved social
standards and the services that one man can provide for another
in order to make life more agreeable -andmore than 50 per cent. of
our work force are employed in services of one kind or another to
the rest of the community if we haven't got the means which an
export income produces for us to carry these things into fulfilme-nt.
The manufacturing industries have a rather more glamorous
atmosphere and public presentation about them, certainly in the
years since the Second W~ orld WHar, and we have all welcomed the
quite spectecular increase which has occurred in Australian
manufacturing industry over that period. Rather interesting and
surprising to discover that proportionately to our population we
have as many people engaged in manufacturing industries as are to
be found in the United States of America, and they number as a
proportion of the work force some 27 per cent, or three times the
current percentage of the work force to be found in our primary
production. Understandably, therefore, the manufacturing
industries have occupied a good deal of the public stage and of
the press. The incentives given to increase exports of manufactured
products, the urgings upon the manufacturers and others to increase
their exports so that they can supplement the earnings of primary
industry, these things, too, have occupied prominence in the public
mind. But we must never forget that for as far ahead as we can
see, Australia's principal reliance for the export income which
enables us to buy the raw materials and the equipment to keep
secondary industries going and the wherewithal to maintain an
Australian community in a state of prosperity and with a high
standard of living, this aepends on the success we achieve in the
conduct of the great primary industries of this country. That is,
I repeat a fundamental consideration for any Australian Parliament
and f or a gathering such as this. 
-4
Having stated that, it doesn't produce any sense of timeliness
or urgency about a matter which has always been with us. But there
are particular aspects which do point up this timeliness.
The effect on employment I have mentionedand the effect on
the manufacturer because of our imports into this country..... it is
calculated that just on 80 per cent. or four-fifths of what we bri ng
in are imports necessary for the conduct of our manufacturing
industries, either in the foi-m of raw materials, semi-processed
matter, equipment or some other gradient of those classificnations.
And therefore if we are to increase our manufacturing capacity, and
we certainly wish to do that, it can only be done so on the basis of
an increasing export income.
It has a bearing directly on our capacity to carry through
the immigration programme because modern trends have provided
fewer employment opportunities. 0n the land, as you knowincreased
mechanisation has resulted in the percentage of the work force
dropping from 12 per cent, a few years ago to 9 per cent, today,
and that trend looks like persisting.
It is in the manufacturing industries whiich employ three
' bimes that percentage that work opportunities are likely to be founJ
more largely for the new labour coming on to the market, whether
from our own natural increase or from the migrants who come to this
country. Here again, unless we can go ahead with an increase in
our primary production, we are going to run into trouble there.
Itis timely because there are uncertainties at the present
time about the volume of capital inflow we can expect into Australia.
There are restraints indicated in the United States and in the United
Kingdom, and while it is not yet clear how substantially they will
affect the Australian position, we would be foolish to go along on
any casual assumption that there will be indefinitely for us a flow
of capital into this country sufficiently large to bridge the gap
which has shown up in recent years between our export receipts and
our export payments.
The other factor which I think makes it timely is that for
the first time in perhaps twenty years, certainly a considerable
period of years, a substantial area of Australia has been subjected,
and remains subjected to the ravages of drought, and this has caused
more hard thinking about what can be done either to avoid drought
consequences in areas where the water can be conserved, or to mitigate
the effects of drought by appropriate policies of silage or fodder
conservation and other matters of that sort. a a a 
Therefore, the incidence of drought and its effects bring
a conference of this kind appropriately to being.
Now, here again, we have seen what the primary industries
mean to the prosperity of the nation as a whole. The drop in farm
earnings from the effects of drought has radiated its influence
through other sections of the economy. If there is a quietness in
certain areas of the Australian economy today beyond that we would
wish to see, then you can trace influences flowing from the diought
very considerably to the effect which has emerged there.
Finally, there is a timeliness, if not the same degree of
urgency in giving some concentrated consideration to what Australia
should be doing, what we should be planning for the enormous
increase in demand for our primary production that we can reasonably
anticipate between now and the end of this century. We are
strategically placed in an area of the world where one-third of the
human population is within ready service of goods that can be
despatched from this country Fifteen hundred million people
of Asia, quite apart from the markets we have established in other
parts of the world, and the demographers predict that by the end of
the century on present population trends, wie could see a doubling
of the population there.
Already Australia is feeling some of the consequences of
this growth in population, associated at the same time as it is
with some improvement in the capacity to import in these countries,
As for example, Japan builds up its industrial strength, so you
find that it is looking for larger volumes of foodstuffs, of raw
materials; the Westernising influences on Japanese life are
influencing people to eat different types of food vvhich we are
capable bf supplying. This has lead to a quite dramatic increase
in the figures of trade between our owin country and Japan.
I think they might usefully be put to you.
As recently as 1958/ 59, Japan purcnhased goods to a value
of $ 204M. from this rountry. In 1964/ 65, that t2O4M. had grown
to S442M. If we take the movement of major export items to Asia
generally, we find that in 1964/ 65, we sold S284M. worth of wool,
$ 180M. worth of wheat and $ 44M. value of metals, S38M. value of
sugar. Now these are markets which even in comparatively recent
times we would have regarded as comparatively small receivers of
Australian exports, and we are, I believe, merely on the threshold
of our potentialities there.
Now, I have indicated a number of reasons why a conference
.' of this sort is timely. I have, I hope, established that the
primary industries are of fundamental importance to the progress 9 0 O/ IC 
6-
of the Australian economy and the welfare of our people.
How are the primary industries themselves measuring up
to the requirements imposed upon them? Here again a few figures
may be illuminating. I just take two of our principal items bout they could be
said to be generally illustrative. In 1948/ 49, we produced
1,050 million pounds weight of wool. By% 1964/ 65, that had grown
to 1,794 million pounds.-Wheat 1948/ 49 191 million bushels;
1964/ 65 369 million bushels. These are impressive figures.
Without that increase in production, Australia could not have
sustained a migration programme, could not have maintained the
standards which we currently enjoy today. And this is not by any
means an end point quite obviously because the requirements of
the future make the accomplishments of today look like only a pale
beginning of what lies ahead.
I don't know how accurate the projections can be said to
be but I know that the view is taken inside the Commonwealth
Departments that we shall need by a comparatively short time ahead
of us to reach an export income of just on $ 5,010M., and this
is assuming Alistralian population grow. th projected on a reasonable
basis related to current movements, and an increase in the requirements
of Australian manufacturing production as it, in turn,
proceeds to develop.
Now the UJovernment has not been, of course, unaware of
these deyelopments and requirements, and I hope ' you will agree that
in a great variety of ways, we have sought to encourage the favourable
output from the primary industries which has been reflected in the
figuxres that I have quoted to you. We have in more recent times
a&amp; opted new policy measures provision of long-term rural
finance, long a goal sought by the primary industries; we have
adopted towards the relief of drought a more liberal, approach than
I believe any government previously in the history of Australia.
Our approach this time was not on any mere basis of sort of
temporary rei~ ief to those unfortunately afflicted. Our approach
was on the basis of an economic measure designed to sustain demand,
to sustain activity in areas which had experienced the ravages of
drought, and this innovation of attitude and policy was certainly
welcomed by the Premiers of New South Wales and Queensland, and
I believe has been welcomed by those who speak for the primary
producers of this country. It has certainly been welcomed by the
farmers and graziers directly affected by the adverse consequences
of drought. But when you look down the list and I am not going to 
-7
occupy your time today in too much g. etail on it, you see the
wealth of measures adopted over recent years and in the past to
encourage the growth of healthy, efficient, competitive Australian
industry: The work of the OSIRO, the work of the Development
Bank, the various schemes of industry research, the preferential
arrangements made under the taxation structure, giving accelerated
write-off s in respect of farm improvements in these and a
variety of other ways, the Government has sought to encourage
production and to keep the growth of primary industry consistent
with the needs of an expanding nation.
This is the vital task, certainly a task which we could
only ignore at the danger to our national stability, and, indeed,
reaching through to our capacity to provide the resources for
adequate national defenoe.
And so, ladies and gentlemen, the substance of wxhat you
are discussing here today is basic to the welfare of the Australian
community. You will have those expert in a variety of different
directions to talk to you on particular aspects, and at tho
conclusion of the discussion, my olleague, Senator Gorton, who
assists me in the work of the Prime Minister's Department on
education matters as well as the handling of his own portfolio,
will be giving his contribution by way of summation.
in
You may have felt perhaps that/ talking in these rather
general terms, and a little coldly in respect of the statistics
that have been quoted that T, personally, have little far'. iliarity
with what goes on on a typical Australian farm. Wiell, I am glad
to be able to say that I can plead rather more knowledge than that.
Most~ f my boyhood holidays, right up to the time of young manhood
was spent on my grandfather's farm not very far up from where we
are, a little place called Nubba, which is ten miles from Harden
and Murrumburrah, which towns are probably well kn~ own to many
of the people of this area, and it was a Tery valuable apprenticeship
because it vas a mixed farm. It had everything on it but
not much of anything. There were some sheep, a few cattle, there
were pigs, there was an orchard, there were fowls, and the whole
gamut of a small mixed farm production. I used to ride in each
morning for the mail a couple of miles, and then round up the cows
in the evening, and occasionally take a hand at extracting the
milk from the cows in the evening. But quite apart from recalling
these days as amongst the happiest of a lifetime and recalling
that with all its heartaches, anxieties and difficulties, the life
on the land is, I believe, the most richly rewarding of almost any
that could be found in our community. I, at the same time, do
0 0 0 0 4,/ 8 
8-
recall the periods of difficulty when we knew drought and when we
could see before us the physical effects, the ravages of diought.
I remember developing some early knowledge of matters anatomical
when there was the weekly slaughtering of the sheep which had to
serve. us as food for the rest of the week. It was lamb's fry the
next morning, chops the day after and salted mutton by the end of
the week for the last two or three days. And so, ladies and
gentlemen, I assure you that when those who speak for primary
industry come to me and put their case, this does not fall on
unreceptive ears nor is there any lack of sympathy or, I hope,
understanding of the problems which those who engage in our
primary industries have to face.
Now here, in the Rural Committee of the Liberal Party, you
have a good illustration of the way our democratic system works
inside our own party structure. There is no dictation to a
parliamentarian from any outside body as to the policy lines he
is to adopt. There is sensible, well-informed discussion, and
arising from that discussion, there are recommendations which come
to us in a Coalition Cabinet. And I believe that the healthy
state of Australian primary industry, as reflected in the figures
that I have mentioned, owes much to the public-spirited work of the
men and women who comprise the Committee inside our own party
orgLanisgation and, of course, who interest themselves in these
matters in the party of our coalition. But our own Rural
Committee has been a strong body virtually throughout the life of
the Liberal Party. It came into existence, I think, Mr. Chairman
in about 1948 or 1949, and the Government has been greatly
influenced over the subsequent years by the thought, the painstaking
thought, the experience and judgment of members of the Rural
Committee which has gone into the recommendations which they have
submitted to us. with
I believe that from this conference,/ tne wealth of talent
that you will be able to drawn on as your discussions proceed,
there will be further valuable recommendations, and I can assure
you that there can be few ' bodies in Australia whose views would
rank more influentially and highly with the Cabinet of this
country than those of the Rural Committee of the Liberal Party.
And so I wish you well in your efforts together, and I
assure you that the product of your thinking will receive the
most earnest consideration of the members of my Government.
I think I have a formal duty before me in declaring the
conference open, so anything that has been said up to this point
of time can be ignored. From now on, officiallythe conference
is open, and I have pleasure in so declaring. 



SEATO COUNCIL MEETING
CANBERRA, A. or. T.
Speech by the Prime Minister Mr. Harold Holt.
27th JUNE, 1966.
Mr. Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is an honour foi me to be asked to open the 1966 SEATO
Conference. I extend a wañ ii welcome to you all on behalf of the Australian
Government and puople. This welcome embraces not only the distinguished
Foreign Ministers and delegations of countries with which we enjoy close and
constructive relations both in SEATO and outside of it, but also the
distinguished Secretary -General, General Vargas, and staff of the Organization.
Australia has become more conscious in recent times that,
through geography, trade and circumstance, we are increasingly part of the
Asian scene. Australia has good cause to value the existence of SEATO. It
has been a solid pillar of security for us. We have faithfully honoured our
own commitments to our colleagues of the Organization, and we are
grateful for the support given to SEATO's purposes by those members of the
Organization who have made much more massive contributions than our own.
There has been a good deal of debate and talk about a domino
theory in Asia. This theory propounds the view that if one country of
Southi-East Asia succumbs to Communist aggression, the others will topple
in turn. We can claim, from its achikevements, that SEATO has
successfully applied the domi-o theory in reverse. It has brought us an
assurance of combined support. We, and others of the-area, have lived
much more securely because of its existence. have been able to plan
more confidently for an expanding future. have done so encouraged by
the fact that SEATO provides a shield of protection and a means of
constructive collaboration. The Asian countries of SEATO have been able to build their
defences and to strengthen their economies. The year under review provides
further heartening proof to that supplied in other recent years that those
countries of Asia under Communist threat can, with outside help
supple m enting their own efforts, meet that challe:. nge and proceed to
prosperous economic growth. We can point to countries of the region, some
of them members of this Organization, which have recorded notable gains
of economic and social progress and are now advancing to new levels of
achieveme-int in an environment of stability. To those of us who live in the
area there is inspiration in the visible evidences of improvemnent and
progress. Some countries that I have visited recently seem transformed
against my recollections of them in earlier years.
What is also heartening has been the emergence of positive
and constructive attitudes to international instrumentalities for economic
co-operation. Although national sovereignty has been attained by some only
within the last 20 years, they display a commendable readiness to work with
others and create the institutions for co -operation. The newly constituted
Asian and Pacific Council and the Asian Development Bank are welcome
examples. We have welcomed also the generous undertaking by the President
of the United States to make a billion dollar contribution towards economic
development in South-East Asia. Developments such as these inspire a
spirit of hope more widely felt throughout the whole region. Even in the
heat of military contest in South Vietnam, there are practical programmes
being evolved for better times ahead. 
-2-
Wie are all conscious of a fermcent of change in the fPsia of today.
The-restlessnoss and the turbulence give rise to the mnore dramatic episodes
which arc, widely publicised. But these, arc only aspects of dynamic forces, some
of them much more favourable in their influence, shaping movements in human
affairs which in turn can affect the whole world.
SEATO has i-Ls critics and, of course!, it has its imperfections.
But the fact is that since its formation, it has held Communism at bay. From
South Vietnam, one of the: SEATO protocol states, where the thrust of
aggression has been fiercest, we are now receiving much mcre hopeful reports.
But while we have strengthened the foundations of our security, the need for
SEATO remains as strong as ever. No region today contains greater dangers
for world peace and security than Asia. South-East Asia has been singled out
by the-Communists as a critical area of challenge. They bclieve that if their
technique of so-called wars of national liberatio n can succeed in South Vietnam,
it can be employed with similar success in many other countries.
Why did the SEATO Treaty come into existence? It was designed
to enable its member countries to combine together to counter the Commnunist
threat in Asia. It was built on the reality that, left to themselves the countries
of the area would fall to Communist pressures. It recognises that these pressures
can take many formis. They vary in intensity, and they require a variety of
responses. Thanks to SEATO the Governments of member countries can
expect assistance, not only when declared conventional military attack occurs
across their frontiers, but also they can look for assistance when their
authority and administration are under assault from those familiar Communist
instruriients subversion and guerrilla warfare.
Communist aggression in South-East Asia follows what has become
a clear pattern. It usually begins covertly. There is long underground
preparation. This includes political i* ndoc tri nation, the training of cadres and the
build up of secret sources of supply. The initial threats are indirect. They
are concealed and they mature slowly.
The response made by the SEATO allies must therefore, be
carefully devised. There must be armed strength, of course, but we cannot
win an enduring victory by military means alone. There is the battle to be
won for the people's support, and to win this there must be political, social,
administrative and economic measures acceptable to them.
On my recent visit to South-East Asia, it was of special interest
to me to discover how earnestly the positive constructive tasks directed to a better
way of life in the community were being promoted. Whether in South Vietnam,
Malaysia or Thailand, I found that the Government concerned had turneld it3
attention to this need for a positive, constructive programme of civic action and
rural development. It is to be found to a growing extent among the programmes
of the military forces of all the countries concerned. Our own Australian forces,
wherever situated give a high priority to their activities in this field. No doubt
we have a long way to go, but the processes are under way.
A notable feature of SEATO is that each member country retains
its freedom of action about how best it can make a contribution. This
flexibility is important because the problems that we face are neither simple nor
clear cut. SEATO has shown itself capable of adapting itself speedily and
effectively to handling the different phases of tactics and timing of the Communist
challenge in Asia. We know, for example, that faced with military reverses, the
Communists are likely to step up their well known tactics of subversion,
infiltration, terrorismi and sabotage. 
-3-
SEATO, of course does not stand alone as the sole
instrument for security in Asia and the Pacific region. Several members of
SEATO belong to other arrangements which help to fortify the SEATO
structure and the fabric of security in the region. These arrangements are,
for the most part, formally established and contribute greatly to the
common defence in the region of Asia and the Pacific. The countries of
the free world associated in SEATO have shown their capacity to defend
national sovereignty and integrity.
Successive Communist challenges in . Isia have failed.
They have been met by the militaryT strength of the Government under attack.
It has been supported by the mrilitary forces, logistical backing and economic
strength of its partners, and of other friendly forces also.
The major challenge of Communism in Asia today is directed
to South Vietnam, as I have said . But it has met growing and determined
strength of resistance. SEATO is not merely an instrument for military security.
Its purposes include the advancement of all in the regions it serves-, It is
well constituted to help by practical assistance and friendly guidance.
SEATO has enabled us to exercise strength through combination. This is
of great importance to the smaller powers which are helped in this way to
devote more of their resources to economic growth. Australia in common
with some other members of the Organization, has made your problems of
development as well as those of defence. Left to ourselves, we would be
overburdened and crippled with security costs. The existence of SEATO and
other security arrangements ensures that members who are most directly
threatened and who are the least able to afford large military establishments
will neither perish nor impoverish themselves.
The wisdom, ability and experience assembled here should
enable this conference to advance most usefully the purposes of the
Organization. The ultimate answer to Communism must be found in the minds
of the people. They must feel convinced that life has meaning, promise and
better standards for them. We who oppose Communism must be more than
anti-Communist. We must demonstrate the false attractions of Communist
ideology and expose its techniques of human manipulation. But we must
stand together for the satisfaction of decent human aspirations and the
precious enjoyment of individual liberty.
Your SEATO labours of today will do much to shape the Asia
of tomorrow. I wish you fruitful and successful meetings.
I formally declare the conference open. 



FORMAL OPENING OF SEATO CONFERENCE BY THE RT HON HAROLD HO. ' MP',
PRIME MINISTER OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA/
27TH JUNE, 1966 1MB
Mr. Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies an
Gentlemen: It is an honour for me to be asked to open the 1966 SEATO
Conference. I extend a warm welcome to you all on behalf of the
Australian Government and people. This welcome embraces not
only the Foreign Ministers and Delegations of countries with
which we enjoy close and constructive relations both in SEATO
and outside of it, but also the distinguished Secretary-General,
General Vargas, and staff of the Organisation.
Australia has become more conscious in recent times that,
through geography, trade and circumstance, we are increasingly
part of the Asian scene. Australia has good cause to value
the existence of SEATO. It has been a solid pillar of security
for us. We have honoured our own commitments to our colleagues
of the Organisation, and we are grateful for the suipport given
to SEATO's purposes by those members of the Organisation who have
made much more massive contributions.
There has been much talk of a " Domino Theory" in Asia,
This propounds the view that if one country of South East Asia
succumbs to Communist aggression, the others will topple in turn.
We can claim, from its achievements, that SEATO has successfully
applied the Domino Theory in reverse. We, and others of the area,
have lived more securely: we have been able to plan more confidently
for an expanding future. We have done so encouraged by
the fact that SEATO provides a shield of protection and a means
of constructive collaboration.
The Asian countries of SEATO have been able to build
their defences and strengthen their economies. The year under
review provides further heartening proof to that supplied in
other recent years that those countries of Asia under Communist
threat can with outside help supplementing their own efforts
meet that challenge and proceed to prosperous economic growth. 
2
We can point to countries of the region, some of them members of
this Organisation, which have recorded notable gains of economic
and social progress and are now advancing to new levels of
achievement in an environment of stability. To those of us who
live in the area there is inspiration in the visible evidences
of improvement and progress. Some countries that I have visited
recently seem transformed against my recollections of them in
earlier years. What is also heartening has been the emergence of positive
and constructive attitudes to international instrumentalities
for economic co-operation. Although National sovereignty has
only been attained by some within the last twenty years, they
display a commendable readiness to work with others and create
the institutions for co-operation. The newly-constituted Asian
and Pacific Council and the Asian Development Bank are welcome
examples.
We have welcomed also the generous undertaking by the United States
to make a Billion Dollar contribution towards economic development
in South East Asia. Developments such as these reflect a spirit
of hope more widely felt throughout the region.
Even in the heat of Military contest in South Vietnam,
there are practical programmes being evolved for better times
ahead. There is the ferment of change in Asia to-day. The restlessness
and turbulence give rise to the more dramatic episodes
which are widely publicised. But these are only aspects of
dynamic forces, some of them much more favourable, shaping
dramatic movements in human affairs affecting the whole world. / 3 
-3-
SEATO has its critics, and, of course, it has its imperfections,
but the fact is that since its formation, it has held
Communism at bay. From South Vietnam, one of the SEATO
Protocol States, where the thrust of aggression has been
fiercest, we are now receiving much more hopeful reports. But
while we have strengthened the foundations of our security,
the need for SEATO is as strong as ever.
No region to-day contains greater dangers for world peace and
security than Asia. South East Asia has been singled out by
the Communists as a critical area of challenge. They believe
that if their technique of so-called " Wars of National
Liberation" can succeed in South Vietnam, it can be employed
with similar success in many other countries.
Why did the SEATO Treaty come into existence? It was
designed to enable its member countries to combine together to
counter the Communist threat in Asia. It was built on the
reality that, left to themselves, the countries of the area would
fall to Communist pressures. It recognises that these pressures
can take many forms. They vary in intensity: they require a
variety of responses.
Thanks to SEATO, the Governments of member countries can expect
assistance not only when declared conventional Military attack
occurs across their frontiers, but they can also look for
assistance when their authority and administration are under
assault from those familiar Communist instruments subversion
and Guerilla warfare. / 4 
-4-
Communist aggression in South East Asia follows what
has become a clear pattern. It usually begins covertly.
There is long underground preparation. This includes
political indoctrination, the training of cadres and the
build-up of secret sources of supply. The initial threats
are indirect. They are concealed and they mature slowly.
The response made by the SEATO Allies must, therefore,
be carefully devised. There must be armed strength, of
course, but we cannot win an enduring victory by military
means alone. There is the battle to be won for the people's
support, and to win this there must be political, social,
administrative and economic measures acceptable to them.
On my recent visit to South-East Asia, it was of
special interest to me to discover how earnestly the positive
constructive tasks directed to a better way of life in the
community were being promoted. Whether in South Vietnam,
Malaysia or Thailand, I found that the Government concerned
had turned its attention to this need for a positive,
constructive programme of civic action and rural development.
It is to be found to a growing extent among the programmes
of the miflitary forces. Our own Australian forces, wherever
situated, gave a high priority to their activities in this
field. No doubt we have a long way to go, but the processes
are under way.
A notable feature of SEATO is that each member
country retains its freedom of action about how best it can
make a contribution. This flexibility is important because
the problems we face are neither simple nor clear-cut. 
Successive Communist challenges in Asia
have failed. They have been met by the military
strength of the government under attack. It has been
supported by the military forces, logistical backing
and economic strength of its partners, and of other
friendly forces also.
The major challenge of Communism in Asia
today is directed to South Vietnam. But it has met
growing and determined strength of resistance.
SEATO is not merely an instrument for military
security. Its purposes include the advancement of
all in the region it serves. It is well constituted
to help by practical assistance and friendly guidance.
SEATO has enabled us to exercise strength
through combination. This has greatly helped the smaller
powers to devote more of their resources to economic
growth. Australia, in common with some other members
of the Organisation, has major problems of development,
as well as those of defence. Left to ourselves, we
would be overburdened and crippled with security costs. The
existence of SEATO and other security arrangements ensures
that members most directly threatened, and who are the
least able to afford large military establishments, will
neither perish nor impoverish themselves.
The wisdom, ability and experience assembled
here should enable this conference to advance most usefully
the purposes of the Organisation.
The ultimate answer to Communism must be found in
the minds of the people. They must feel convinced that
life has meaning, promise and better standards for them.
We who oppose Communism must be more than anti-Communist.
/ 6. 
We must demonstrate the false attractions of Communist
ideology and expose its techniques of human manipulation.
But we must stand together for the satisfaction of decent
human aspirations and the precious enjoyment of individual
liberty. Your SEATO labours of today will do much to shape
the Asia of tomorrow. I wish you fruitful and successful
meetings. I declare the conference open: 



PRIEIE MINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND U. K.
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB. *. ASHINGTON. June, 1966.
Presideat ( Mr. Booth):
Gentlemen, it may interest you to know that at this
very hour in Canberra the Secretary of State, Mr. Dean Rusk,
is addressing the Press Club of Canberra.
I would like to introduce the distinguished guests at
this table. On my left, His Excellency, iMr. John Keith iraller,
the Australian Ambassador.
On my right, our very own, the Honourable Edward Clark,
United States Ambassador to Australia.
On my left, Sir John Bunting, Permanent Head of the
Prime Minister's Department.
On my right, Sir Lawrence icIntyre, the Deputy Secretary
of the Department of External Affairs of Australia.
On my left, the Honourable Robert Furlonger, the Minister
of Australia. On my'right, the Honourable John I. c Naughton, Assistant
Secretary of Defence for International Security Affairs.
On my left, a most iL: portant man, f. r. Tony Eggleton, the
Prime Minister's Press Secretary.
On my right, the Honourable Ray Farrell, Co; uIissioner of
Immaigration and Naturalization.
His job is the one that our distinguished guest used to
hold in Australia. On my left, an old friend, the Honourable Claude Pepper
of Florida. On my right, the Honourable William Battle, former
American Ambassador to Australia now with the State Department.
On my left, a distinguished member of this club, Press
Attache to the Australian Embassy, Mr. John Malone.
Gentlemen, the nation, the city, and especially the
National Press Club we are proud to have as our guest of honour
a distinguished statesman from down under. His country is a most
remarkable one. It is almost the exact size as ours. It has
everything going for it that ours has great cities, vast
stretches of farm land, mountains, prairies, and it is all tended
and brought to bloom and fruition by fewer than twenty million
people. HOLT Twelve.
Twelve, I'm told. I was giving them a few. ( laughter).
Australia is a land where an A1. erican at least this one
feels more at home than in any other country but his own. Our
guest became Prime " inister of Australia last January. He
succeeded a veritable legend, Sir Robert 1ienzies, who was Prime
Minister for a generation. And, incidentally, who also spoke
from this platform. 
2.
Our guest is the leader of the majority Liberal Party
in Australia. That is the party to belong to just now. But
he knows this country and city well, having participated in
many , orld Bank and other financial meetings here.
But he is not all business by any means. He is a
skilful skinciver and spearfisherman, who enjoys water ski-ing
and power boating. He is a familiar figure at the Melbourne
race track and he goes the right way with top hat and tails.
How good he is at picking the horses his biographers don't say.
He is here today representing his coilntry, the faithful
ally of the United States, through thick and thin, good times
and bad. Gentlemen, the distinguished Prime Mlinister of Australia,
the Right Honourable Harold Holt.
MR. HOLT: ir. President Booth, Your Excellencies, Distinguished
Guests, Gentlemen of the National Press Club, and other types
not otherwise included;
This all makes me feel very good. In the first place it
is, as most of you have discovered, regarded by most of the
politicians of the world as something of a status symbol to have
the National Press Club. These things are taking a well defined
pattern at these times. If you can get your photo in'Timd' or
" Newsweek" or matters of that sort, well, you arc well on your
way to recognition. I have only had my photo, I think, twice in
" Time On one occasion I was sitting along side David
Rockefeller, who is rather better knovm here than I am. And on
the other occasion I appeared with three of ry delightful
daughters-in-law in their bikinis. A nd I got more international
recognition from that than in my thirty years in public life.
( laughter). Indeed, as I came across the United States, I was a
little chastened because, although I was shown every courtesy
and attention at the splendid hotel in San
Francisco, they kept addressing me as M1r. Ambassador. When I
went up to my room some generous friend had sent along a couple
of bottles of hooch but it was addressed correctly to me by
name so there was no argument as to the possessor, but it
described me as the Prime Miniister of Canada. ( laughter). Then
we got on the aircraft to co! te across to w'ashington auiwe
hadn't been off the ground very long when a somewhat worried
looking captain of the aircraft came along and he saw me
lounging in the front seat with a sweater on, by this stage, and
my collar loosened and my tie a bit askew and he said, " I am
looking for the Prime Minister of Australia. But unfortunately,"
he said, " I don't know his name." ( laughter). So, gentlemen,
my eg3 needed a bit of building by the time I got to ashington.
And thank you very much for asking me here. I see around me a
lot of friends. Some I have made at earlier times, some whc
apparently have just come along for the very nice lunch. 
On my right you will see a man who can usually be
distinguished by the " Yellow Roses of Texas" in his buttonhole,
your distinguished Amibassador to mW country, iir. Edward Clark.
Now, I am not without hope that by the time he ends his term of
duty with us we will have persuaded him to remain permanently.
I think he finds rather larger areas of land to be cultivated
there than in Texas. It's a little cheaper and the oil has yet
to be found. And, of course, we have around the room others whose
friendship I have valued over the years in which I was engaged
in the rather esoteric mysteries of' the Secretaryship of Finance.
But today I want to speak principally to you about the
sort of view that we have developed from the part of the world
in which I live about what has beco,.-e the major external issue
in this country and indeed in other parts of the world the
issue of Viet Nam. And I think it would assist a clearer
understanding for us all if v could turn our eyes away for a
week or two from, the daily episodic reportings to consider the
environment, the general situation, the total picture which
relates to Viet Nan and its place in Asia generally. Benause
from much of the criticism that I have been reading, the woods
seem to have been lost sight of as people inspect the trees. And
if we want to assess the value of our participation in South
Viet Nam, then I believe those who criticize must broaden their
horizons and sue wvhat has been achieved by resistance to
communism in South Last Asia and study in turn what this will mean
to the Asia of tomorrow. The military operations would then
fall into place as marking the continuing challenge of communisia
in Asia. The stakes, gentlemen, are very large, and that is why
three successive presidents of this great country, m-den who
should have at their fingertips information, informed advice to
an extent and of a , juality which very few other people could
hope to match, even the best informed of us. And in the exercise
of their country's heavy resoonsibility of free . orld leadership,
they have firmly decided, one succeeding the other, that the
i-ilitary po,. er and economic strength of the mightiest nation in
human history must be brought into the scale to preserveafœ eedom
and hope and progress in the countries of Asia. There/ a illion
people a billion and half people, rather east of Suez, and
their number grows appreciably each year. In India alone the
population increases to an extent equivalent to the total
population of my country -rhich, IVr. President, despite our best
efforts and a very active Immigration programme, has only
advanced to about eleven and a half million. 1, whleya rt lifted
for a momcnt when you said twenty million. ( laughter). That is
-where we hope to get. and get with other goals in sight.
But, gentle-men, they are people of quality. Je are very proud
of our Australian people.
But the one and a half billion people east of Suez may
have doubled their number by the end of this century. And Asia
has become a dynamic theatre of social ferment and revolutionary
economic change. In this region and I contrast it, as I say
this, with the continent of Africa there are countries rich
in resources with ancient civilizations, but some have been slow
to adapt themselves to the possibilities of -doiern techniques. 
Most of these countries are going through dramatic processes
of change, varying greatly in kind. You get, for example, the
modern industrialization which has occurred in Japan and, on
the other hand, the regimentation of the coru,, unist administration
in China of the 700 million people of that country. The only
major military power on the mainland of Asia is communist China.
No country Li Asia bould feel itself secure from the threat of
communist aggression but for the power and resolution of the
United States of America. And so we might fairly ask the critics
who don't like what is going on in South Viet Nam, do they want
a world in which a communist dominated Asia forms a major part?
That is a fair question. They may feel that the issue can end
in South Viet Nam. None of us who live in that area of the world,
and I speak as one who has in the course of this year not only
been to South Viet Nam but through several of the countries of
Asia. I come to you as one who opened on 1Monday morning in
Canberra the conference of SEATO powers. And on the preceding
weekend I was able to have talks there with Michael Stewart, Dean
Rusk, and the Foreign Mi: isters of all these SEATO countries
attending that conference.
And they are under no doubt as to the fact that a
continuing threat exists. They welco e what have been quite
favourable developments in the course of the past twelve years.
And there are very hopeful developments em-erging in A'sia. But
without American strength in ! sia then we might as well hand it
over to cormmunism of the Chinese brand.
ve in , ustralia share the views of your lead,. rs, and I
would hope and believe of millions of your fellow Americans, that
a critical battle is being fought in South Viet Nam for the
future of mankind. This conflict symbolizes the challenge of
communism in Asia and is the current , major expression of it. ,. e
have tried to see alL this in the perspective of history. -7e are
inclined in Australia to see things perhaps in direct simple
terms. But you are not necessarily i-Aore likely to be wrong on
that account. I think you can over-complicate the situation
to a point where, as I say, you lose sight of the woods because
your are concentrating too much on the detail. And there is
plenty of detail, of course, to be seen in South Viet Nam, in
the complex, dificult situation. And that is why the communists
are there, because it is difficult, it is complex. It is not
easy to produce national unity which would make the task of
defending the country and building it up again so much easier.
But we work with the conditions as we find them. And the issue
is still clear enough in our eyes. In these simple direct terms
we saw our role in world war I and world II. de were a cocintry
of only seven million people in those times, and i'ustralia
sustained nearly half a million casualties in those two world
wars. I think I speak correctly when I say that in the first
world war we lost more men killed than the United States itself.
And tha is how we saw the communist challenge in Berlin and in
Cuba. We fought it with you in Korea and we joiridwith British
and other Corinonwealth forces in fighting it in Malaya. He see
South Viet Nam in the same context, a crucial struggle for human
liberty. 
Never forget that the United States has not only put troops
into Asia, it has also put heart. And I speak for one of the
countries in the region which has felt heart, encouragement,
and strength froin the knowledge that the resistance that could
be made would oe backed in strength by the United States.
Reienber, that as far back as 1954, President hisenhower
decided to exteid both economic and military aid tc South Viet
Nam, to enable the development of a strong, viable state. And
during the next five years So-th Viet Nam made economic and
social progress which some observers described as miraculous.
And that progress was not halted by the South Vietnamese themselves.
It was halted by a campaign of subversion, of terror,
of infiltration, and finally of organized military aggression.
Remeiiber also what your country has done to help the
economic and social growth of countries such as Korea, Taiwan,
and Thail* nd. It stands ready to assist and suppo't co-operative
programxes for economic development in Asia. Your goal and ours
is for peace and a better life for all who are willing to live
at peace with th-ir neighbours.
The United States is working and building for these
objectives. ' e have heard a lot of discussion and debate about
the so-called Domino Theory. ; ell, those of us who take the
view from down under believe that, thanks to the assistance of
this country, the Domino Theory is working in reverse.
' ve believe that because the United States is in Asia,
other people arc encouraged to stay there and help the emerging
young Asian countries to work out their own future without fear
and without the persisting monaoe of a philosophy which Mlao
Tse-Tung says grows out of the barrel of a gun.
It is in our judgment shortsighted for' the industrialized
nations of the Lest to believe that they can contract out of the
problems, the troubles and agonies of Asia. The challenge thrown
down by communism in Viet Nam is a challenge not only to So. tth
Viet Nan, it is a challenge to the whole free world.
Lcl-t me say something about peace in Viet Nam. Peace in
A sia. Peace 11 ove the world. I'e have been nauseated by the
propaganda which describes the free world as imperialistic and
the coimunist world is benevolent and humanitarian. The converse
is demonstrably true. No man has worked harder for peace in
Viet Nam than your President, and he is not alone in this. Most
of the world supports him. Only Hanoi and Peking will not have
peace. , Jhat they want is surrender and a victory far
totalitarian communism.
, e believe in the kind of peace that carries with it
the right of small nations to grow and develop in their owm way.
ie believe in a living kind of peace. The comunists offer the
peace of the grave.
The Aerican decisions I see as turning points in history
were the Marshall Aid Programme, which opened a new vista for
human welfare, and the other was the decision to give military
support and aid to South Korea. iIhere would we have been had
America turned its back at that critical time upon support far
South Korea? 
There would have been undoubtedly today a Korea entirely
dominated by the comm-unists. And forces would have been
released at that early stage which would have pressed on the
other weak countries south of China itself.
But thanks to the United States' strength, Asia is
stirring. , e are at the dawning, I believe, of an exciting new
phase in human affairs. And I speak as one who has talked in
these recent years, and more particularly in recent months, with
leaders of countries such as those to be found in Malaysia, in
Thailand, in Taiwan, in Korea, in other parts of South East Asia.
There is a mood for co-operation. With Japan, for example, a
country which has produced the most remarkable industrial
expansion of iroiern times.
Our own trade with Japan today is running at about four
and a half times the dimension of the early 1950' s. And Australia
and Japan are both withholding from consumption more of their
gross national product than any other countries to be found in the
world about 28 per cent in the case of Australia, which compares
with 17 or 18 per cent in this country and the United Kingdom.
And so we are, we believe, at an exciting phase of
development in human history. Here are countries which have never
found either the i ill nor the means to co-operate, except under
the force of oppression, down through the earlier centuries.
India, another country which has gone through a
signifioant re-orientatior.. of thinking and movement. In
Indonesia, one of the richest countries of the world potentially,
a hundred million people which today find themselves in
administrative and economic chaos, but with resources so
potentially strong that a decade of capable administration and
management could make them one of the strong economic powers in
Asia of the future. And here is how this great country, and we
say it with gratitude and appreciation, because where else do
the countries of South East Asia and ultimately of Asia turn,
except to the strength and generosity of this country,
until enlightenment, perhaps, brings greater support from other
countries who would, one would have thought, from the generosity
extended to them, when their reconstruction was a matter of
necessity in the post-war years, one would have thought that they
would have joined gladly in this task of defending liberty and
progress in this troubled area of the world.
Jell, thanks, I repeat, to the United States, Asia is
stirring. And we are ourselves with optimism facing the future
ahead of us. ;, hat the United States has done is, we believe, of
epochal significance. It represents the engagement of the
riches and opportunities of the world with the revolution and
potential of Asia. It is quite impossible, of course, to assess
let alone overestimate the value and the sheer magnitude
that the service rendered by the American Government and people
on behalf of individual liberty, human dignity, and national
self-respect throughout the world since the second world war.
There has been nothing in history to approach the totality of
American generosity and enlightenment as expressed in a unique
combination of economic and financial assistance to the needy,
military protection to the weak, and dedication to the cause
of freedom everywhere. 
oe need to remind ourselves of all this from time to
time. It is all too often forgotten by individuals and
beneficiary nations under the passing stresses and irritations
of international life. I wonder where estern Europe would
stand today had it not been for the Marshall Plan and the American
contribution to NATO. And nowhere, perhaps, has there been a
better example of Aerican reso-lution and patience than in Viet
Nam. We are convinced that it has put fresh hope into those
Asian countries that are at the same time jealous of their
independence and depressed by the harsh realities of living
close to communist China.
So far from inviting a mounting chorus of protest, the
American 6xample has encouraged some of these countries to come
in with military help for the people of South Viet Nam. First
the Republic of Korea and now Thailand and the Philippines. I
am convinced that others of them, while constrained to preserve
a posture of aloofness and even disapproval for public purposes,
are privately thankful for what the United States is doing
The results of all this are to be seen everywhere. The
successful holding operation in Viet Nam has brought time for
a re-appraisal in Indonesia, as I have mentioned, of the prospeet
of the harsh and sterile realities of comnunism, and with it the
promise of an end to Indonesia's confrontation of Malaysia.
There has been the recent meeting of free nations in
Seoul, the first such meeting held by them, out of which has
come a new regional grouping to be knovm as ASPAC. The Foreign
Mfinister of South Viet Nan was present at our SEATO ieeting in
Canberra and this meeting was concerned not primarily with
matters of defence and security, but with opportunities for
political, economic, social, and cultural co-operation, looking
towards the future, free from the shadow of aggression and war.
The military forces of all the countries engaged hpve as
a major part of their task the Civic Action and Rural
Development Prvgrammes, a totally new concept that military
forces have brought to their responsibility in military
operations. !., hat better testimony could there be to the
fruitfulness of American aid and allied policies and actions
in South Viet Nam.
Let me end with a tribute to the steadfastness of the
United States' aims and objectives in that country, and to the
courage and fortitude of all of those military and civilian
alike, who are carrying them through difficult and frustrating
conditions. V'qe are grateful for the resolution, clarity cf
purpose of your President and his Administration.
As I said last night, it is a ggod thing that this
administration has the defence in depth from so many ablenmn,
all firmly and resolutely determined to see this thing through.
Their efforts have the full support of the Australian Government,
of the substantial majority of our people. And I express our
appreciation and our gratitude for them. 
NR. BOOTIH: Mvr. Prime Mi_, ister, you have several hundred sharp
newsmnen here. They have asked some hard questions arnd some
easy ones. Let me say again that I do not write the questions
sir. I merely ask them. And the first question. Sir, we are
not used to having our policies so enthusiastically supported.
( laughter). ( applause).
12ll. HOLT: a7ell, frankly, currently, not is our eyes. And that is
rnot simply a blind acceptance of everything that the United
States cares to produce. It is because the Australian people
and the American people are inheritors together of~ a great
democratic tradition. We think very much alike on the problems
which affect the world. I'We have great principles held in coiaion.
And I believe that we can be appreciative that there is a champion
to defend those principles of the strength which you hold.
As we grow in our own strength and determined we are
to go on with our growth then I hope we shall be making an
increatingly strong contribution to our common causes, whether
it be in the field of military effort, of international aid, or
of co-operation for other useful international purposes. But
currently the only problehis between us are SOI:!-e rather some
trade problems the 25 cents a pound. on -wool and a few other
odds and ends like that. ( laughter). In the international
foreign affairs field we see the situation very closely with
your ox'in outlook. ( applause).
! IR. B'O'OTIH: Sir, what is the nature of the problems iiwhich devolve
upon Australia because of the changing British stance East of
Suez?
11R. HOLT: Well, 11. r. Chairman, as explained to me by the Primie
Minister of the United Kingdom, the situation remains unchanged
froin the understanding ,-; hich was discussed with us by the Min,-ister
for . efence, Mr. Healy, earlier this year in Canberra, and then
subsequently foniiing part of the defence review which he made to
the House of Com-,.. ons.
Mr. Harold " l-ilson has reaffirmed that position quite
recently in public statement and in the text of the speech which
he made to his own party m-, em-bers.
Now. wie are currently concerned, of course, with the end
of confrontation situation. But confrontation has not yet ended
formally. We hope things will work out satisfactorily. But, of
course, there have been in the past times when all that looked
promising in Indonesia didn't work out quite the way that we had
hoped. We are m,, ore optimistic at this time. But we have ahead
of us a consideration of where we all stand once that situation
has satisfactorily ended.
Now the United Kingdom has made it clear that it will
stay on in the military force and presence in Singapore and I
would think with other Commi~ onwealth forces in Malaysia for an
indefinite time ahead. In what strength remains to be made hown,
but we are more concerned to have the British presence there as
a moderating and stabilizing influence than with the question of
just how -, anv people there are. 
W1e pursued, in Australia,. in company with the British,
both in Australia and the United Kingdomn, a study of possible
alternative base situations in-Australia if a situation
developed in which the United Kingdom could not effectively
maintain its force. in the bases where they at present are
stationed. But we would hope and we would believe that this decision
having been made is welcaned by the countries of the area
conc~ erned, that Great Britain will, as far ahead as we can see,
maintain a presence East of Suez in almost certainly the same
areas where they are at present held.
MR. BOOTH: Thank you, sir. In the light of Australia's maembership
of the recently created ASPAC, w., ould you say that Australia is
now going to get closer and more co-operation with its Asian
neighbours than was the case in the past?
vM. HOLT: Mr. President, that I believe is undoubtedly so. This
was a welcome development for as and no less welcome was the
warmth with which Australia Luid New Zealand were accepted into
the cor-pany of A sian countries. have cone to know sevexral
of them of course, closely, either through our SEATO cooperation
or in the case of those outside SEATO, in trade
developments of recent time.
And this is a symptomr, I believe, of the emerging
spirit of co-operation, of hope in Asia. There are potentialities
for trade which become quite exciting as new resources are
opened up and as better technical trade co-operation, machinery
is developed between us. This aspect, emergence, and the earlier
meeting of the Education Ministers at Bankok, the useful meeting
of SEATO which has just been held, the As ian Development Bank as
a new institution servicing the area, the undertaking which
President Johnson has given that there will be a billion-dollar
programme of development in the area if co-operation can be
successfully developed all these things are hopeful symptoms.
Hanging over all is the menacing cloud of colm-unism
which we must dispel. But subject to that I believe that, the
Asia of the next fifty years cannot only make great forward
strides, contributing notably to human welfare and progress, but
that it can appreciably improve the standards of the people of
the world as a consequence of this economic growth.
MKR. BOOITH: Thank you. 11r. Prime Minister,/ 0? e our colleagues asked
for your comment on the prospects for increased Australian
economic co-operation with Japan in, first, the development of
Australian mineral resources and, secondly, the general
development of South East Asia.
KR. HOLT: M1r. President, you are being very kind. There must be
a tough one or two stuck in that pack that you have there.
( laughter). . fof course, as I indicated earlier, have had a
remarkable growth of trade with Japan. It has multiplied by
four and a half timies, as I have said, since the early fifties.
But, even at that, wie believe wie are really just at the early
launching point of the trade between the two countries. 
Let me illustrate this for you b. .': hat is hap. ening with
respect to iron ore. are at the present time developing
great deposits in one part of .: estern Australia. It has been
estimated that there are 15,000 million to 18,000 million or
should I say billion, to make the figures miore intelligible
or 18 billion tons of good quality iron ore. And contracts
are currently held for somewhere in the neighbourhood of dollars
billion for the supply of this ore to Japan. That is just
one item which is only in the early stages. These are the initial
contracts which have been secured.
In some instances we shall require Japanese in association
with our ov. n and of that of other investing countries, most
notably the United States itself, particularly since soime strength
has been ijposed in the United Kingdon on further investment from
there. But we see, as I described it the other day, Mr. President,
the Australia of today is the sort of Pandora's box of mineral
wealth. There is hardly a week or a month which passes without
so,. e new mineral discovery of consequence coming to our notice.
And there are quite responsible people who predict that within a
measurable period of years our export inco... e from minerals will
exceed our export income from our traditional staple export, wool.
Now this should be not only a source of tremendous strength to us
but would assist in avoiding the sort of fluctuations in the
Australian economy which conditions of drought or lower world
prices for our primary product have brought to us.
We face a future in which Japan will figure prominently
and there is a very good basis for co-operation developing in the
trade field between the two countries.
KR. BOOTH: Kr. Prime Miinister, in my introductory remarks I am
afraid I gave my American colleagues more credit than they
deserved for the increase in population in your country. But
there are two questions in that area. To what extent did American
servicemen contribute to your population increase? ( laughter).
And do you favor any changes in your Immigration policy so as to
attract additional population from neighbouring Asian countries?
MR. HOLT: Mr. President, so far as I can gather, the American
forces were notably active but not notably productive. ( laughter).
( applause).
MR. BOOTH: The second, I am not sure you need to answer it after that
answer, sir. ( laughter. But do you favour any changes in your
Immigration policies/ s to attract additional population from
neighbouri . g Asian countries?
MR. HOLT: . iell, . uhrr esident, the sting was in the tail, of
course. have/ stablished Immigration policy but it has been
reviewed frcm time to time. And it is operating, I think, not
unsatisfactorily at the present time. I made a few liberalizations
myself, of not very extensive kinds, but at least they
were :. oves which I ino; gave considrable pleasure in the
countries of Asia. One -was to establish the same period of
naturalization for non-Europeans as well as for buropeans. -, e
do admit for a number of purposes people fro::, Asia and those who
have had a period of residence of five years or more can aply
for naturalization. 
11.
Any non--European who iarries an Australian spouse, a male or a
f~ male, as the case may be, beco;-mes eligible for citiz3nship
of the country and the children of that mArriage, of course,
enjoy full Australian citizenship.
We have at the present time well over 11,000 Asian
students in our vaLous schools and universities. And i know
that the governments of the countries from which these students
come do not favour any change in our iruaigration policy which
would have the effect of enabling a considerable proportion of
these or sone significant number of these to remain in Australia
rather than to go back to the country which needs their skilled
servizes so very much.
But these are matters which can be talked over quite
calmly and sensibly between us. It is well recognized that the
Australian policy is based on the desirability of maintaining
a homogeneu population that can integrate one element with
another. are currently, of course, attracting migrants from
many countries of Europe and we have quite a task at this period
of our history in successfully integrating. And I think we have
been doing it successfully and the people from so many other
countries who have to develop familiarity with the Australian
scene. But as our position in Asia increases from time to timae,
no doubt, there will be a desirability to have skilled people.
Special projects will call for soze presence of executives or
even a labour shortage could produce some need for a modifieation,
temporary or otherwise.
These things, I repeat, are all capable of being
handled within the ambit of the programme. There is some
flexibility given to the department for the permanent admission
of people who have special distinctions and skills. And it may
interest you to know that the permanent condactor of the Sydney
Symphony Orchestra is a very delightful person who an
American negro. And so there it in. ic are able/ t ese ways,
I think, to administer our programiae with humanity and with
good serse.
1R. BOCCM. Pr. Prime Ei ister, there is as much interest in
Indonesia a number of questions. I think I shall ask them all
at once so that you can expostulate generally on your feeling
about Indonesia because tine presses us.
Q. The first is. Please, a word about Indonesian
development from the Prime liinister, of a country once fearful
of Sukarno's expansionism. And the next one. hat is your
view of Indonesia's greatest present need? And third. In what
way can or sho. d oestern countries assist economic rehabilitation
in Indonesia, especially how should Australia? And
fourth, Considering the recent changes in the
Indonesian GovernLat, how would you characterize present
Indonesian-Australian relations? 
-v
12.
MR. HOLT: izj. President, if I tried to answer in general terms
I think it will cover the questions which are raised.
14e in Australia have always attached great importance
to friendly relations, co-operative relations with our
nearest neighbour, Indonesia, which is literally only a matter
of minutes flying time, at least, these days from the
No: othern mainland of our country. And even througi the period
in which Australian troops have been engaging Indonesian troops
on the border of Borneo, we have kept a line of friendly contact
going with them. Now the extent of the communist purge which
has occurred in Indonesia has yet to be either evaluated in
numbers or in consequence. I have here estimates which have
ranged from low field, 300,000, to high field, about a million,
of the figures of those who were liquidated in the communist
purge. And I think one can reasonably assume from that there
has been a re-orientation of policy in Indonesia.
Now while we may not ourselves approve of the methods,
at least if Indonesia is turning towards more co-operative
relationships with those of us who are in the free world camp,
then I think that can greatly improve the general prospect of
stability and progress in South East Asia generally. And the
country, as I said earlier, is tremendously rich in resources.
T know from discussions I have had with some of the entrepreneurs
from your country that provided they could see a period of
stability ahead and faithful dealing froma the government, then
they would be encouraged to make substantial investment of the
developmental kind in that country.
The future of Indonesian international policy is not
so clearly to be seen. Quite certainly, it wouldn't be linking
up with that of cori. unist China. I should think it would
probably seek or pursue a nonaligned role. But there has oeen
over recent times such a display of friendship from Indonesia to
Thailand, for example, and the talks regarding the ending of
confrontation with Malaysia were conducted in such a friendly
atmosphere that ' ie are hopeful that at no distant point of time,
providing we go ahead with developments like ASPAC for cooperative
economiic purposes in the region, that Indonesia would
find itself attracted to membership of such company.
But it is a hopeful sign and I should have put it on the
score earlier of the things which the United States is playing,
that its policy in South East Asia has secured. If there had not
been a resolute, continuing presence of United States strength
in South Viet Nan, we would never, in my judgment, have secured
the outcome which has occurred in recent time in Indonesia.
MR. BOO Mr. Prime Minister, we have had these wide-ranging
questions of viorld import. But there are plenty of us in this
audience who write for newspapers in tovns such as Fargo, North
Dakota, in the great plains of Canada, Topeka, Kansas, . here
wheat is big, sir do you feel that the world price of wheat is
being held down by the operation of the United States export
subsidy?
MI. HOLT: vell, I would like to turn that one over to my
colleague, Deputy Prime 1, lLister John chwen, the Leader of the
Country P; arty in the coalition government which I have the
honour to lead. 
13.
I an sure that John ;. ould say that the price of wheat
is too low. I don't know how many causes he would ascribe to
this, but anything any of you gentlemen can do to assure not
only a better price for wheat but for sugar and a few other of
these basic primary commodities, will be greatly welcomed by
the Holt Government in Australia. ( laughter). ( applause).
MR. BOOTH: There are many other great questions that I wish we
could ask, but we can't because, as you see, time presses us,
Ihen I introduced this table I purposely failed to introduce a
distinguished member of this club : who sits here. , ie have a
little ceremony coming up. Roy Macartney, who is a member of
this club, known to most of you out there, greatly admired and
loved, is the correspondent of the Melbourne Age of Melbourne,
Australia. Not only is he a great reporter, he is a great tennis
player, And he has just won the National Press Club tennis
championship. And I shall ask Mr. Macartney to come to this
place and the Prime Minister of Australia . ill award him the
trophy. Mr. Macartney.
MvR. HOLT: Mr. Roy Macartney, I offer congratulations not only from
myself, which is purely a personal matter, but froim the rmembers
of this club for this notable achievement marking yet another
Australian triumph in the field of tennis. It couldn't have been
more timely, gentlemen, because for the first time in living
memory there is no Australian in the quarter finals at . iimbledon.
And so Roy, you have kept the tennis reputation of Australia
high. I don't know how you've managed it with all these
penetrating dispatches that I have been reading back home from
your pen. But it just shows that the versatility of the
Australian abroadis something which has to be seen to be believed.
I now present to you this trophy. I don't know whether it is
do you have to win it three years too?-
iMR. BOOTH: No, it is his.
HOLT: ® Ie. l l, here you are. And unless he finds out by some
other process the editor of your paper will not discover this
rather this rather uncomfortable secret, as I imagine it to be.
Gentlemen, I am sure we all join . n applauding a great Australian
athlete, I give you Mr. Roy Macartney.
MR. MACARTUEY: Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister. It is quite
a handsome trophy. It would have been more decorative, perhaps,
if it was one of your swimming companions. Thank you very much.
R. BOOTH: It just shows how snart these Australians are. The
Prime Minister anticipated my last question but he may have some
notion after having just presented this trophy. Mr. Prime
Minister, what is your government doing about getting one of
your players into the finals at iiibledon?
KR. HOLT: dell, I think . e will demand a replay or else submit it
to the United Nations, something of that sort, vr. President.
MR. BOOTH: Thank you, sir.
MR. HOLT: Thank you very much. 



PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. A. AND U. K.'
Reply to Mayor Lindsay by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt
at Dinner at Metropolitan Museum of' Art. New York
Thank you, Mr. Mayor. Well, Mr. Mayor, before we let you go
away, would you come back so that people can see me gettin rd of
this thing to begin with. This isn't our principal gift, Ladies and
G-. ntlemen, but I thought it had better get out of the way in case
there was any confusion... ( Inaudible exchange with Mayor Lindsay).
This is not a very big cigarette case, but it holds a few cigarettes
and it has got in opals at each point around the me pof Australia
the capital cities. You won't find Alice Springs tht's an extra
opal, which we, in this difficult year, felt we couldn't afford
we've had a drought as you mentioned. But it's got all the regular
capitals and it comes to you as a small but sincere memento of a
warmth of feeling between Australia and your countr and in
particular the special place which New Yy~ rk has in the minds of
people in my own country who recognise it as one of the great
romantic and historic cities of the world. But I'm going to say
something about that so I won't spoil the speech. Here you are..
Well, now, Ladies and Gentlemen, that was really only a
little bit of trackwork. now settle down to the serious running.
Mrs. Holt and I, who have been honoured in so many different ways
in this visit we have had to the United States, and who have
memorable thoug. hts to take away with us of the kindness, the
graciousness of the American people, add another chapter tonight to
that story of our friendship with your country and of the unique
features which have made the United States one of the exciting
countries in the history of the human race. This city, New York, has
its o' ins pecial place of course. We take a magazine called the
New Yorker each week just so that we'll know what is going on around
the place. We never seem to get to a lot of the well-commended
and well advertised establishments I thought I might have got to
one of the livelier places of entertainment, but at least we have
had a topless show. here tonight as I gaze around the room. My wife
brought me here to this vionderful gallery and museum of yours in
order to see a mobile of the sun. I didn't know what she was
talking about. It seemed an unnecessary invasion into the very
limited time wie have had. But we camne to see the mobile of the sun.
I think wie have been back a few times since, and she is threatening
to return before we catch the plane tomorrow morning. But we
couldn't have had a more delightful setting for this dinner which
you have broug5ht to us by way of honour, and we couldn't have had a
nicer group of people, which, by succession of visits, seems to
include a great many of the friends, respectable and otherwise, I
have formed in this city of New York.
But you and I have quite a few things in common. You are in
the first six months of your Mayoralty. I'm in the first six
months of my Prime Ministership. I don't think you have to stand
for re-election as quickly as I do on the other hand I doubt
whether we will have any tugh fiscal measure in my Budget which
would endanger my position. It's a remarkable thing that you seem to
avoid these problems as you get close to your election. The following
year fiscal necessities build up but I don't want any trepidation
to develop in my own country on that account. I had the privilege
of introducing seven Budgets. It says much for the toughness, the
durability, the tolerance of the Australian people, that I was able
to succeed Sir Robert Menzies by unanimous election after a punishment
on my fellow countrymen of that kind and over that duration.
-4A. 
2.
Tonight we have been honoured by an assembly here of people
whose names are household words throughout the world and whose
generosity or whose contribution to industry, science, to knowledge
and in a variety of other directions in which human experience have
come together in this amazing city of New York. I think, Mr.
Mayor, you have a population very close to that of my own country
and we have a country the size of the United States if Alaska can
be left out of it. It's always a difficulty for me about this
Alaska business. I've got nothing against the people of Alaska.
I've no doubt that they are very fine people, but it spoils my
whole comparison iffl have to bring Alaska into the comparison.
But leave them out, and there we are with the same dimension of
country to look after. I understand you have some 27,000 policemenwell
wie have only 18,000 policemen, and I don't know whether
that means that we're just short of policemen, or that you need
more policemen than we need policemen. But it's a fact. But the
thing which really makes me warm to this city is that, through your
gate and with the symbolic Statue of Liberty was built the greatest
democracy in the history of mankind. The strongest power, the
richest civilisation and most affluent society. This all came
largely through the people that flowed into this country through
this city of New York.
I happen to have been Minister of Immigration in my owin
country for nine years and made quite a study of how you did it
because in this day and age it couldn't be repeated. People
w,-ould want, if you brought them here, the schools, the hospitals,
all the other amenities of the community life the stress and
added burden of the community would seem almost insupportable. I
wionder if you would know that if you have the same growth rate in
the United States today in population that wae have in my country you
would have to build another half million homes a year to accommodate
that rate of population growth. Yet, through the 19th century, people
pDoured in the numbers were not accommodated in the organised way
that they are at this time but somehow '. he nation adapted itself
to the growth of population, new industries sprang up, employment
grew as the demands and needs of one supplied the opportunities for
the other. I have speculated more than once in a lifetime that if, in
that period of human history, the critics had succeeded in
discouraging the men in leadership in the United States at that
time if all the things that could be said against the pressures
that arise from building up a population too rapidly had carried
the day, then would w~ e have had brought into the cause of freedom
at a critical stage in two world wars the power, might and resources
of this great American democracy? I leave that thought in your
minds because it is somethaing I have often thought about and when
the doubt has attacked me at times, when the pressures on our
resources seem greater than we could comfortably bear, I was
heartened by the recollection of what had been accomplished in your
great country and I felt if America could be made great through
people of quality, and exploiting the resources of a pioneering
country, then Australia could follow in that example and itself 
contribute a great democracy to the cause of freedom throughout
the world. We have been together in the cause of freedom four
times already in the course of this century and I suspect that
over the long; years ahead of us there will be many times shen
America and Australia will go in comradeship together, whether
in war, but, more hopeftilly, in the conditions of peace, to build
a better world for free people. I have been proud to acknowledge
in this visit the contribution that you have made to the security
for us all. I hap pen to come fromn an area of world where, as I
was just saying to M1iss Douglas, our hopes are highest but our
dangers are greatest. It's an area of the world where, over the
next 10, 20, 50 or 100 years, I believe a great new chapter of
human history will unfold. If it develops in the way in which
we would hope to see it develop, then that will be because of
the resolution, the generosity, of the people which made the
Marshall Plan a turning point of history. And you, Mr. Mayor,
through this city which has given so much in leadership and
inspiration to the American people as a whole, can feel that you
have been a great inheritor of the democratic tradition of a
courageous leadership -and that you, in your high office, are now
launched on the endless adven'ture of the public man who has to
give that leadership and see the issues through.
We have in your President such a leader and his resolution
is rallying the people in the area from which I come. Through
him and through you we give thanks to the American people for
vxhat they mean and tonight you have added a colourful, gracious,
and attrative memory to that feeling we have of comradeship
together in the great responsibilities, the great enjoyments which
the modern world has opened to us. Thank you very muich. 



PRIAE MINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND U. K.
Speech given by the Prime Minister, ] Er. Harold
Holt, to the American-Australian Association
at the River Club. New York. July, 1966.
Thank you very much, MTr. President He nmanson, and
greetings again Governor Dewey, other distinguished guests and
gentlemen. I don't suppose there are many places around the world
where an Australian public figure can feel more at home than he
does when he comes into this room. You have reminded me that I have
had not only many free meals here Randal, but very pleasant ones
and to come back to you after a number of years in which I have
been Finance Iiiin ister of the Commonwealth and be able to say to
you, despite all, that they elected the old so-and-so unanimously
Prime Minister of Australia is a matter of great satisfaction to
me. Randal, your presence in this chair is a further
reflection of the warm-heartedness and friendship for Australia
of the American people. are out-nmbered, iaagine to the
order of at least seven, if not 10 to one, in this company today
by citizens of the United States. But that did not prevent them
recognising the wonderful work you have done in support of that
great man who laid so much of the basis of the co-operation
which has come to Australia from this organisation Floyd Blair.
They did not hesitate to look to you for the succession
when Floyd passed on and I refeat here publicly the
congratulations which I sent you privately at the time and I say
what a gracious gesture it was on the part of those whose
numbers were justified in maintaining an American in the chair,
that they recognised your own devotion to the purpose vhich this
organisation can so usefully serve.
Now you are all busy men and you don't want to hear a
lot of introductory comment from me but I shall tell you what I
have in mind to do in the time at our disposal. I gather it is
a little more elastic than usual because you are all expected to
be on holiday in any event. It is not only flattering to find
you coming along in such good number but reflective of the
growing sobriety , temperance and tolerance of the peo," le of this
great democracy that so many of you are here in good shape and
apparently having come through the July 4 week-end almost
unscarred. But we couldn't help in the date arrangement because
i was heimed in by the opening of SEATO last Monday ( June 27)
and I have to be back in Australia for Btdget discussions which
we will be having in our Cabinet in lit u.ñ e riore than a week's
time, with London ahead of LIe in between. It is rather
reflective of the shrinking world in which we live. 
Earlier in the year, I relmemaber having answered
questions in the House of Representatives up to 11.15 one
m-rorning and the next morning I was talking to our troops in
Saigon. It is actually a shorter distance fromi Darwin to Saigon
than it is from Brisbane to Perth. Your Dean Rusk was out with
us at the SEATO Conference. The next time I looked him up he
was talking to somae group, I think, in Korea. Anyhow he was
around that area of the world and although on the map there seem
to be great distances between us, we are all these days
remarkably close to each other. But even so, it is useful to
hbave the word from those who have come froma the sp. ot.
I am not going to talk a lot about Australia because you
have had in recent times two people who have, I am sure, spoken
in quite enthusiastic order of my country. Sir Henry Bolte, the
Premiier of Victoria, is always capable of stating with enthusiasm
the prospects for his own State and indeed for the nation as a
whole. Ie have a fellow who has succeeded quite remarkably in
represtnting three countries at oncewith the same devotion. That
is a chap named Clark who speaks with the same enthusiasm for the
United States, for Australia and for Texas, all of whom he
represents very ably indeed. So you don't want too much about
Australia but let me just say these few things quickly in passing.
vve have just had the first Y. ajor drought for just on 210
years, People had al~ iost begun to forget what occurred when you
had a drought. In other areas it is som~ ething of a rarity in
these more recent years but this one was a quite serious drought,
particularly in New South * iales and Victoria. On our latest
assessment the sheep population had fallen from 170 million to
157 million in the whole of Australia a drop of about 8 per
cent which means that New South qales caught it a good deal
harder than that. The cattle population of that State, which is
not one of the great cattle areas of Australia, dropped by just
on 25 per cent.
Now~ that all sounds pretty serious but the matter
worth recording for you is that we have just closed our 1965-66
fiscal year and I think our export receipts are within a
" Coo-eel' on just the wrong side. But they are very close to
being on the right side of the record export receipts that wie
have ever gained. That was in a quite fabulous year, 1963/ 64-,
when everything seemed to go right. If we can just about touch
that figure in a drought-affected year, vith rural income down
very considerably, that demonstrates how the diversification
of the Australian economy has taken a lot of the fluctuation out
of our eco-iomic affai-rs.
e hardly felt these fluctuations, employment remained
high all the time, there was a little dampening of customer
demand, particularly whore, say, farrm equipment wvas to be s. old
and that radiated out to the consumer area generaliy. Right
through it all, erpl%. yment was sustained at what you would
regard, I' m sure, as an over-full employment level, -,,* hich has
become pretty well standard with us in good times something
just over one per cent of registrations of the work force. 
The other thing that was interesting out of it was the
balance of payments. Ve had thought when we brought the Badget
down last year th., at they would show a substantial reduction by
the end. of the fiscal year. Some commentators put the figure as
. high as about dollars Australian 400 million but we thought in
the Treasury it could be up to dollars Australian 200 million.
The result, thanks to a strongly sustained capital inflow, plus
this good export experience and some drop in the level of iriports,
is that we have b. en able to keep our reserves just about where
they were 12 months ago, and that means in a very co-fortable
position for us.
Now the drought has left open the opportunity for a much
larger aereaWfor wheat this year. The land is rested and the
farmer looking for a quick cash crop in order to retrieve some of
his losses is turning to wheat for which there is a very strong
demand around the world, The acrcagunder wheat is expected to
rise from 16.9 to about 20.7 million acres.
Now I don't want to say anything very much more about
the Australian situation other than perhaps a word on capital
inflow. Some of you may have been concerned about this when
restraints were recommended in the United States and more
recently when a programme of monetary restraint was indicated by
the Govermnent of the United Kingdom. I have always held the
view myself that, provided the bait is strong enough or
attractive enough, the capital will come to the bait. There are
so many of you in this room that will know from the activities
of your ovn organisations that the bait is still a very
attractive one.
Capital inflow has, in point of fact, been at a record
level through the 12 months just under review. It is continuing
quite strongly and indeed as some of these project3 have come
into fruition and as the quite exciting story that will be told
of them around the world iakes itself more widely known, I
believe that this capital investment will tend to increase
rather than diminish.
The reflection of that which may interest you is to be
found in the Inigration inquiries we are receiving. ue nevcr
looked to this country because it is a very prosperous country
and opportunities abound here, but we are now receiving thruugh
our New York ofrice and through our San Francisco office,
immigration inquiries at the rate of 1000 a week each in those
two offices. Quite considerably in excess of what we have known
previously. Nsw I don't want anyone to interpret this as an
indictment of the Admbinistration. I assure you it is nothing of
the sort. It is reflective of this growring appreciation t1--at
here, in this vast continent the size of your own if you put
Alaska temporarily to one side, in this vast continent , dith just
under 12 million people and with so much developing and
happening of proiis3 for the future there is an exciting
opportunity for the kind of frontier experience, of getting in
on the ground floor of national development that you have known
through so much of your history. " e welcaTme this development.
Indeed, when I get backI'll be asked what our Administrative
arrangements are. I know it must be straining the present
resources of the two Consulates-(. eneral and, once the inquiries
begin, we certainly don't want to lose the interest of those 
who have been attracted by this possibility. I can't imagine,
other than our ovwn people from the British Isles, any people
that would miore readily and agreeably fit into the Australian
scene than the enterprising migrant from this country.
Now we haven't been relying entirely on your capital
inflow because 90 per cent of fixed capital investment has come
from our ovn resources. We vithold 28 per cent of our gross
national product from current consumption for fixed capital
investment that is only surpassed by Japan. Your ov.' n figaiis,
I think, 17 per cent and the United Kingdom about 15 per cent.
So we are doing something for ourselves but the remaining 10 per
cent is quite critical because it is in that area that you get
the large projects, the new developments, new skills, new
enterprises and we welcome that flow continuing.
However, that is not what I came here principally to
talk about to you today because we share the concern and the
sense of importance that so many thoughtful people in this country
have about the situation in Viet Nam.
This importance and public interest is reflected in the
amount of attention given to it by all the news media and public
discussions. Because of the nature of medern reporting and the
episodic narrative account of day-to-day developments the
resulting picture in South Viet Nam is, I believe, incomplete ard
indeed misleading. I had the first experience of spending soime
time there just a few months ago, and w,, hat I found on arrival was
so different from what I had imagined in my ovwn mind from what I
had been reading day to day, that a misleading impression must
be held in the minds of a great many people and where discussion
is critical of the administration policy.
These days it is very much easier for public figures, and
I don't say this disparagingly, I'm one myself, to get the public
attention by criticism than by commendation. Good news is no
news, in the minds of sa. e of those who are looking to attract
a public interest.
The result is that very few people, even if they know
a good deal about the griamer side of the war in Viet Nam, have
any awareness firstly of the positive, constructive and helpful
things that are going on there affecting the general comrkunity
and far less of the amazing developments which have been
occurring in the surrounding area of South-East Asia under the
shield and security of the American presence in South Viet Nam.
But that is a story chich I've been trying to speak of
since I came here to the United States. It wasn't that I had
in mind to talk about principally when I came, but encountering
this atmosphere this apparent unawareness of what your ijresence
in South East Asia has meant to people like ourselves who live
in that area I felt it was time that somebody had something
to say about it and it is very hard to get something recorded
about it. If I were wanting to get some notice taken of me in sonm
sectins of the press of this country, I'd buy a six-feet pieoe
of canvas or calico and print somethirg abusive about your more
prominent people and go and hold it somewhere. Now that would
almost assure me of front page presentation in the most august
journals of this democracy. 
I saw a picture the other day, a front page picture
of Dean Rusk addressing the National Press Club in Canberra and
behind were a little band, I think of six or eight young
people from the Australian National University. I had seen them
around quite a bit. I think they were there when Hubert Humphcry
came: They were there at the time when Sir Robert 1ivenzies opened
the National Library and I was there to help him along, and there
they were standing in the background with this same little banner.
And if they were to conduct a public hall meeting with
the views they were wanting to express on the banners, they
would ' t fill th1e 0INst couple of rows, but they will got more
notice taken of them by some sections of the press than by a
spokesman for your country or far mine when we choose to discuss
t ese matters quite soberly. So let's get a more balanced view,
not merely of what is happening day by day but of the total
situation there.
I've read the criticism as a public man I'm not
unaccustomed nor resentful of criticism but I find no
alternative prograe presented to that which has coravended itself
to three successive Presidents in your country and to two
successive Prime Ministers in mine and one of those Prime
Ministers a man who had been there for 16 years and knew
something of what the world was about.
I don't know how far in this company, gentlemen, it is
necessary to talk about the situation there. Surely amongst
the intelligent people I see around me, one doesn't have to argue
the case about hether this is a civil war or whether this forms
part of an organised coLmviunist penetration. The story that the
Ky government can't run the place properly, and that South Viet
Nam can't look after itself, completely overlooks the fact that
for six years after Geneva there was very good progress made in
that country, of a positive kind, and it was only when the
national product had increased about 20 per cent while North
Viet Najiis had fallen 10 per cent that you found this switch in
tactics and the present campaign of aggression, subversion and
infiltration developing from the north.
Now these things are surely clearly perceived by people
today. Surely it is equally well perceived that unless there is
a substanital force, whether it be the United States in company
with allies, or a grouping, as I believe it should be, of those
powers that you in unparalleled generosity helped to place on
their feet in Europe after their period of trial had passed
whichever way it is handled, qite clearly, unless there is that
strength in Asia, then you can hand Asia over to the Chinese
communists and proceed to deal with a very much smaller and
narrower world of the future.
But who in his senses would turn his back on half of
mankind 1 billion people East of Suez with their population
growing, not only assisted by their natural fertility but by the
fact that their public health measures are now keeping alive many
people who would have died either from famine or disease at
earlier points of time. Ve can't ignore, no matter how
indifferent we may choose to be, the fact thait there is going
to be a population explosion there. That there is likely
to ue doubling of that 1-2-billion by the end of this century and,
if we are wise, we will try to help the people of the area
through their problems. will try to help them take advantage
of what modern technology can accomplish. 
I can say as one coming fro,] the area that they are
anxious to do more for thermselves. How much do you read about
it? 4-dho knows of the recent developments in relation to the
Asian Development Bank for example a billion dollars becoming
available for assistance through the area with this country
putting up a couple of hundred million dollars, Japan a couple
of hundred million, even my small country 85 million dollars
towards that fund.
Who hears about the meeting of ASPAC? The meeting of
ASPAC at Seoul a few weeks ago was no doubt briefly reported but
the significance of this gathorig of nine Asian countries was
riot brought out. Yet most of the countries represented at Seoul
not so very long ago were engaged, as we were, with Japan in
conflict. This conflict threatened to destroy my own country and
theirs. Our trade with Japan today is four and a half times what
it was in the early 1950' s. Now you may turn to the project of
the .' ekong Valley, the Indus wiaters Projects, the positive
programme which the military forces in each of these countries
and in South Viet Nam in particular include now as part of their
regular progrmi.; es of civic action, of rural development, of
village security and village development these are now accepted
as Dart of the necessary programmes of military forces in every
part of this area.
Would we have had the quite dramatic re-orientation of
Indonesian policy if there had not been the growing realisation
around Asia that the United States was firly resolved to stay
there in Asia, resist comm-unist aggression where it found it,
and assist the countries of the area to live co-operatively and
with growing prosperity and security in the years ahead?
, e have seen oountrics like Thailand emerge and prove
most helpful in the recent negotiations with Indonesia.
I know that you feel very lonely in this country at times,
particularly as criticisms are spread from one area or another,
but there are 34 countries giving aid in one form or another in
South Viet Nan. Some are giving military aid, others material
aid. I would hope that in Europe there would be a more faithful
recognition of what is being done out there.
I read a fine speech by former Premier Spaak the other
day in which he paid his own tribute to A ierican presence there
and chided his fellow Europeans that they were not doing more
to help. Now I just want to add one thought or series of
thoughts before I conclude what I have to cay. This relates
to the search for peace. I believe that there is nobody more
genuinely dedicated to the search for peace than the President
of this country. I have talked with him, I have read his
statements and I have heard what he has to say. There is no
doubt in my mind that he is genuinely dedicated to peace, just
as he is completely firm in his resolution that he is not going
to turn his back on Asia and leave the chaos, the destruction
which would flow from victory for Chinese coi. imunism there. 
a* 7.
Australia, on my own public statements and those of
my colleagues, firmly supports American policy in South Viet
Nam and recognises the contribution America is making to the
stability and security, strength and progress in South East
Asia generally. -e believe with your Administration that the
search for peace must be genuine, persistent and imaginative.
The world cannot go on indefinitely with those in
opposing camps regarding it as made up of goodies and baddies,
the description reversing according to which side you appen to
be looking, All countries contain intelligent :: on and women
capable of a realistic assessment of their own national
situation and, indeed, of an international situation.
The leaders of the communist world must be increasingly
aware tma days that the hope for world wide response to
communist propaganda and methods has failed to materialise.
Indeed the past year has seen much significant movement in the
other direction. Free world corrmunities do not aggressively
impose their ways of life and forms of government upon others
but I tink we need to give more attention to ways and means by
which both the Iron and Bamboo Curt. airscan be made a little more
penetrable and the interiors a little more accommodating.
I am encouraged to come to this view because surely it
is galling to the leadership both in Russia and China, having
made sufficient technological progress to put man and satellites
into space with impressive accuracy and, in the case of China,
to develop a bomb and be able to make MIG aircraft, to find
that the masses both in Russia and in China are still seriously
short of many things, including the foodstuffs that they require.
It .: ould certainly be a boon to them if more of their
industrial cevelopment could be directed to peaceful purposes
and I certainly believe it would be a boon to mankind if this
would also happen in the freedo. u-loving countries of the world.
It always rather saddens . ie that, wvhenever there is a
serious discussion about ;-eace prospects, the stock exchange of
New York seems to take that amiss or in an unkindly fashion.
Down go the stock exchange values. This does not read too well
around the rest of the world. Surel y it is possiJle for
programmes to be available so that and I'm sure a great deal
of planning and thinking has been done on this by your own
Administration as peace prospects emerge ( as we would hope
they would at a not too distant point of time) we do have in all
our democratic countries the programmes for an era of peace that
will carry our people further along the road to the security a. r
wellbeing to , which we all aspire. that
There are personal contacts at various levels/ can help
towards a better understanding of seemingly hostile viewpoints
and aspirations. Trade is, of course, one of the major methods.
I know this is a controversial subject but there is normally a
mutuality of interests and of benefits from trade transactions.
Personal contacts are established on a basis of friendly exchanges
or co-operation. 1e have traded freely with Russia and China
in respect of wheat and wool and we do not see that this is more
inconsistent than the line we took with Indonesia when we had
troops in Borneo meeting the confrontation challenge. 
8.
Ve were looking to the point of time, which we believed to be
not too far removed, when enough sanity would be restored to
Indonesian Counsels to have them wishing to co-operative with the
countries which could mean so nuch to their o n future and in an
area of the world of great consequence to us.
Tourism facilities for visits by journalists,
eicouragement of visits by cultural and scientific groups these
are minor ways to break the ice but there are a variety of other
ways in which tho ice can be thawed unless vie are completely
barren of hopc or imagination. I do not think any of us can
afford to becoAe. so rigidly imbedded in an attitude that there
they are and here we are and never the twain shall meet.
I amL sure it would be tiv-ely for China to review where
its current policies may lead. I say this because at this point
of time we are on the threshold I believe of a new Asia growing
in co-operation as it copes with this population explosion and
China standing at a crossroad between a friendly and mutual
beneficial associj. tion or a lonely path of persistent and
hardening hostility.
When I go to London I shall be expressing something of
the concern I felt in Australia, lest there be a reduction of
British interests in that area of the world. We are not looking
for massive British forces there but we are looking for a
continuing interest in the problei: ms of an area which, I thinl,
not only forms part of one of the major upheavals in human
history but an area, and with a body of people, that is shaping
a new world order the limits of which can only be imagined.
Modern technologies and a growing degree of co-operation can
transform for hundreds of millions of people a future which, at
the moment, is compounded of famine, of illiteracy, of poverty
and of despair. So we have a prospect which your o-wn President sees
quite clearly. e have welcomed his imaginative ap~ roach and
I do not say that only of your own President it is the
attitude of men of goodwill on both sides of politics in this
country. There has been nothing in hiunan history to match the
unparalleled generosity and vision which brought one of the
turning points of history in the Marshall Plan for Amlerica to
the world. I believe that your intervention in South Korea was
another of the turning points in history. You have been
following this up with enlightened policies in Asia or South-
East Asia of which my o-n is one wvhich reoognise this, which
are appreciative of it, which fecl grateful to the United States
for what it has done and are determined to co-operate with it
resolutely in resisting aggression, but helpfully and in a spirit
of comradeship in the great constructive tasks which lie ahead
for us all. 



ADDRLES BY THE ACTING . PRIME-MINISTER,
MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY,
AND LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNTRY PARTY,
MR.. JOHN McEWEN,
AT' THE FIRST ANNUAL MEETING OF THE
CANBERRA-QUEANBEYAN BRANCH OF THE. COUNTRY PARTY,
CANBERRA, 6TH JULY, 1966
The Country Party took shap. as a political entity
separately in all the States at about the time of the First War.
It had different names in the different States. It was. sAme little
time. before the State organisations composed a Federation.
Organisationally the Party is still a federation of State
entities. Federal policy is..-composed by a Federal Council with a
membership from all the State : organisations and the Federal
Parliamentary Party.
In due course a common name was adopted: " Tho Australian
Country Party"; and the branch formed. here to-night will be a unit
of the N. S. W. Branch of the Australian Country Party.
Unduubtedly the Party in its formative years was composed
primarily cf farmers concerned with policies cnn. erning the interests
of farmers and their export industries,
If anyone said that the Country Party was founded on a
narrow sectinnal basis 50 years ago, I would not dispute that, but
wauld quickly point out that the economic health of this country
then, as nnw, is inseparable from the existence of healthy expanding
export industries tr earn the foreign , xchange to scrvice our national
growth. It was founded as a Specialist party. It has grown to
broad national stature without losing its 6apacity for specialist
attention to the wll--being nf the rural industries..
All that was 50 years ago.
Australia itself is not recognisablo as a nation to-day
Qomparcd with the Dominion of Australia of 50 years. ago. And as
Australia has grown and broadened, so the Country Party has grown
and broadened over the same perind.
I believe that many who are attracted to the Country Party
here to-night, and widely around Australia, are attracted because
the policies of the Party are so singularly for the growth and
strength of the Australian . economy, and peoplo.
Fifty years ago the terms " farm-products'' t-and -" export
industries" were synonymous. 
We have grown with a consciousness that the self-interest
of the person engaged in the export industry coincided completely
with the self-interest of the nation, always avid to earn the maximum
foreign exchange. Constantly increasing prodiution of new wealth is
tho most essential foundation from which to apply other political
policies. The dlearly growing coales6ence between the farm Gxport
industries and non-farm export industries has been a most natural
development. The basic political philosophy of the Country Party has
always been attached to the concept of free 4nterprise and against
Socialist doctrines. This is the Gommon ground which places the
Country Party so constantly in alliance with the Liberal Party.
On the other hand, the Country Party has always wanted
the fruits of productive labour to go to the maximum extent to the
producer, and this explains the almost identity of interest between
the Country Party and the great Co-operative Groups which now handle
so much of production.
The concept of retaining strength in the hand of the
beller by combination is expressed in many different forms, but the
objective is constant: dairyfarmers or fruitgrowers combined to
establish a dairy factory or a fruit cannery to handle their own
produce a purely private arrangement. The sugar growers and the
wheatgrowers found it necessary for Governments and Legislation to
aid in their co-operative activities. The motive of retaining the
maximum value of production to the producer is the same.
This leads through to the whole complex of statutory
marketing boards or regulatory boards.
That is a glimpse of the Country Party's historic part in
attending to the well-being of primary producers. The Country Party
still slaims the specialist knowledge in this field. But, standing
further back from the picture, one discovers the extent to which
the Country Party has broadened its objertives as Australia has grown
and as our circumstances have (, hanged.
We have always been strong for adequate defence provisions;
f) r close co-operation with Britain, and natural allies. Our growth,
the diminution of British strength, the shift from Europe. alone as
the possible source nf war to include Asia in this threat, the
emergence of Communist. strength on the one hand and American might
cn the other hand have all Gontributed -to progressive broadening
of Coutntry Party policies. 
-I
( f a 
To-day, the Country Party abandons nothing of its
specialist field in relation to the rural sector, but plays an
increasingly broad and leading part in propounding policies for
the growth and strength of the Australian nation.
We support policies of alliances for military strength;
of better educatign and health services; better . ommunity services
generally; of full emplbyment and adequate so6ial services. But,
being fundamentalists at heart, we are firm in the belief that all
these poli&amp; ies are only attainable in strength if two ossential
ingredients exist: first, a growing population, and secondly, a
smfficient foreign exchange earning to servic-e our requirements and
our ambitions. I place it as broadly as that: growing population,
migration, are mere words without job creation. Job creati-n is
synonymous with developing industrialisation, which leads in turn
to growing tertiary activity.
No ambitions in this direction can live without sufficient
foreign exehange earning, and here the farm industries are still the
backbone. Primary industry still earns more than 80% ) f our total
foreign exchange and is key to a healthy growing national economy.
Name any single aspect of policy and the Country Party
will relate it to its position in respect of strong industrial growth,
strong capacity to earn foreign exchange.
I have pointed out again and again that superficially there
could appear to be a contradiction between fast industrial growth,
which undoubtedly impscs a pressure on costs, and strong growth for
export, which, to be competitive, requires costs to be kept within
bounds. This is a problem, not a contradiction.
No one can contemplate an Australia prodominantly composed
of farmers, even if operating from a low-cost base, nor &amp; an anyono
contemplate an Australia highly industrialised with the foreign
exchange-earning farmers squeezed out of existence. We have to
reconcile this problem.
We have to grow without stultifying the farm community,
and the Country Party believes that supporting fast economic growth
as it does it is entitled in equity to policies which will
compensate for the cost pressures imposed on the export industries.
And, quite apart from the argument of equity, I point out that there
is no future for the country if it fails to earn sufficient foreign
exchange. In 1919 we might have resisted, and probably did, industrial
development which would impese cost pressurps. To-day the Country
Party sees clearly that industrial development must go on, and 
prc'poses constructive policies designed to compens-ate the export
industries for the added costs and to enable them to survive and
expand. The greatest single point of Country Party policy here is
that of support for the scientist and technologist and extension
worker; to help the wheatgrower, or dairyfarmer, or wool producer,
to bear heavier cash costs and yet experience lower unit costs by
doubling the number of sheep carried on an acre or the amount of beef
produced; doubling the amount of sugar produced per acre; getting
the wheat yield up, and the fruit yield up, and so on. Success in
this direction is the predominant explanation of rural industries'
ability to survive in a phase of growing cash costs: a 60% increase
in total agricultural production during the period of this Government
with a diminution of the rural workforce of 10% in the same period.
This efficiency has been the major offset to cash cost increasos.
There is, of course, a total complex of other policy itemshome
prices, a lower bank overdraft rate for the export industries;
a greater access to credit; a preferred access to credit; a number
of taxation concessions; a fertilizer subsidy; concessions in
freight rates; a search for markets overseas, trade treaties, trade
publicity; international commodity arrangements, special bulk sales.
Increasingly, policies of the same character are now being
devised to aid the export of manufactured products: payroll tax
rebate; the underwriting of overseas investment made in the course
of securing market opportunities; the highly specialised insurance
provision of the Export Payments Insurance Corporation. These steps
supporting manufacture at export are comparable in Country Party
thinking with the objectives in mind when a fertilizer bounty is
provided, or a trade promotional campaign mounted.
From the fast-growing economic strength of the country,
which has been supported by these policies, we are now able to
afford what w,, ould hitherto have appeared prodigious expenditures
rn defence, enormous allocations for social services, and for
education, and to help the State Governments; and for special
activities for Northern Development, such as funds provided for
the Ord, for brigalow clearing, beef roads, and very substantial
expenditure in Papua-New Guinea of taxation raised in Australia.
I am quite sure that the Australian Country Party is
broadly respected for the breadth of its policies; respected not
only here in Australia, but respected internationally, where, on
many occasions, ideas that have had their origin in this kind of
thinking are now part of Iinternattlonal -di-scussions and planning. 
But, with all the strength that we can muster in our day,
we still need strrnng friends. Our close bonds with the British
people and Commonwealth countries need no documentation. The ANZJS
Treaty with the United States and New Zealand establishes a mutual
alliance between Australia and the world's most powerful military
country to-day.
We expect others to accept it that this enviable oountry
is entitled to be free from aggression, and this must result in us
lending our support to preserving the freedom of other nations against
aggression. This principle and our unbreakable bond with the United
States have combined to lead us to join with the United States in
resisting Communist aggression in South Vietnam. In human and in
international political terms, we are right in joining to protect
this free country fr 2m, Communist aggression. In practical termn, we
are right to keep the frontiers of expansive Communism as far fr'MM
our shores as possible.
In terms of our owm long-term security, the recent
deolaration by Mr. Dean Rusk that any attack upon Australia would
produce a massive American retaliation is the greatest guarantete
mf our safety in a dangerous anorld.
In the.-D policies we and our Liberal coalition partners
hold idcontinal views.
I am confident that the policies cf the Australian Gmntr* y
Party are good both in the specialist sense and, moreAimp~ r-antly,
fomr the over-all well-being f-Autralia. 



Speech by the Prime Minister. Mr. Harold Holt,
at Commonwealth Correspondents' Association Lunche \ a'f
at Waldorf Hotel. London .1
I have always been a Commonwvealth man as long as I have been
in the Parliament of the Commonwealth, but using the first reference
to Commonwealth in that very much broader sense which embraces the
many Parliaments of our Commonwealth of nations, and indeed I have
seen that number grow very considerably from my first Commonwealth
Parliamentary Conference here in London in 194, w'" hen the only three
new Commonwealth countries admitted to the old club were India,
Pakistan and Ceylon, to the time today when those of us who belonged
to the old Commonralth find ourselves historically at any rate in a
very small minority among the newer countries which have secured their
independence and Cormmonw. ealth status since that time. These are days
in which we ask ourselves what does the Comonwealth stand for at
the present timie. Some of the unifying factors seem either to have
disappeared or faded in strength. We can't claic: as we look around
the Commonvwealth today that the thing that is holding us together is
a common devotion to Parliamentary democracy, because in some of the
countries of the Commonwealth we haven't got Parliamentary democracy
and in some where Parliaments function they do not function along
the lines of the Mother of Parliaments at Westminster. They may have
the standing orders and IMr. Speaker and the rest of it, but sometimes
there is only one Party, or at least only one which is allowed to
operate effectively. In other cases the Parliament is non-existent
for some significant periods of time. Agin there is no longer, and
this was established at the time when India decided to ask for
Commonwealth status while seeking to be a Republic, there isn't the
same common allegiance to the Crown which had marked the Coiomonwealth
of earlier years. There are many countries representing many
different circumstances of life, conditions of people, races, creeds
and habits of life, tending to present us as different people among
the quarterthe population of the globe included in our company.
But, having said all that, there are still things we cherish as
part of the Commonwealth relationship and I felt this as I sat with
you today that one of the things which still remains true about the
Corinonwealth and I hope will persist is that there's a rather
different feeling when we sit down together, even as people who have
never met each other before and I have met only a few of you in this
room today, one sits down feeling immediately relaxed and at home
with members of the family, perhaps remote relatives some of those
here, but there is that feeling of warmth and companionship, cooperation
together which still remain essential features of our
Commonwealth relationship. I have been pleased to see how proudly
new Commonwealth members have adopted their relationship. There is
a disposition these days for groupings, either of a regional kind
and perhaps, even less satisfactorily, of a racial kind.
I've been troubled myself by what have been known as the
Afro-Asian ali gnments which have seemed to rest not so much on
policy associations or attitudes, but rather on. attitudes of race
which tend to create differences and antagonisms with other sections
of the community and one of the most commendable features of the
Commonwealth association has been the way a multi-racial community
of Parliaments and countries have been able to come together for a
friendly, frank and quite forthright exchange of vieos and out of
the many Parliamentary conferences of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
organisation, which I personally attended and some of which I presided
over, there came a better knowledge of viewpoints in the Commonwealth
and a warmer feeling towards its people. I used to make it a practice
myself whenever I travelled of visiting a new part of the Commonwealth
and I think now with interest and a good deal of warmth about the 
2.
countries which one visited in earlier years and am able to follow
with a sympathetic interest the way they have gone about handling
the difficulties of development which faced niany of them. % 7e are
not these days a strong Conrnonwealth financially or militarily.
There is tremendous potential, of course, an aggregation of peoples
occupying so vast an area of the globe, much of that area relatively
underdeveloped at this time but potential, while comforting, is no
substitute for the actualities of need at a given point of time.
I had a former colleague in the Treasurer's job in Canberra
who, when people used to tell him about the long term benefits w,, hich
would come to him from some particular progrm-me, used to reply by
saying that it's a case of " Live horse until you get grass."
Whilo some of our Cormonwvealth countries, while they have the
potential for development, are going through difficult periods as
hey look for foodstuffs, the opportunities for education, housing,
the medical services and all the other factors which go in a civilihL
community towards raising the standards of the people, wo.
can't expect it to lean indefinitely on the United Kingdom in the
way that perhaps at an earlier point of development of the Connonwealth
was found possible. Quite obviously we can't expect the United
Kingdom to provide the tidlitary strength to keep the Comon, ealth as
a whole secure. We each have to do more for ourselves and, in some
cases, for each other. But given time, association and the cooperation
which is within our grasp, this can be a very much stronger
Cormmonw'ealth, and even in the intervening years it can be a very
influential Corinonwealth because there are many of us , Jho are to be
found in most places where policies are discussed. We have our
influence, some in one group, some in another, some with one country,
soEmle with another, and provided that -ien aintain towards each other a
goodwill, a determination to make a multi-racial association work,
then the Commonwealth can still contribute greatly to the welfare of
mankind. Wie should always hold before us, I believe, the goal that
w must first make this association work if there is to be any hope
of that larger association functioning effectively in the United
Nations. If the Commonwealth can't work, then how can the United
Nations. On the other hand can, by the force of our own example,
by the Comnmonwealth functioning co-operatively and leading to the
Xrengthening of its membership, show to the rest of the world that,
iven goodwill and a spirit of co-operation, this can be accomplished.
! hat is the kind of vision we can cherish together and do individually
what we can to keep the Comnonwealth spirit alive and make it in its
practical application a function for the benefit of our conunity of
nations and through those for the rest of the world.
Now, that's enough from me by -, ay of opening the session, and
if I can deal with specific questions you might like to ask me.
Q. What association would you like Britain to have with your own
country and New Zealand in your part of the world and how strong
should Britain's contribution be?
MR. HOLT: Do you mean do we need any formal association? I don't think
we do need any formal association. Wie know each other well
enough, and we have complete faith and confidence in each
other and all I think we need to do is to resolve among ourselves
what courses should be followed. I, as you know, have urged
strongly that the United Kingdom maintain a presence east of
Suez. I have pointed out that here are to be found more than
half of the population of the world and on population projection
that half will tend to grow rather more rapidly than the other
half, that the potential for change, development and economic
growth is greater there in my judgment than in any other part of 
Mr. Holt continued:
the world. To me it seems unthinkable that the United Kingdom
which, over the centuries of history, has had so largo a part
to play in the world and its historical development should not
be associated actively in a number of the projects iwhich will
develop in the area. This does not mean necessarily large
military forces or large expenditure, but I think the people of
this country in these days sometimes tend to underrate their
own influence around the world. The respect that is still held
for British character, skills of government, the British capacity
for organisation and management, and, in areas of the world which
are sorely lacking in these things, guidance and aid from such a
source can be critically valuable at times.
Q. Will the Australian Government set an example in racial
harmony to the rest of the Cormonwealth by abolishing its White
Australia policy?
IMR. HOLT: Well, of course, it hasn't got a vhite Australia Policy so
styled. It has a policy of restricted immigration, as does every
country of Asia in fact some of the countries of Asia are a good
deal more restrictive than is Australia. Ceylon, for example,
would have a restrictive programme, India would, certainly
ialaysia has, and so far as I am aware every country of Asia has
a programne of immigration restriction and that programme is
based on the need to preserve certain national standards, to
protect employment opportunities for its people and to avoid
disharmony developing in the country. For our part we have
maintained a restrictive policy, I hope with humanity and good
sense. It's been liberalised in a number of situations which
seemed to call for that. I remember as a former Minister for
Irmiigration myself having adopted a policy in relation to the
Japanese wives of our servicemen who were then admitted on a
basis of full citizenship . which has nowi become standard policy
in Australia. Any Australian who marries a non-European has
the husband or wife admitted on a basis of full citizenship and
the children of the marriage, of course, are Australian citizens
from the outset. Recently we -uended the previous aidinistrative
arrangements so that those non-Europeans, and there are quite a
body of them in Australia who have come there for the purposes
prescribed under the policy, can apply for naturalisation after
five years of residence with us. It's not generally known that
there are some 13,000 Asian students in Australian schools and
universities at this present time. I am sure those who like
to attribute some racist aspect to our thinking would be rather
surprised to know that the leader of the Sydney Symphony
Orchestra is an American negro, Dean Dixon. You will find in
various ways we have tried to apply the policy in a practical
way, but we would not be serving Asia or the rest of the world
effectively if the country were to be torn by racial division.
It would not be a case of admitting one nationality or another,
there are scores of countries outside Australia in Asia, Africa
and elsewhere, if we were trying to admit a certain number from
each of these countries and at the same time go throuh a
satisfactory process of integration into the community life at
this stage of our national development, I think it would tend
to reduce our effectiveness to help others, to build our
defences and to build our national aid rather than help that.
The best answer for those who have doubts and some scepticism
or criticism in respect of the Australian attitude is to come to
Australia for themselves. They will find great friendliness,
no discrimination, and most of them in my experience have come
to the conclusion that the way things are working out this is
just about the soundest policy Australia can adopt at this point
of its history. 
Q. Can you say at what stage are your discussions with the
British Government on a base in Australia, and will it be a
base and how much will it cost?
MR. HOLT: I can't answer those questions specifically at all because
they-have not yet been resolved. I can say that following our
talks with Mr. Denis Healey earlier this year, when he put in
train at the Service level for discussion between representatives
of our two countries a number of proposals in relation to the
three Services. Those talks have gone some considerable
distance. There may be actual estimates of cost, but so far
the talks have been at the Service level. I have known as
Prime Minister that they have been going on, I have known
particular locations which it is thought could be suitable for
such a purpose, but our own view has been, for the reasons I
mentioned a little earlier, the desirability of the Asian
people themselves feeling that Great Britain is making a
contribution by its presence and its assistance to the strengthening
and development of the area, it is preferable to maintain
the establishments wie have. They are good establishments the
Singapore za-val base and the barracks at Terendak and Butterwiorth
in V. aysia. These have been developed at considerable expense.
They are very habitable as I saw for myrself when I visited them
recently, and it seems unnecessary to duplicate them hen the
governments of the countries concerned seem very contented to
have our forces rema~ in on there.
Q. A figure of 30,000,000 has been mentioned.
accurate? Could this be
MR. HOLT: It could only be speculative at this point, but it wiould
obviously be more costly to set up now bases Yihich would be
providing anything like the same scale of accommnodation that we
already have. They w--ere costly enough.
Q. Is there any possibility of growing difficulties with the
British Government? ' Jas it in relation to the question of
Britain's position east of Suez or Vietnama, and, if so, could
you throw any light on your talks with Mr. Wilson on Vietnam?
' MR. HOLT: There are several points when one considers the whole range
of policies as between the t, 7o governments when you will tend to
Set a rather different view from a small population in a large
eveloping country from that of a country with a small size and
large population, very conscious of its proximity to Europe and
the problems of Europe. It's understandable that Great Britain
should tend to concentrate its attention rather more on Europe
and its problems. On the other hand, our gaze tends to wander
more frequently these days around the countries in the general
area in which wie live But if you ask about Vietnam in
particular, Australia formed a very strong view and I ermphasise
this because otherwise there might be a disposition to think
that we are in Vietnam because the Americans happen to be there.
We are in South Vietnam because to us it seeras no less important
than it does to the United States that the %, Sgression there
should be resisted and I believe Australia to be more directly
involved in the dangers of fa1ilure to resist this agression
than would be the United States itself, but if the attitude of
the Peking Government, which has declared that wars of national
liberation oh that was the North Vietnamese Government, but it
flowed from the philosophy of the Peking Government. It was
Peking said that power grows out of the barrel of -a gun, and if
this philosophy that so called wars of national liberation
successfully tried in one country can then be employed in the 
Mr. Holt continued:
next were to be successfully adopted, then nobody in South-
East Asia, or for that matter in Asia, could feel secure and I am
sure that our friends in the room today from India are very
conscious of the shock which came from the evidence that China
was disposing its troops in a menacing ay in relation to a
country which had been so friendly to it as India had proved
itself to be. ue are, therefore, strongly in support of the
American intervention. We feel that if aggression can be
halted, that on the pattern of what has happened in South Korea
and Taiwan, Thailand, in Malaysia, where we fought a long
emergency campaign to beat the Communist activities there, that
on these patterns there can be restored to South Vietnam a
situation in which it can go ahead with its own economic and
social progress. I used the word restored advisedly because
from 1954 onwards, after the Geneva accord, South Vietnamn did
make this kind of progress. In was not until 1960, when it
had become apparent to North Vietnam that while there were
slipping back in their production, South Vietnam was moving
steadily ahead that the campaign of aggression against Sbutli
Viet Nam became actively pressed.
Q. Does it appear to you, ad it does to riny here, that the
British Govenment believes that Australia's frontline should
be at Danrwin and not 1,000 miles to the North?
MR. HOLT: I don't know that this represents the viewpoint of the
British Government accurately. The fact that you stage your
forces in a particular area as a base doesn't necessarily mean
that you regard that point as the front line. It would be a
base from which you would operate. I think the British Government
would still regard a point further to the North of Australia
as the more favourable point from which to conduct military
operations. But of course one can't answer a question of that
sort with any authority or precision unless ou know the
situation you are coping with. Is it some trouble that has
arisen in ndonesia? Is it a march down the Malaysian Peninsula
by Communist or other hostile forces? The military action and
stretegy necessary to cope with this will be affected by what it
is you are dealing with.
Q. Do you think Britain should be in the Anzus Pact? Has there
been any move to brinA Britain into ANZUS and, if so, what has
been the reaction fromi both Britain and America?
HOLT: I wouldn't like to cormment on that. We have other arrangements
with the United Kingdo,, but I'm not pressing for anything
to be done in that direction. My own belief is that if
Australia were seriously under threat that regardless of treaty
commitments the people of this country would want to come to our
assistance. After all, nearly half a million Australian
casualties were sustained in two world vwars, fought a long way
from home when this island wis threatened. I have no reason
to believe that British people wouldn't feel that they had not
an obligation but a call on then if we were vitally threatened.
Wo. can all take comfort in the fact that the United States, which
remins the migtiest rilitary power in the history of . mankind,
has stated quite emphatically as recently as the ast few days,
through its spokesman Dean Rusk, that there is no question so
far as America is concerned that if Australia is under attack
they move in to cover that attack. 
Q. You said that unless the Comronvrealth can agree then there
is no hope for the United Nations agreeing. Perhaps I read
too much into that, but would you explain please. It seemed
to imply that unless the Commonwealth acts together as one
unit the United Nations can hardly succeed.
MR. HOLT: I think you did read a little more into it, and this might
have been my own fault of inadequate explanation. What I was
saying . as that we do at least have the advantage within the
Comorronealth of warmer co-operative feeling towards one another
and, therefore, to the extent that some multi-racial organisation
can be made to function effectively it ought to be
possible to do this rather more readily inside the Cor-monw ealth
than in a more amorpheous and more diverse, and at times more
po.-erfully hostile, body such as you find in the United
ations. Furtunately ve have nothing in the way of an
ideological conflict within the Cornonwealth of the magnitude
which exists inside the United Nations.
Q. Many people are a little puzzled by that fact that, although
Australia supports the United States policy in Vietnam, ie do
continue to trade in increasing amounts in wheat and -ool with
Red China. Did you find in America sympathy and understanding
for the Australian policy?
MR. HOLT: I didn't feel the disposition to discuss it frankly. I feel,
and I think Harold Wilson would share this view, that these
are means whereby we can hope to build a better relationship
between countries which are other.; ise hostile to each other.
Trade norally connotes a mutuality of benefit, a mutuality
of interest, and if trade can build steadily between two
countries and work to their ramtual advantage they are less
likely to take action hostile to each other. e don't see
inconsistency with this, while at the same time sternly
resisting pplicies of aggression. We are trying to tell the
aggressor that this is not acceptable to us and will be
combatted, but at the saie time we don't want to put that
aggressor, in the circumstances of the modern world anyhow,
out of business, destroy the economy or destroy the lives of
the people. I think that in trade, tourism, even in the
visits of reporters on a more frequent basis, the cultural
and social exchanges which can be an increasing feature of
the life between those behind the curtains and those on this
sido of it, these and other ways have to be tested to see if
we can make some improvement in relations. We can't allow
ourselves to become bogged down indefinitely in rigidities
of hostilities one to the other, and I joined in welcoming
the initiative of the Prime Minister in making another
attempt in Moscow to help to get some progress towards
negotiations for peace. These initiatives may fail, but a
time comes and this in my experience has been a feature
of negotiations with Communists when their determination
or stubborness at some point of time is converted into a
disposition to go on with a negotiation. Therefore we
just keep trying as best w-e can, but in the meantime taking
whatever action seems to be necessary to ensure the
aggression does not succeed.
Q. You were reported in ashington as saying that Australia
was prepared to go all the way with L. B. J. in Vietnam, and
yet I gather you have your " ban the bomb" groups in
ustralia with distinctly anti-American sympathies. Can
you estimate the degree of support in Australia for American
policy in Vietnam and can you visualise at what point you
yourself would wish to draw the line as the British Government
has done in that support? 
IMR. HOLT: I don't want to deal with suppositious cases. The support
of the Australian Government for the United States is based on
a mutuality of interest in the policy being pursued. We
consider ourselves even more directly involved than the Unied
States and we are very conscious of the fact that the brunta 0
the effort there is being borne by the United States. V&amp; 6 are
very appreciative of what the South Vietnamese are doing too,
and they paid a heavy price themselves in their determination
to keep their country from this aggression. I find in the
coment I made in relation to the United States an expression
of our own detormination, a recognition that the policy being
followed there is in the Australian national interest. We,
of course, have people in our country who are opposed to the
policy, the official Opposition is opposed to our policy, it
is opposed to national servicemen being used and has said it
will bring them out of action as soon as it can after it takes
office. But my Government is a coalition of two Parties and
two Houses of Parliament. Up to the time I left Australia
I was able to say that I had 100 per cent support from all
Members in both Houses in both Parties on the Government side.
One Government Senator has since notified some reservations
he has about it well in that case I have 100 per cent less
one, or one out of 73, something to that order. On the
public opinion pollig of recent times there has been not only
good support for a policy of participation in Vietnam, but the
polling indications for the Government have been at the highest
level known in our history.
Q. If the present talks between Rhodesia and Great Britain broke
down, would your Government be prepared to support the tightening
of the screw policy, imposition of more sanctions on Rhodesia,
and if those failed would your Government be prepared to support
the use of military force against Rhodesia?
MR. HOLT: I wouldn't speculate publicly on official policy. I'm not
stating new policies here today. I'm merely trying to interpret
policies which are already current. We have a policy current
in respect of Bhodesia and I am not able to add to that at the
present time.
Q. Do you feel any need for a closer relationship between Australia
and New Zealand in view of their geographical proximity and joint
policy agreement?
MR. HOLT: You mean some sort of organic relationship? Having just
said I'm not stating new policy, I had better not violate that
rule and certainly I would not want to indicate a new policy
because frankly we don't have a new policy. I can say the
current relations between the two countries are very good. I had
personal talks with Mr. Holyoake before I left Canberra. He
came over for the S. E. A. T. O. Conference. We've recently
negotiated a Free Trade Agreement with New Zealand, which will
increase the volume of trade between our two countries. We are
together with our forces in South Viet Nam. I say together
advisedly because when I saw the troops up there the New
Zealand battery was actually in physical contact or proximity
to our own Australian forces in military camp there. On most
of the problems of the day, as they affect our part of the world,
we think very much alike. As to what the future holds, there is a
good deal of interesting speculation going on about that.
T think this is happening ncreasingly so in New Zealand because
there is a realisation there, I believe, that the domestic
market cannot become large enough except in relation to
particular items of manufacture to warrant a very extensive
development of manufactures, and that, therefore, the Australian
economy, with its much greater diversification, could integrate 
tY
r * 94*~ 99
ii' it) 2( 99 9 999 6 i.
" I.
4' 9 9
I. I 9 9. 9,)
9 9 9 4 49
.9;
5~ 9 A
9 9..
A 9 .9.
9999. 9999' 99 9* 94 ,999
9
.7
9. 9~ 9 9 r.
9 9~ 99 . 99
4 6~ 9 9 9 4..
9 .9
9 9. 9
4,9~ 99 9
9.
9 9 99 9
9 9 9 9 99 9 9
9 99.
' 99 99 .9,949
9 .9
9 CdAI.
4 9 99
9 4 ,~ 1 99
9 4 ci 9
a. 9 9 9.
noon
.7
9 .97
~~ 99 9. 99 * 99
1. j 9
9,9, 4. 9 .9 49 " dv 9 99
' 4-
L. A
.4 94
9( 9 9 .9
LI: N 9
9 9 999 1'
99
.9 *~ 4
99~ 9
.9 .9 9 99
9' 9~ t~ 9 99 9 949 9
9 .4
9 9 9 9 9 9 999 .4
c 
8.
Mr. Holt continued:
more closely with that of New Zealand. I don't mean by
integration a mergot of the two countries, but I moan that We
believe in the future we could be deawn even closer in matters
of trade and shall remain closely sympathetic to each other
in matters of international policy.
Q. The British Government, through Mr. Healey, has indicated
that it is imposing some restrictions on arms sales, and
specially in relation to their use in Vietnam. Is this a
matter of any embarrassment to the Australian Government?
MR. HOLT: This is opposition by the British Government to the sale
of arms for Vietnam? It's not a matter which iould be
inclined to be in my mind. I wyould have thought the equipment
already there was both large and adequate, but I'm not in a
position to make a policy statement about that. 



PRIME I4INISTE1W'S VISIT JTO U. S.--AND U. K.
Sveech ariven by-the Prime Minister. ME, Haroldf Holt at
the -AV2! k iipttl Oa ile ocAc asion twñ Austraxla C lub
Dinner in L~ 01C9Df 12thL July 1) 66
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Prime Minister and gentlemen, I have
always looked upon Lord Baillieu as a friend and, indeed, many
of his family are good friends of mine in Australia, and my
heart lifted when he sent his invitation to me to come to dinner
at the Australia Club in London. I'd been to one once before
when my distinguished predecessor was being honoured, as you are
honouring me tonight, and this became a forum in which Sir Robert
Menzies, one of the masters of exposition of our century, stated
so clearly for his country our views and our aspirations. it
is tough enough to have to follow after Bob Menzies but then
tonight our Chairman host brings along one of the most articulate
of Englishmen, who proposes the toast of Australia, and I feel
that this is a difficult path to follow, but fortunately the
salesman doesn't have always to rely upon the line of talk he's
developed. If the product is good enough he can succeed in
getting the product purchased. And tonight you do me the honour
of speaking of Australia, and what finer product can I refer to
in any part of the world? When I was coming across to this
country there were various newspapers which were handed to me to
lighten the burden of travelling across such a large distance of
the Atlantic and here were all sorts of speculations. I expected
to find myself lined up in a sort of confrontation with the Prime
Minister of Great Britain, I almost expected to meet him eyeball
to eyeball I think that's the phrase, but here we are, he
quoted some Australian poetry to me. I hope this practice
doesn't spread. I landed in Washington from Australia the
other day. I'd been given an advance copy of the notes thc
President was likely to employ, they ran over a page and a half.
But a few minutes before we were to speak together I was handed
another set of notes which ran over seven pages and these included
a poem about Australia, " I Love a Sunburnt Country" well I
couldn't draw on my very vast knowledge of poetry to any useful
extent other than to say by way of reply " Say not the struggle
naught avail us". Now perhaps that could apply with equal force
to my embattled colleague, and who carries more responsibilities
on their shoulders in the world today than the Prime Minister of
Great Britain and the President of the United States of America.
For an Australian to come to London in whatever capacity
is a stirring experience; no matter how many times we perform the
visit we find ourselves increasingly drawn and, moved by so many
eviclences of our commuon heritage of history, of democratic
tradition. Our own country, of course, is overwhelmingly a
British country. You've spoken, Prime Minister, of the migration
which has been such a feature of the post-war years. I must
say that while we are out to obtain as many suitable British
migrants as we can, I can't help feeling a sneaking gladness that
your own visit ended with a return to your own country. I say
that because another Prime Minister from Australia might be here
standing in my place this evening. But I can assure you, had
he remained in Australia, and secured the Prime Ministership of
my own country, you would be addressing this audience as a
member oi my own Party. .2 
A very great Englishman who served Australia with great
distinction as a Governor-General and remains a memorable
soldier of your own past, Lord Slim, wrote to me about some
matter recently and the concluding sentence of his letter
ran " what a fascinating time to be Prime Minister of Australia"
and it is a fascinating time because a country to draw out the
finest qualities of its people needs a cause, a stirring cause,
and Australia is fortunate in that we don't have one cause which
stirs the pulse, we have several causes, and I propose to
mention just three oi them here tonight.
You referred to immigration, and that itself has been
for the Australian people a great challenge and a remarkable
accomplishment. It is and history will, I think, establish
this the most remarkable peacetime achievement in the history
of our nation because we have, since the end of the war, welcomed
two million migrants from various parts of the world. They've
become successfully integrated, most of them, in the community
life of our country.
They have contributed notably to its development, they
have improved the food and drink quite significantly ( laughtpr),
and just on half this total have been migrants from these islands,
and I'm glad to say that we continue to attract rather more than
per cent of the total of our migration from here, and this
helps us to sustain the British quality and character of our,
community life. It may interest you to know that of the youing
people in Australia today one in every four is either a migrant
or a child of a migrant, and so the influences which play on us
today are not merely the geographical matters to which you
referred, but the impact of so many different nationalities,.
people seeking to establish a new homeland for themselves, to
build a new life in their adopted country. And the result has
been the greatest era o. f progress in the history of our nation,
a progress which I'm glad to say continues quite briskly and,
on all the evidence, will continue and, indeed, accelerate, in
the years immediately ahead of us.
We have, it may interest you to know, a population
growth rate of just over 2 per cent per annum. The comparable
United Kingdom figure, I hope I quote this one accurately, is
.8 of 1 per cent. if you were required to build houses, say,
in this country, to say nothing of the hospitals, the schools,
and all the other amenities of a civilised community, for a
growth rate of that sort I think you would need to add about
180,000 homes a year to whatever total you are currently
constructing. And this does, of course, place great burdens
on a community of something under 12,000,000 people, particularly
when you bring into your accounting the fact that great
distances have to be traversed, the transportation costs
represent a very high proportion of production costs generally,
but we are absorbing the people and we are succeeding in making
the economic progress.
You mentioned, Prime minister, the position of sterling.
Australia doesn't have to talk about sterling, we act about
sterling, and what greater confidence could be shown in sterling
arnd the future of sterling than by retaining the overwhelming
proportion of our reserves in your own currency. I would
only hope that with so many possibilities opening up for us
which could build an export income capable of adding to those
reserves that, having been assisted so notably over the years
since the war by a substantial inflow of British capital we 3 
shall be able to continue to strengthen your reserves by the
capital necessary to develop our projects. The other matter
which I'd like to mention in this connection is that the economy
as a result of these processes, new employment given to the
migrants, arnd this largely has to be done not on the farmlands,
because they absorb a much smaller proportion of our work force
today than they did a decade ago. They're down, I think now,
to about 9 per cent of work force. But in our manufacturing
industries and in our services the bulk of the addition to the
work force has to be absorbed. But overall we have developed a
highly diversified economy and this was revealed very strikingly
in the last year when we experienced the worst drought our
country has known for just on twenty years. The figures reveal
the extent of it. Over the total sheep population of Australia
we lost just on 8 per cent of our flocks. in New South wales
we lost 25 per cent of our cattle. So that a few years ago,
had this occurred, we would have had a disastrous economic
recession, but, as you've mentioned, we came through the year
with a balanced budget, wie added something to our external
reserves, and the experience demonstrated that Australia today
has so diversified and strengthened the base of its economy
that we can stand up to these hazards which formerly would have
meant major economic setbacks for us. Now we're going to
greatly improve that position in the years which are coming up
because the mineral projects are expected by 1975 to be producing
an export income for us in excess of that which we would secure
from our staple export item, wool.
There are just on 50 major mineral projects either
under way, proposed, or in course of expansion, and we have here
tonight, I notice, Sir George Fisher, who, if he were being
very helpful to you, would tell you what his company proposes
to do with the enormous deposits of lead and zinc that they've
discovered in the MaCarthur River in Queensland. But all
around Australia these days we seem to have opened up a sort
of Pandora's box of mineral wealth, almost every month that
passes by some great now discovery is found and we So ahead
with the process of trying to add an export income from this.
You made reference to our iron ore deposits. Its a few years
ago that we maintained an embargo on the sale of iron ore from
Australia because the disclosed reserves seemed hardly adequate
for our own domestic steel industry, and then they began discovering
iron ore of a grade of 60 or over by the mountainful, and in
Western Australia alone there are now known to be reserves
estimated to be 15,000 and 18,000 million tons of high grade
iron ore. Wa have vast contracts with the Japanese for the
sale of this which will greatly improve our export earnings and,
as you've said, we might even reach to the markets of Europe
arid, indeed, of Great Britain in the course of the next few
years. As to bauxite, our situation is even more impressive
when it comes to resources. We have the world's largest
bauxite deposit at Weipa in North Queensland. You've only
got to XUick the ground with your foot and there it is, and we
do hold, I understand, about half the free world's reserves of
this commodity which is basic, of course, to the ali~. inium
industry. Manganese Broken Hill has got a great deposit
at Groote Island in the North of Australia, nickel has just
been found in Western Australia, apparently in very good
quantity, and that great deficiency that we have had for so
many years, oil, is now being discovered in increasing quantities 4 
and, with this encouragement, we would certainly hope that the
explorers will go on until we become self-sufficient. AS
Barrow Island is added to the existing fields it is estimated
that 9 per cent of our consumption will be home-produced and
we would hope to add to that particular figure quite quickly.
Natural gas, the first attempt made to find natural gas off
the coast of Victoria produced a commercial field, and it should
not be long before the people of my home city are literally
co~ ting with gas but at a very much lower price than the rather
deficient substitute, or at least so-called commodity which
reaches us at this time. That is not libellous, I hope, of
the Melbourne Gas Supply, or slanderous.
The other thing which gives us cause for the stirring
of the pulse is that over recent years for the first time,
significantly I think in our history, we have become very
conscious of the place we occupy in Asia. In my own boyhood,
countries to our north produced a rather picturesque set of
pos~ tage stamps, but we know very little about them other than
that. But in these days we are directly involved in a variety
of ways. We are involved for ffence purposes, we see a rapidly
growing trade with them. We ourselves contribute to aid
programmes in the area, indeed, we can claim to have pioneered
the Colombo Plan which has been expanded so greatly since the
massive contributions made by the United States and the large
contributions which your own country has made. But to us the
future of Australia is going to be very considerably affected
by what goes on in Asia, and because of this we have naturally
given very close study to the developments there.
You have mentioned, Prime Minister, these hopeful
developments in which a greater measure of teamwork is now
being evidenced by the countries around the periphery of Asia,
perhaps brought together by a Common concern, lest they, at one
point, become the target for commiunist aggression, but arising
from this building up of teamwork and a collaboration for
purposes of trade and of mutual interest which I believe
produce some of the most hopeful signs to be found in Asia today.
Now remember when we speak of countries east of Suez we are
talking about half of ma. nkind a billion and a half people,
whose population is increasing rapidly, both from their natural
fecundity and improved public health measures keeping many
more of them alive for a much longer space of time. This
creates, of course, problems for them and for us, but it also
creates opportunities for us all, and whereas in Africa, to
which so much attention is given from Europe, and from the
United Kingdom in particular, there you have, I think, about
270 million people. Well, in Asia, we have about a billion
and a half and they may have doubled by the end of this
century, and many of the countries, countries of long and
ancient civiliation, some of their people, many of them have
quite a high degree of education, their take-off point is much
closer to us than is to be found in many of' the countries of
Africa, and we're finding that there are meetings such as we
had recently at Aspac in Seoul, where nine countries including
N~ ew Zealand and Australia as tho-only two non-Asian countries
were able to come together in friendship and start building
together for a brighter future in that area of: the world. 0 
We know that the United States is determined to help
build a stronger and more prosperous Asia, there has already
been brought into being an Asian Development Bank with a capital
of a billion dollars, much of it subscribed in the area, with
Japan contributing 200 million and Australia 85 million, the
United States 200 million and so on, and in these ways, with the
development of the Mekong Valley, the Indus Waters, a whole
variety of projects which, if time permitted, I could mention,
we are seeing the emergence of an Asia which we had never expected
to find within our own visible distance, and so when we find that
major areas of opinion in this country seem to be turning inward,
away from that area of the world, naturally we have a degree of
concern. You have greatly encouraged us by what you've told us
of the intentions of your own Government. The arrangements which
were made earlier in the year with your Defence Minister seem
to us adequate and satisfactory. Wie appreciated the response
you gave to the views we put in respect of your continued maintenance
of a presence in the area to our north and for our part we have
been working closely with your own service people on proposals
which would meet the sort of contingencies which might arise should
you find yourself unable to continue to maintain a presence in
that area. But it is not so much a military presence that we
are thinking of. I don't know whether there is a full
appreciation in this country of what British influence, British
character, British leadership still mean to the rest of the world,
and for Australia it would be quite a damaging setback to our own
hopes and, we believe, to the aspirations of the people in this
area of the world if, for some reason or other, these qualities
of British character and leadership were somehow to depart from
the area. I know you don't view it that way and I sincerely
hope that while there seems to be an increasing disposition to
look inwards to Europe, the great possibilities, the great
opportunities, would seem to us to be opening up in this part
of the world, will not be overlooked.
Now as a concluding note, may I just emphasise something
which I think is expected by everybody in this room, and that
is that fundamental to the world's hopes for a peaceful and
better order is the continuing collaboration between those two
great English-speaking countries, Great Britain and the United
States of America. My own country has the satisfaction of
enjoying a close friendship with both, my own journey to this
part of the world was a direct consequence of invitations given
to me quite separately by yourself and by the President of the
United States. You both quite independently of each other
when I succeeded my predecessor asked me to continue the same
close and intimate communiction which had developed between you.
This has been greatly valued by me and has been valued by the
colleagues in my own Government, and I feel that Australia would
be responsivo and touched by the confidence and friendship shown
to us in these practical ways. I want to assure you, Prime
Minister, that the objective of keeping warm and close the
friendship between your two great countries is one of the great
objectives of policy of my own Government. There may be
practical ways in which we can help to a better understanding
one of the other, or at times in our own area of the world which
seems so remote to the rest ofL you, prove ourselves capable of
carrying out purposes Which further the joint objective which
our three countries hold together. 6 
6.
Well, it is for Australia a bright, interesting,
exciting, quite dangerous but at the same time challenging
world which faces us down under, and it is perhaps regrettable
that more of the possibilities, more detail of these
developments, cannot be clearly seen by those of the Western
hemisphere. The reporting day by day of what is going on in
Viet H~ am, as I discovered by my own visit, is quite misleading.
We get very little indication that great, constructive
projects of a developmental kind, are going on there, but
its not just a grim war of death and disaster, that each of
th~ e military forces of all the countries represented there
have their own constructive programmes to carry out, and they
are carrying them out. Now its through the stability which
can be brought to that area by whatever process of peaceful
negotiation and by constructive andcavars hereafter that we
feel an Asian society can be built which will be a strength
to the world and not a point of danger and weakness.
Well, Prime minister and Mr. Chairman, I don't wish
to abuse the great privilege which has been given to me tonight
of addressing you all. This is one cfthe great forums for
anybody in London. I compliment our Chairman who through so
many years has by force of his own leadership and the regard
held for him in this city helped to create for Australia a
gathering, perhaps as representative as any that will ever be
asjsembled in the city of London. And so we say thank you,
Clive. I close by saying that I'll be prepared to sing, if
he insists on it, with Harold Wilson, " Along the Road to
Gundagai" but perhaps we could take as our slogan for the night
" Hark the Harold Angels Sing" t 



PRIME ITSTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND U. K.
XCHANGE OF TOASTS . fE-N T. E DENT OF TE UNITED
LUN\ XTLON I Tfi' WHITE H3TJE 14th July, 1966.
Kr. Prime M inister and my friends:
A house twice visited by a good friend is a house twice
blessed. So, Lr. Prime rainister, we welcome you back here to the
White house and we are very grateful that you were able to arrange'
your very busy schedule so as to return and pay us a visit.
While you were away, I spoke to my countrymen, and I hope to
yours also, about the Pacific area that we share with many of our
! sian friends. I said the other night, and i should like to reemphasize
it now, that I believe that the Pacific is the great
testing ground of man's yearning for independence, order, and for a
peaceful and productive life. Prime hinister, if we can win
that test in the Pacific we may very well have won the fruits of
oeace for all of our fellow men in the world we would hope, perhaps,
for all time. But if we lose it in the Pacific, we will have lost
achievement and hope, perhaps, for all time too. -3ut we shall not
lose the test, because A--iericans and Australians and Vietnamese,
Mew Zealanders and Koreans, and our other allies shall prove in the
Pacific that agression cannot succeed on an continent, in any
country, against any people in the world in the 20th century. The
Pacific is not an ocean. It is not a region. It is a crucible
in which the free, proud, and peaceful world of tomorrow is today
moulding and taking its shape. 6o, as we meet here this aftbrnoon,
the winds of hope arc blowing fresh and strong off the Pacific and
they are blowing throughout free Asia. Wo are partners in stirring
that excitement. Yes, Lir. Prime ipinister, the partners in
creating the b1iThn dollar Asian Development Aank. Wo are partners
in developing the ekong iver Delta, in denying those who would
destroy the promise of stability and growth, aiid in encoureging
those who would make that promise a reality. And that is the
reat and urgent work that, after your extremely important meetings
in London and here, you will return to Australia to advance, ir.
Prime inister. So today you leave us, not only as our trusted
partner and our cherished friend, but as a man who has left much
behind while the bravery and the nobility of the Australian people,
a new generation of Americans, are living the lessons that their
fathers learned.
I see in front of me Captain Stevens, a teacher at West
Point. It was 25 years ago, that I got out of bed in Townsville
one morning about 3 o'clock with Colonel Stevens, with whom I had
roomed. He died that day over Lae and Salamaua. He left a
little five year old boy, who is now this teacher at West Point,
to carry on for him. But we learned that quarter of a century
ago, Mr. Prime Minister, that one can never ask for finer comrades
on the battlefield, or more willing colleagues in the works of
peace than our Pacific brothers, our Australian allies. And so
it is our prayer today that God grant that your young men and ours
will soon return from conflict to enjoy the peace that we seek so
fervently together. And, until they do return, we will stand
shoulder to shoulder supporting them all the way.
So, gentlemen, I should like to ask you to toast that
bright hope and its living symbol, the very able, courageous, and
distinguished Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia,
Mr. Holt. 
2.
M1r. President and gentlemen:
Any man who had been honoured by a luncheon given to him by
the President of this great democracy would treasure that as a
memory for a lifetime. To be so honoured twice in so short a
space of time is not merely a great honour to me and my country,
but it has been tremendously gratifying to my colleagues as they
notified me by cable from Australia. What you have done by your
warm gesture, Mr. President, is a further strand strengthening
these close bonds which have developed between us.
Since I was last with you I have been acroos the Atlantic
to London. As you know, my main purposes in coming abroad were
to see you and to develop a warmer and closer, more intimate
relationship with you. You had kindly suggested that, and so, in
his place, had the Prime M~ inister of Great Britain. I have gone
through this process with Harold W-ilson in London. Last Sunday'
night at Chequers, that historic establishment of Britisn Prime
Ministers, after his wife and mine had left us for the evening,
he kicked his shoes off and lay down on a counch and for three
hours we settled the problems of the world. I told him, Mr.
President, that you had been so generous to me that I felt that if
I had asked you for the Statue of Liberty you would have gladly
g iven it to He said " Wdhy didn't you ask hirm for Fort Knox?"
Wll, he may have felt that it would have been handy. But
earlier in that evening he had taken me on a conducted tour
which you w. zere kind enough to do this for me last night at the
w-ijhite House of Chequers. At one point of the establishment
there is a picture by Rernbrandt illustrating the fable of " The
Lion and the Mouse". It is a wonderful picture, of course,
greatly celebrated and beautifully painted. But when Choquers
was occupied by Winston Churchill, Vlntnused to study this.
He was, as you know, an amateur painter. In fact I think he was
almost a professional painter by the fees he got toward the end.
But he studied the picture. Perhaps it was failing eyesight, or
Rembrandt had left something to the imaination, but he said " I
cannot see the mouse". So he painted in the mouse on the picture,
and there it is. And so you have Rembrandt and Churchill on
this particular picturo. But there was a moral in it, of course,
for me. My countrymen won't like me describing them, as mice.
Indood we produce the largest rat in the world. It stumps itself
along and calls itself a kangaroo. But I remember the moral of
the fable was that little friends may prove great friends. In a
sense, my country is a little friend, because there are less than
12 million of us. But I think of the men that this country
produced when there were 2i million of you and you signed the
Declaration of Independence. I have often rnrvelled at the
greatness of the men you produced from that small conmunity at
that time. I think it was Smuts who said that the great countries
are the countries which produce great men, and you produced great
men as early as the period in w-hich you had something less than
2-2 million. Washington, him'self, Jefferson, Franklin, Alexander
Hamiulton. You know the list of them so much better than I. But
these are Lien whose names stand in the cor1non heritage of
democracy and freedom around tho world.
I talked about myself. Perhaps I could return to that for
a moment, because wie have so mny d~ istinguished press representatives
and columnists -and people of that sort here. I had a recent
example in London of how. important correct reporting can be. Ir!
wife was interviewed by the press while she was there and was asked
what she had been doing. Naturally, being the wife of a politician,
she was quite cautious about this. So they asked her if she had
been doing any shopping. You know nothing can embarrass a politician 
3.
any more than to have it reported that his wife had been doing a
lot of expensive shopping. So she said that she had bought a
couple of white rice. This was solemnly reported back in
Australia. Then the cables started to flow in the most intriguing
jargon of the Public Service of the Commonwealth, pointing out
that the import of white mice into Australia was prohibited under
our quarantine arrangements; that these white iuce would have to
be exterminated if they arrived. It would be very embarrassing
for all concerned if the wife of the Primie Minister had to be
subjected to this treatment. Now if the press had only added what
was the fact, that these white mice were made of china and were
designed for our grandchildren, then everybody would have been
happy. But I have had, Mr. President, on this journey, memorable
unforgettable, and very stirring experiences. And you, Sir, have
contributed notably to these in ways which my country will not
forget and certainly I shall not. And then in England, of course,
Ihave these memories also.
But one would expect to find some disap pointments along the
way, and I found one here. I found one when Iwent to England.
Perhaps there wore others, but these are the ones I mention. The
disappointment I found here was to discover how little of the total
story of what is going on in the Pacific area was reaching you
through the columns of the press. There was a vivid, dramatic,
day-to-day reporting of the military operations in South Vietnam
and this, I suppose, is the first war which has been fought on a
television screen for most people, and, therefore, not necessarily
the most objectively understood by most people. And so I was
disappointed that, while I knew of the feeling and appreciation that
your own Adm~ inistration has for this area and its problems, and you
have , iven elophent tostiin-on to that in the words you have given to
us this lunchtime, it was to me, I repeat, a disappointment that wie
didn't hear more of what was going on in this area of the world
which contains half the human race, which, by the end of the centu. ry,
will contain rather more than half the human race, because the rate
of increase there is significantly greater than in the area of
Western Europe or even in these United States. But you and your
colleagues have shown your ovin awareness of the problems of that
area and your determination to play a significant part in seeing
those of us who live there through the challenges and through the
opportunities which lie ahead for us. In England I found some
disappointment in the fact that Great Britain, and even more so the
other countries of Western Eurcpe, seem to be almost oblivious to
the existence of that area of the world, almost as if they had quite
deliberately turned their backs upon a large part of life, history,
and experience in these modern tinies, because so much that is
stirring and exciting in these modern times is occurring in this
area of the world. To brine out the best in the people of a country
you need a cause that will stir the pulse. We have, I am glad to
say, several such causes moving in my own country at this time.
The problem of developing a large continent, of brigng people in
from so many different countries, the challenge of great projects
which have to be opened up, the comparatively recent discovery
Perha: s I should, in saying this, mollify what one has said in a
critical vein of these other countries, because it is only in
comparatively recent times that in Australia, have become
conscious and sensitive to the fact that we, by force of qeography
and circumstances and the history of the future, have a significant
place in Asia and, in particular, in the Asia of tomorrow--. These
were the disappointments. 
4.
On the other hand, Mr. President, I was to find in the United
Kingdom an expression, by the Prime Minister, of determination to
support your presence in Vict. iun, of recognition of the need for
the two great democracies of the United States and the United
Kingdom to maintain a close ck-oradeship in the affairs of the world.
And you will shortly be vis: t. d by the Prime Minister, again keeping
close and warm the link betm. cn these two democracies whose leadership
means so much to the we. l-being of mankind. But the primary
responsibility of that leadc" hip falls upon you as the head of the
mighty nation which these days loads the free world. It is an
awesome responsibility and it ib fortunate for all of us who value
freedom, the opportunities, c.-d liberties of free men that vie should
have, as the leader of this , reat democracy in turn leading the
free world, a man of your o cco: u rage, character and resolution.
And the lesson that we shall. uarry out to the rest of the world and,
indeed, I know this is the ju'! nent of the Prime Minister of Great
Britain, is that here wve have a man of resolution determined to see
the issues in Vietnam throua to the end, however difficult or long
that task may be. But you ' rid I, as men who have this stirring of
the pulse for the things thati can be done and perhaps because we
come from great open spaces and can draw a big fresh breath from
the country in which we live and breathe, that we tend to take the
long view, perhaps the visionary view. But the visions help to
provide the causes and the causes help to evoke the qualities that
are the best that lie within us. And we share this great cause in
the Asia of the future. This, to me, has been one of the really
heartening experiences of my journey to the Northern Hemisphere
from down under. Here in this country is the resolution to see
the job through where the difficulties lie and eager determination
to take up thEc oopportunities in comradeship and collaboration with
those of us who live in the sroa to make something of Asia which
will mark a new and hopeful phase in the history of mankind.
Mr. President, this is the sort of hope you leave with me
and which I take back to rmy country. And it is a stirring thing.
It is a comforting thing. It is a heartening thing to be ableto
feel that we can go on throu ih the many difficulties which face a
small people in a large continent with hundreds of millions of
people of different race, different history, different tradition,
different religion, different outlook, inmediately about us, but
confidently facing that future, because we believe that in our own
friendship, our own enterprise, our own willingness to join in the
task of Asia, we will build ourselves new friendships that will
see us through the difficulties that we face. And underlying it
all will be the knowledge that we have a friend, a very powerful
friend, whom you sy-bolize on this occasion. Thank you. for meaning
that strength and that inspiration that is heartening to us all.
In that spirit, from Australia, I salute the President of
the United States. 



ADDRESS TO A2TIONAL P ESS CLUB, CANIHEiH
ON PRIIE : INIS'iER'S ETU. N FiROI VISITS
TO THE UNITED STATES AND BRITAIN 18th July, 1966.
Mr. Chairman, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It doesn't seem so very long ago that I was talking to
another National Press Club, in Washington, and I w-as able to say
to that gathering that an invitation to speak to the National Press
Club in ' ashington had become a sort of status symibol in the life
of the potential statesman. I think the way you are shaping, Ir,
Chairman, the Canberra National Press Club can claim that sort of
prestige for its functions and I wish you success in the development
of an institution which has added, significantly I believe, to the
value of attending Canberra gatherings by those who have come to be
named amongst the world's most notable.
You had very recently one of the great men of contemporary
times in Dean Rusk I happened to be in New York at the time and
you were being noted with so much significance that a fe: w entlemen
holding up a piece of calico by way of protest to hr. Rusk s
presence found themiselves honoured by front-page treatment in the
" New York Times", but I doubt whether anything I say here today
will be similarly publicised there, but at least the National Press
Club here in Canberra has been noted in this way in one of the
most august papers of the United States.
Nci I don't know that I clearly apprehend how I should go
about this business this afternoon because there was such a
comprehensive cover in the Australian press of everything I did
while I was overseas that it would be a waste of your time to go
over the ground in a narrative way again. It is one of the
significant development of modern times that a public figure in a
position of leadership going abroad does have a coverage,
particularly from his native press and the other communications
media of television and radio, surpassing anything that we have
ever known in the past, and in a sense this is a good thing since
the workings of a democracy require an understanding in some
detail of what it is the head of that democracy is putting publicly
at any particular time. But I would like you to know what this
adds up to in demands upon the itinerant statesman. If, at every
airport his plane touches down, even if only to refuel, he finds
himself met with a battery of television, radio, and newspaper
representatives, then by the time he reaches the country of
destination much of what he wanted to say has been dissipated
along the route. There is always the alternative of turning
rather rudely away from the complicated apparatus that people have
brought at considerable inconvenience and expense to greet him,
but that is not a very popular alternative, and so one usually
obliges by making some comment which the doctors have advised is
not well-considered within 24 hours of a jet journey. Perhaps
that is why so many foolish things are said at airport interviews.
The other thing is that accompanying you these days is a
team of pressmen. In my case I had the comforting presence of
radio and television representatives as well, and the result is
that back home my own people got very full treatment. They
have all heard what I have been saying and doing. They have
read so many accounts of the same sort of general proposition
that some must have wondered why I have been talking so much,
but in point of fact it is necessary to thump your way as hard
as you can to make the slightest dint in the press of the country
in which you are appearing, and I think it is as well for our own 
2.
poeple to mkno that. Although . we feel that in some of the
significant areas of policy making and with some of the leaders
of policy around the world, Australia is able to exercise an
influence, the space we occupy in the national press of the
countries concerned is unflattering to our egcs and this must
be accented as one of the facts of contemporary political life.
So don't be surprised if in the course of a journey such as I
have just made you find your spokesman saying apparently over
and over again the sort of thing that you read a week before.
To make his point, to register the argument, w. ith the press and
the public of the country he is visiting these things have to be
done. Well, I think that b' dint of diligence and persistance
on this occasion the points that I desired to make were registeeod
at least in quarters where they will have some impact, and I will
say a wor or two about that as I go along.
. y prime purpose, as you know, w-as to establish closer
working relations with the Prime Lnister of the United Kingdom
and with the President of the United States of America. Both of
them independently of each other had proposed to me that I should
visit then for this purpose. Both of them, independently of
each other, had proposed to me when I took office that I continue
with them the same intimate co; mmunication by way of correspondence
and cable that my predecessor, Sir Robert Inenzies, had conducted,
and this itself is a reflection of the growing place which
Australia occupies in the affairs of the world at this time, or
at least in this area of the w, orld in which we find ourselves.
For my part I w; as very glad to receive these invitations,
believing that it would be nationally advantgeous if I could
develop closer working relationships.
In the result that aspect of the journey turned out far
better than in my most optimistic moments I could have hoped.
Hy visit to President Johnson, as first log of the journey,
proved -: arm, cordial and laid the foundation for the closer
discussions which took place on the second visit, but there were
some valuable discoveries to be made from the first and as these
items have not previously been commented on publicly by me,
I mention them now.
The first was the welcome discovery of how fit and
buoyant the President looks. I had imgined that, having come
through an operation of a serious kind quite recently, and
noting as I had before in the case of President Eisenhower that
the newspaper photographs seemed to take a lot of the blood out
of tho subject, it was encouraging to find in charge of the
affairs of that great democracy this live, vigorous man. Not
only w. as he fit and alert, right on top of his ow-n particular
responsibilities, but that morning he had sat up until 4 o'clock
w'aiting for the reports which had come from the oil installation
bombing operations. I could hardly have tined my visit better
because he lwas anxious to know the results of the bombing and
also to hear the reactions around the world. Je had been
consulted beforehand, we had made known beforehand that in our
view this was a -icgitimate exercise of military tactics, but
it was fortuitous that T happened to be in Washington just on
the morning w-hen the new. s broke, and Wvhat I was able to say
then in support of that decision was welcomed widely by all in
the Administration and by many people throughout the United
States generally. 
But one matter I think I shoul. d put quite finrly on the
record. It is important that this should be Imade w. idely known.
There may be doubts around the world, certainly I believe these
doubts exist in the Cormunist w. orld, aboub the strength of
resolution of the President of the United States and leading
members of his Administration in their detclrination to see the
issue through in South Viet Nam. I have no doubtin my mind,
I say that not merely because he made this clear in emphatic
terms to me, but because of my own assessment of the man and of
the very able team of men he has around him. You saw one of
them in the person of Dean Rusk here quite recently. I repeat
I have no doubt in my own mind of the strenth of the President's
resolution, his determination to see this strugle through.
Now I say it is important that this should be known
because those who lead the Commui-' nist forces are not familiar, or
seem to be unfamiliar with our methods of government. To them
it would be unthinkable in their own country that a government
should find itself faced with the hostile voices that one hears
in a democracy without taking some action to supress those voices.
They find leading figures in American life, academic leaders and
others, critical as we find them in our own country. This
influences their own thinking. It becomes a subject matter for
the propaganda material which they subsequently prepare and
consequently it becomes important for us to stress publicly the
belief, if belief exists, and in my case it is the strong belief,
that the President, backed by the capable men he has around him,
is determined to fight on in South Viet Nam until a peace which
meets our concepts of justice and fair dealing and effectiveness
can be procured in that country.
I saw. in one press editorial this morning a query as to
whether there was any substance in the suggestion that the
Americans were determined to go ahead and secure a military
victory before any negotiations would be entertained. Well, as
recently as the time of the release of the communique by the
President and myself, in Washington, it was made clear that
negotiations would be welcomed at any time, and the sooner the
better. We both commended the efforts, negative though they
have since proved to be, of the Prime tinister of India, in seeking
to promote negotiations as early as practicable.
And so we are fortunate, I believe, those of us who are
held secore by the strength, the military might, the free world
leaderh. ip of the United States, we are fortunate that there
should be in that leadership at this time a man of the resolution,
the clarity of vision, and the will to see this thing through
with a view to producing a better world order in that area, in
the person of the President of the United States. Don't let's
overlook the fact that it is not the decision merely of President
Johnson that has been given effect in South Viet Nan. There is
a disposition to think that this is a product of the will and
judment of this one particular Presidential figure in point
of fact he is the third President in succession .' ho has felt that
free world interests and the proper policies for the United States
require an American participation in strength in this area. For
our part, we in this country have the authority of two successive
Prime iinisters backing the judgrcnts of those three Presidents. 
In the United Kingdom I had talks which were just as close
and just as cordial with Mr. Iarold iilson. It's rather
unfortunate that not so much pro-: inence has been given to these
talks because they formed for no a basis for continuing
collaboration with him in a most cordial fashion, and, no less
than in the case with President Johnson, I was able to build a
personal relationship with him. ' We spent together one night at
Chequers, the historical residence of Prime Ministers of Great
Britain. We had 3 hours alone in which we canvassed all the
problems I had put down on a sheet of notpaper, matters which
I wanted to raise with him. Later that night I ticked off each
item, in case it proved necessary to follow up next day in the
course of further discussion we had arranged some matters which
had been overlooked. I found that we had covered the whole
field, and although there are differences of viewpoint which
I think have become well identified between the United Kingdom,
the United States and ourselves I for one as a parliamentarian
who has had to work both with a majority of one and with a
majority very much larger than that, don't underrate the political
problems . which Mr. Wilson has to contend with.
Knowing those political problems, the President feels, and
I certainly feel that 1r. Wilson has shown great courage and
firmness in holding his government in support of our presence in
South Viet Nam and in support of the objectives we have there.
I mentioned this to the President and at the same time talked
about concern at what seemed to be a lack of substantial interest,
and even more so on the Continent of Europe, in what is going on
in this area of the world. One has only to pick up the papers
and scan through them each morning to see how little space is
given to events in this area of the world, outside of the day to
day military reporting in Viet Nam itself. And the fact of the
matter is and who are we to be critical of it because I suppose
we don't take all that much interest ourselves in what is going on
in some of the countries of Europe that the people of Europe,
and this goes for the mass of people in Great Britain also, regard
these countries as remote and relatively unknown and thus
possessing no great or direct significance in their eyes.
I happened to arrive about the same time, in fact a day or
so after the French Prime Minister, and great prominence was
given to all that he said and did while he was there. From the
more significant papers, such as " The Times" and one or two
others, we had quite a good press cover of what I was putting,
but clearly the mass of people did not have this interest and if
the mass of people don't have the interest then the Parliament
tends to reflect that attitude of mind and these days Great
Britain, the countries of Western Europe, tend to be inward
looking into their own affairs rather than outward looking in a
way which would embrace the problems of areas asremote as ours.
Well this, from our point of view, may be unfortunate, but
if it exists then it is important that we should know about it
and we should adjust ourselves accordingly. And I come back to
this country with a more balanced assessment, I believe, of the
relative strength of feeling about the future of the area and
this must have its effect on policies as they emerge from time
to time. 
In the United States it seemed to me that there was very
vivid reporting and a. groat deal of it of the actual fighting
and events relating to military ocprations in South Viet iNai.
But, again, one found a quite noticeable lack of public reference
to the more positive developments occuring around the South East
Asian area. Now these are not drar. tic in a new. sense, and,
taken, isolated one from the other, perhaps don't seem to amount
to a very great deal. But to those of us who have been dealing
closely with these things over the years, wo feel a great hope
from developments which are now taking firmer shape, which do
evidence a growing co-operation, particularly amongst those
countries of the area -ho have felt thensolves threatened by
Colmunist subversion or attack, or feel the potential danger
which could develop as a result of CoInunist penetration if
country after country were to fall.
And so wo have seen an organisation such as the Asian and
South Pacific Council eecrge with 9 countries, of w: hich Australia
and New Zealand are two not a great power country amongst them
other than that Japan must be considered a great power in an
industrial sense, but in a ilitary sense, not a great pow. er
amongst them. But all of them feeling unity of purpose or danger
from the fact that they are on the periphery of Asia or in
sufficiently close contact to the events in South Viet Na. and in
China, to believe that unless there is a chock to that aggression
then they could be endangered in the future.
We have seen over recent years the way in which countries
formerly threatened, like South Korea, Taiwan and Ialaysia, have
been able to strengthen their economies and to build up their
resources shielded by the strength of the United States and its
establishments throughout this area of the world. And so I made
a point wherever I could of ephasising this and it was heartening
to find that the theme had attracted the interest and enthusiasm
of the President and his Administration. I don't claim that there
was novelty in the matters that I was putting forward, and indeed
Australia has always mi ntained an initiative in this field. You
may remember that Lord Casey, as Iinister for External Affairs, was
one of the very few linisters of Foreign Affairs of any country
outside of Asia directly, who went around those countries and
made our viewpoint known clearly, built up good personal relations.
There was the pioneering work of Sir Percy Spender with the Colobo
Plan. The work then followed up by Sir Garfield Barwick and,
more recently, my colleague Mr. Hasluck.
Therefore, it is not by accident or by geography that
Australia does possess a very warm, friendly and close -: working
relationship with so kmany of these countries. even have a
friendly basis with countries which don't enjoy that same kind of
relationship with very many in the area. For example, we have
very good relations with Cambodia and indeed, represent United
States interest in Cambodia.
Right through the period of confrontation, we nevertheless
managed to maintain a channel of friendship through to Indonesia.
1Vith Thailand, there was the exchange of visits between
the Prime M. inistcr and myself, he visiting Australia first this
year. In the course of my own visit later to South East Asia,
I was able to develop a still closer relationship with him.
These are just syrptoms of the times. The emergence of an
institution like the Asian Development Bank; the arrangements
we are making together for the developnent of the kekong Valley;
the grant by Japan of 800 million dollars of credit to South
Korea as part of the close economic and trade relationships with
that country. These, I repeat, are only sympto but we're 
6
dealing wit more than half the numan race East of Suos and with
a population growth rate higher than almost any other country or
area in the world.
By the end of this century that billion and a half of
people may very well have doubled, and in this area the United
States has expressed its determination to join in developing the
resources of this new Asia, in joining in co-operation with
others in order to make more effective use of their own resources
to provide a ray of hope for a better way of life for the people
of these countries. Evidence of this has been quite dramatically
provided for us in the course of the past foe days by the President
of the United States.
Now this was a theme which was expressed quite vigorously
by me and before I had left America and, indeed, by the time
I wont back again for a second visit, had become well taken up by
the Administration and had formed the material for a lot of
approving editorial comment throughout some of the leading
journals of the United States. And I regard this as being just
at the beginning of our activities in this field. Australia and
Japan have given a notable demonstration of what can be achieved
in our friendly trade one with the other. It has multiplied four
and a half times since the early 1950' s and, we believe, we are
just at the beginning of this process.
Now somebody asked I think you, Mr. Chairman, in
introducing me, how far did " All the Way" mean in relation to
the President. I only hope that those who'vc given currency in
this country to the phrase have studied as closely all the other
things that I said while I was there. They would then have
developed a well balanced appreciation of what it was I was
trying to express. It doesn't mean, certainly, that Australia
has any lack of independence of mind, and anybody who knows the
President would be paying him no compliment if they felt that he
was looking for the kind of friend who was never prepared to
have an argument with him. He has a vigorous mind of his own
and he looks for a vigorous exchange of views from those who
invoke friendship with him.
Quite shortly after seeing him in Washington I put some
views in New York to the American-Australian Association which
certainly didn't coincide with Administration policy of the
momeht. I spoke of the need to penetrate both the iron and the
Bamboo Curtains to build up trade as a means of opening up
personal contacts, personal relationships, to have more
frequent visits by reporters, by scientific and cultural groups
and in these and other ways help to establish a human quotient
which would assist in breaking down these resistances. The
phrase I used then I think is worth repeating, not because of
its excellence, but because it does express a concept that I'm
sure all here would adopt. We can't afford to look on the rest
of the world in terms of the " goodies" and the " baddies",
contending that all the right people, the good people, are on
our side, and all the " baddies on the other in the Communist
camp. There are intelligent people, dedicated people, working
for their own national interest in all communities around the
world. For our part, it is for us to -see where those who are
willing to look for a better world can come together in some
settlement arising out of present differences, and apply the
tremendous resources that men are capable of now attaining, to
the betterment of mankind for the better world to which we all
aspire. In the President, we have a practical rnn who is, at
the same time, a man with vision of a better world whether it is
the society that he works for in his own country, or for an 
application of the fruits of science and technology to the needs
of the rapidly increasing human race.
Now, out of these discussions, I feel that a basis has
been established in which Australia can play a useful part in the
future. Adopting the old Aesop Fable oi the Lion and the ' i~ uso,
I said-that " Little friends can prove great friends' and Australia
is so placed geographically and in terms of the relationships we
have built up with the countries of Asia, that 0e can, I believe,
serve in a useful way both with the United Kingdom and with the
United States in doing more in this area of the world. The
United Kingdom is conscious of the limitations upon its own
capacities. " Overstrtcdh" was the wori which seemed to signify
the situation in that country. It was put to me by members of
the Government itself. They'. re very conscious of their cormitments
at a time w-hen their resources are not adequate to meet the
extent of the commitments they have undertaken. They have to
bring themselves into a better state of balance. But with the
United States, the position is rather different. If only a
situation of peace and stability could be restored in South East
Asia, then the vast resources that are currently going into
military purposes could, with advantage, be turned to the tasks
of reconstruction and development of areas possessing so much
potential in themselves.
Now, I believe that Australia as a result of all those
talks, finds itself in a position where both the United States
and the United Kingc. om look to us as a country of influence, a
country capable of playing a significant part in the future of
the area. I can say, without any reservation, that no
additional commitments have been sought of this country. These
matters did not arise in discussion between us. I think, both
in the United States and in the United Kingdom, it is recognised
that as Australia grows, so will our contribution, in a security
sense and in the provision of aid. There is a more realistic
appreciation that this country is not making a military
contribution merely in one area or the other, that ' we're doing
so at several points. And there is a more realistic appreciation
that the country which has still a vast continent to develop,
with such limited resources of population, has its own limitations
upon what it can accomplish.
Having said that, gentlemen, I dor't imagine I've covered
your queries by any manner of means, but, broadly, that is the
field which was covered at this time and I feel, in my own
heart, greatly encouraged by the reception given to me as the
representative of this country. It illustrated for me better
than anything else perhaps that I could look for, the regard and
the respect which the Australia of these times is held in the
countries which mean so much to us. The vwanr, co-operative and
friendly relations which these great democratic leaders have
developed for Australia and for its own leadership are, I believe,
happy auguries for the future of this country.
I would just, by way of final cor. ent, say Mr. Chainman,
that the reporting of those who acconipanied me on this tour was
I believe in the best tradition of the craft of journalism, and
I would like to express my personal thanks to them for faithful
reporting and for every consideration given to the subject.
Thank you very much. 
QUESTION: L'r, Prime Minister, having soon you in successful
action in Washington, I know the circumstances in which you said
" All the -way with Apparently this has been risconstrued,
not only in Australia but in various parts of Asia. Could you
please reconcile the apparent inconsistency in our desire to be
part of Asia and to participate actively in Asian affairs, and
our equally empha. tic wish that Britain should remain East of
Suez, and that we should be so close to America?
MR. HOLT: Well, gentlemen, in South Viet Nam, and my remarks of
course were directed to that, I had no hesitation in indicating
our full support because, as I've said so often before in this
country, my Government believes that Australia is more directly
involved in South Viet Nam even than the United States of America
itself. We believe that the security of this nation ultimately
is involved in successfully resisting Communist agression in that
country. If it can't be successfully resisted there, then
ultimately, we believe, it will spread through Asia I'm not
saying this is a matter of vears, it may be decades but
ultimately it will spread through South East Asia generally. And
the kind of world in which we will then live will be a very
different world from that which we see today and the even brighter
world which is within our sights tomorrow. And so, when it comes
to American participation, American resolution to see the issue
through in South Viet Nam, Australian undoubtedly is " All the iay".
QUESTION: In view of what you've just said, and in view of the
fact that we know America is in process of a further massive
increase in its forces in Viet Nam, do you foresee at this stage
the possibility of us having to increase our commitment?
HOLT: This was not raised with me, as I have already said,
and I don't regard it as a matter within our early review. Of
course, as time goes on, we will review w. hat the Australian
contribution should be, but there is no escalation in dimension in
contemplation. QUESTION: Was any indication given by Washington of how long the
Viet Nam war could continue?
MR. HOLT: Well, I think a lot of people would like to be able
to forecast this, but r. y political opponent is the only regular
forecaster I know w. ho is prepared to put a precise time on these
matters. I don't think anybody can say with precision, because
it depends on your definition really of military action. I've
always believe that as the Communists were either defeated or
repulsed in major military engagements, they would turn increasingly
to the kind of guerrilla activity which they can conduct at
relatively small, cost to themselves and considerable nuisance and
cost to the forces on our side. We had to contend with that in
Malaya for, what was it, 12 years or thereabouts. But the fact
of the matter is that I had a very thorough briefing on all this
at the headquarters of Admiral Sharp just two days ago as we came
through Honolulu. There is no rmaor engagement these days that
the Viet Cong is winning. Whore the Viet Cong measures up in a
major force, then the forces opposing them are gaining the victory.
the loss ratio is running at about 5 to 1 in respect of the Viet
Cong and North Vietnamese forces against those on our side. Our
people are much better equipped and better organised. There is
improvement in intelligence. There has been a good deal of
success in halting the flow of materials, but even so materials
do get through. We know that the North Vietnameso and the Viet
Cong are having difficulty about food supplies, even more so with
medical supplies. But how long they'll go on taking this kind of 
punishment is in their minds, not in ours. So no one can give
you a precise answer on it. I said when I came back from South
Vit Nam that the Viet Cong could not win, and that ve were
making good progress in the military field. That is confir,. cld
by the latest advices which reach me, and results in the guairod
optimism -which has been expressed in 1Washington in recent tim~ i
QUESTION: You state the need to penetrate the Bamboo Curtain
by way of trade and cultural and scientific exchanges. Did you
put this specifically to President Johnson, and, if so, could you
give us his reaction?
IM. HOLT: I did not put it specifically on my first visit. We
had very lir. ited time on the first visit for close personal
discussion. By the time the various ceremonies were carried
out we had a luncheon at the iJhite House where we both spoke;
the next day he left on a speaking tour himself for a couple of
days. He had said to me that he wished to speak with me further
and as this had not arisen by the time we left, I wasn't altogether
surprised when in London he urged me to come back via Washington
before I camjron to Australia. But, in the meantime, and of my
own initiative, I advanced these views while I was in New York.
I think that a large body of opinion in America would favour some
development along those lines. It's not easy for a politician
facing election to advance some of these ideas. I felt they
should be advanced and did so and I don't think anybody was
unduly disturbed by them. I think more hard thinking is now
being given to what ought to be done in relation to China, just
as I hope that inside the Communist camp more hard thinking is
being devoted to w. here they are getting by their present policies.
They must see that they are driving a lot of the non-Communist
world more closely together and that if they allow another ten
years of this process to go on, then there will have been built
up economic strength and trade relationships which they might
find prejudicial to their own interests later on.
. QUESTION: Now that it is clear that the bombing of Hai Phong and
Hanoi has not compelled Hanoi to negotiate on terms acceptable
to the United States, there seems every possibility of an
escalation of bombing in North Viet Nam. There have been
forecastsby American spIkesmen that the next steps might be to
knock out power lines, dams and canals. If this eventuates,
can we assume that the pledge you gave Mr. Johnson of " All the
Way" means that, in advance, we have endorsed such actions?
MR. HOLT: You're dealing with some quite hypothetical situations.
As far as Australia is concerned, just as we were closely
consulted before the other operation, I . m s~ irc . io .: iuld bL-made
, ahy :; fig nifici. at dchngc in American tactics.
QUESTION: Mr. Holt, as Australia is proving herself such a
firm friend of America, did you seek American aid for national
development in Australia while you were there, such aid that
America has given to countries that have been hostile to her?
LR. HOLT: No. I made it clear when I got there that I hadn't
come ' to ask for anything. We are, it is true, a good friend of
America and I hope that's a general feeling in this country.
I don't know where people would choose to look for the security
of this country were it not for the friendship and strength of
the United States. There is no lack of will on the part of the
United Kingdom Government, for example, no lack of goodwill 
toward this country, but its own capacity to help is limited
these days, and you and I and the rest of us are secure in
Australia today because our security has been guaranteed under
treaty by the United States of America.
QUESTION: If I right take an earlier question a little further.
You have had the opportunity of seeing the situation in Viet Nan
yourself and these talks in the capitals in London and iWashington
how much hope do you put in peace in Viet Nan say, for example,
with Mr. Wilson's forthcoming mission?
MR. HOLT: You don't want me to predict in advance
that it's not going to got anryhcre. I prefer to leave
any cocnt on that until we see the-outcome.-I'mi sure we wish
MIr. . i. lson well in his efforts. He has, of course, made many
visits to Moscow in the past, particularly during the period
when he was President of the Board of Trade, and so he is well
known personally to several of the leading personalities there.
I'm sure that there could be nothing but value from the close
talks that he would have with Mr. Kosygin and other loading
members of the Administration. But, whether the Russians would
act independently of any general Communist attitude, I think is
highly doubtful. But at least as Co-Chairman with the United
Kingdom, there is purpose in them having talks together and from
what I have seen of wilson, if anybody is capable of putting
a view clearly and compellingly, then he possesses those
attributes. QUESTION: Mr. Holt, in place of an extension of the bombing of
North Viet Nam, do you see a greater likelihood of American
ground action from bases in Thailand? Has the President given
you any indication of what the next phase is if the bombing
fails to stop the movement of troops along the Ho Chi Minh Trail,
and if ground action is in his mind, do w. e support it?
MR. HOLT: Well, I dor'lt want to canvass publicly what were
clearly private discussions between us on various possibilities
which may arise. I've already said that we were not asked to
increase our commitment nor have we. But we shall certainly
be closely in touch with the United States regarding future
developments. My own impression is that the Thais have made
it known that they wish to cope with terrorist activity within
their own borders. But I wouldn't claim to be inside their
ninds on that matter, I haven't had any recent discussions with
them. QUESTION: Do you feel that the United States regards Australia
as a more important ally in the South Pacific than Britain?
MR. HOLT: I wouldn't know about that. I'm sure that the
United States values Great Britain's tremendous influence in
world affairs, and there has been for a considerable time a very
close working relationship between the United States President
of the day and the United Kingdom Prime Minister of the day.
In the case of President Johnson and I1r. ' iilson, there have been
frequent exchaiges, visits by iMr. W-ilson to him. Indeed, Mr.
Wilson will be making another one within the next week or so,
on my understanding. The United States would, I think,
believe that Great Britain will tend to decrease its role in
this area of the world. It sees in Australia a country, not
only which already enjoys good relations with others in the
area and which itself by virtue of its geography and circumstance
is placed significantly in the area, but that looking at some
point well ahead from where we are now, we shall be a country
of increasing population, increasing economic strength, able to 
11.
play an incroasing part in the affairs of the area. And it
is understandable therefore that , e should be regarded as a
partner, and cw are undoubtedly now regarded as a w,-arm and close
friend. QUESTION: You said a moment ago, Sir, that you did not discuss
the question of trade with China with the President on your first
visit. Could you say whether you discussed it on your second
visit? IR. HOLT: Notin specific t. nrms
QUESTION: Mr. Holt, have you asked the President to come to
Australia and, if so, has he been able to give a time when he
might be able to visit here?
MR. HOLT: I've made it clear that there would be a warm welcome
for him whenever he can arrange to come, and I know he iwould like
to come indeed after we'd gone for the journey down the Potomac
he took me back to the vihite House and arranged for a screening of
a 20-ninute film which he'd taken out here some 25 years ago or
thereabouts, when he was a servicer. an in this area of the world;
it was like most moving films taken by an amateur photographer,
not the best example of the cinematic art, but I've asked him for
a copy of it for our own national archives.
QUESTION: Sir, you've spoken about our alliance with the United
States. You've said that the British attitude towards this part
of the world is going to have some influence on our policy
thinking. You were also reported as saying while you were away
that it was expected that defence expenditure in this country
would rise to about 5 per cent of our gr: oss national product.
Does not this junct. ure of circumstancos mean that we are. going to
have to expect substantial increases in our national sacrifices to
play our part in this part of the world in the coming years?
MR. HOLT: Well, that depends on productivity, the run of the
seasons and a variety of other matters. ! e have, as you know,
entered into some arrangeonts to spread part of the cost of the
defence equipment that we're scocuring a little more widely. The
figure of 5 per cent is one which was mentioned to me by the
Treasurer as a figure which seemed to be looming on what he
could see of the trend in defence expenditure. An end to
confrontation would have a bearing on what our costs are, but
I would hope that we would be able to manage these things without
eating unduly into our development prospects. One f the factors
here which will have a bearing will be the extent to which
capital inflow is sustained. We've had a remarkable year in
that respect, an all-time record inflow, but there are the
restraints being imposed in Great Britain on a voluntary basis,
and some uncertainty as to the future availability of capital from
the United States now that money has shot up in price so much
all around the w-orld. Quite remarkably in *. estern Germany, the
Government is pa-ing there 8, 9 and 10 per cent for money. And
in Great Britain, of course, a 7 per cent bank rate has just been
introduced. So the cost of money may itself prove one of the
limiting factors on the availability of capital here. Now, these
things could all have a bearing on how far we have to restrain our
own expenditures. There is only one country in the w orld that
currently withholds a higher percentage from consumption of its
gross national product, a fixed capital and investment, and that is
Japan. Australia ranks next. So we're already doing a great deal
to help ourselves. I would hope that, with our own efforts, and
with the sort of inspiration that this growth, this feeling of growing
responsibility, a growing place in the world brings,, will result for
us all a better national tema. work enabling us to meet these cor:. itmont, 



S) pech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt,
at the Higains Electorate Dinner July, 1966.
Alan and my friends from Higgins:
This is a very memorable night for Zara and myself.
indeed it is made the more mnemorabl e for us because Alan, with
that genius for organisation which you possess, you've selected
for this celebration the room hallowed by the fact that we held
our wedding celebration here nearly twenty years ago. And, as
I have very happ recollections of that occasion, obviously
ha ' ppily consoliffted as you look at the beaming spectacle of my
dear wife here, then this will be another memory to add to that
rich store of the past.
But wherever we held this gathering it would have been a
notable occasion for the stalwarts who have been, as I look around
this room, what I might call my thick-and-thinners; those who
have stuck with me through good times and through bad. You've
mentioned the troubles of the early 1960' s. Well, be it everlastingly
to the credit of Higgins that they wjere with their
Member all the way. ( Laughter and applause). And I'm e~ ad
you feel we succeeded in laying I beleve we did the base of
a sound economy, one of the soundest economies to be found
anywhere in the world today.
Now I thought, Alan, that up to this point you'd proved
yourself a very good and staunch friend. But when you labelled
me to deliver an address I wasn't so sure about that. I thought
that this was one of these pleasant, relaxed, convivial evenings
in which we manifested our friendship with one another by
consuming a quite inordinate amount of delightful food and even
more titillating beverage. But you've throwin on me at this late
hour of the night this responsibility, and where do I begin?
I begin, I suppose, at the 26th of January this year,
because, by a happy combination of circumstances, it was on
Australids Nati onal Day that I assumed the responsibility of
office. So I can't forget my anniversary, next Tuesday I think
I complete my first six months of office. It seems more like
six years frankly, when you look back on what has been compressed
into that period of six months. Surely, putting the personalities
on one side, it must be accounted one of the most remarkable
periods in the history of the Australian nation.
I asked my very able Press Secretary, Tony Eggleton, to
select the highlights for me of the things we'd done in thcse six
months. I thougt I might have been able to give you the
highlights on an occasion such as this. I took one look at the
list and I felt completely exhausted. I couldn't credit that
we'd done so much in so short a space of time. But there have
been some quite remarkable developments in that period. Now,
this perhaps is one of the most conspicuous features of the
changeover which has occurred. We have not merely had a
transition from a very distinguished leadership which carried
Australia through the most notable period of propess in its
history, but from that leadership we have moved into what can be
seen as a new era of Australian historic progress. It's not a
change of personalities that brings this about, it is the result
of historical forces, the circums~ tances of events around the
world which has been producing these changes here in Australia. 
Whether Sir Robert Menzies had been here or not would not
have altered the fact that the British Minister for Defence was
with us in the first months of the year to discuss with Australia
the pattern of British defence in this area of the world in the
1970' s and indeed, into the 1990That itself was a quite
historic development because for understandable reasons with
which we can all sympathise, the United Kingdom had found it
necessary to reduce its commitments around the world and one of
the places in which it had to review its cormitments was in
various military bases established in this theatre of the world
in South East Asia and East of Suez generally. And we discussed
this very earnestly because it clearly had an important bearing
on our own planning. It was made clear to us at that time that
if it was found untenable to hold British forces in Singapore,
for example, then unless they had some other base to go to in
this area of the world and that meant Australia then they
would have to go home.
de urged that Great Britain should maintain a presence in
that part of the world for as long as it found it possible to do
so for the very good reason that British character and British
influence do exert a moderating, stabilising influence in this
area of the world. You have comparatively weak countries, as
to their military strength and, indeed, in the case of some of
them, their economic strength, and the British influence and
presence not a colonial imposition or anything of that sort
has this moderating, stabilising influeuce. This was what we
were wanting to preserve. And they saw the force of that
argument. They felt that we were a little more optimistic
than they were about their capacity to hold on in these places
with regard to a certain amount of restlessness that occurs there.
But we believe from our contacts in the area that the people
there would welcome a continued British participation, and
I believe that still to be so.
I merely mention this as an illustration of the sort of
change in circumstance with which we have had to cope, and we
have had quite dramatic confirnation in the last few hours
literally that Great Britain has felt the pressure of these
burdens and responsibilities and has been forced into drastic
economic action in order to meet them. Now, we for our part,
have given our support to Great Britain and the sterling area
generally in that most of Australia's overseas earnings are
held in the reserves of the United Kingdom, in sterling reserves.
And this is a considerable support to the strength of sterling
and their own economic viability in their external accounts.
*; e've been able to discuss quite realistically together the need
for Australia to go on earning overseas as much as we can;
we've been helped to do this in the years since the war by a
great influx of British capital and a considerable body of
British migrants.
Now we know that the migrants will continue to come,
perhaps they will even increase as a result of the difficulties
in the United Kingdom. But as to the influx of capital, we
would hope that the British Government and people would see
that in the growth of Australia, in the build-up of its own
export income, is a further strengthening of the British
position in the world. We can do more in this area of the
world, we can do more in the way of international aid, we can
provide a larger defence establishment for the security of the
area as our own economy grows, as our national development
progresses. And these are matters of the character that I've
been discussing recently with Mr. Wilson in London. 
You've made some very charming references to Zara, Alan.
She, of course, is my secretweapon and I think it's not so
secret now, it's emerged publicly. Indeed, for some years
when I was Deputy Leader to Sir Robert Menzies I used to say in
all frankness that I was deputy leader also in my own household.
And this fact is gradually seeping around the world to the
knowledge of other people. However, it doesn't seem to do me
any harm. It builds a certain amount of respect and indeed,
warmth with others to know that I must have qualities, perhaps
undiscernible to them, which have attracted this very notable
lady. And my credit enhances accordingly. ( Applause).
She only caused me one serious passage of embarrassment
while we were away, and that, of course was over the regrettable
incident of the white mice. ( Laughter). I don't know how
many of you read about the white mice, but in London, when the
press were asking her what she'd been doing, of course they
pressed her as to whether she'd been doing some shopping. And
my wife, being a very wise woman, knows that there is nothing
in election year more damaging to a politician's standing than
to have his wife doing a lot of expensive shopping abroad. You
remember there was that lady in Africa who bought the gold bed
and got into it ( Laughter). Anyhow, my wife settled for a
couple of white mice and I was able later to point out to the
press how important it is to avoid international misunderstandings;
that there should be full and adeuate reporting of these matters
because the press here merely carried a reference to the white
mice and this set in train some involved deparmental cabling.
i~-hoever acdministers the quarantine arrangements sent a rather
frenzied cable to London to the effect that the importation of
white mice was prohibited. It would be very embarrassing if
the wife of the Prime Minister brought them in, and they had to
be publicly destroyed, or something to that effect. You see the
really critical reference that had been omitted from the report
was that these were china white mice for our grandchildren:.
We seem to have featured with the rice because while I was
spending the night at Chequers it was a wonderful experience
for us to be invited to spend the Sunday night in this historic
residence of the British Prime Ministers we were shown around
by Mr. and li'rs. :' ilson. He pointed out to us the picture of
Rembrandt of the Aesop Fable of the Lion and the MIouse, and it
was a magnificent pice of painting. But he went on to tell us
tht-ren ' inston Churchill was the occupant of Chequers, he used
to study this picture and finally he could stand it no longer
and he said " I cannot see the mouse". So he painted in the
mouse and the Rembrandt at Chequers is now Rembrandt plus
Churchill. ( Laughter).
This was the story I employed at the '; hite House in
Washington because the moral of the Aesop Fable, of course, is
that little friends can prove great friends and, in this sense,
Australia I believe can prove a great friend both to the United
States and to the United Kingdom. It's through the collaboration
of these two great democracies that a great deal of the strength
of the world, its prospect for peace, hopes for progress, still
rest even in these times. Despite the relative weaknesses
today of the British economic position, British character,
British influence, British leadership, still account heavily
around the world, free or communist world, and we don't underestimate
that. Nor, I assure you, is it under-estimated by
the President of the United States. And I was glad to have the
opportunity of my second visit with him. Harold Wilson knew,
of course, that I was going to see him again; we'd discussed 
4.
this together in some detail in three hours--of talks at Cheauers.
Ihope that That I was able to say both in Londan and-in Amdrica
proved, helpful to that association.
There are ways, and particularly out in this area of' the
world, in -which Australia can be of help, quite important help.
Let me just give you an illustration of how the mouse as a great
friend at times can work out. You've all heard of the Colombo
Plan, but it's not so widely known that the Colombo Plan which has
brought aid and technical assistance to the countries of Asia and
South East Asia in particular, was pioneered by Australia and by a
particular Australian prominently associated with the work in its
early days. And its one of the ironies of life's circumnstances
that the man who is being abused in some quarters around the world
at thig time, because in the exercise of an honest jUd~ pent he
gave his decision in a particular way, our own Sir Percy Spender
was the man who gave the drive, the impetus and the inspiration
to what later became the Colombo Plan.
Now Australia has provided under that plan what is for our
size of population a respectable total of 130 million Australian
dollars. The United States has provided 15 thousand million dollars
under the Colombo Plan, And here is an illustration of the way
in which an initiative we were able to take and get something
moving, had the effect of being of benefit on this scale to the
p eople of this area. I mention that because, for me, one of the
highlights perhaps the highlight of my recent journey overseas
was to find that, having put vigorously in the United States the
view that the press cover being given there didn't reveal to the
American public how much was being achieved by the people of South
East Asia, under the protection of the American shield they have
been able to go forward with their own progress and able to cooperate
more closely together for Veaceful purposes, for trade
purposes and for mutual strengthening of each other's security
position, Now this wasn't being told, I felt, fairly and
adequately in the American press, and I kept on saying so until
we did get some notice taken of it. And what is more, we got
from the President himself a quite historic declaration of American
attitude. This has now been recognised in American as a significant
development in their foreign policy, the attitude of the President
to American responsibilities and possibilities in this area of the
world. They were encouraged by the evidence which has been
accumulating of co-operation be tveen those countries vihich have
been protected by an American presence in South Viet Nam from
corrmunist aggression. Those of us who have enjoyed this
Protection have nowr been co-operating more closely together.
There were ten countries which met recently at Seoul in South
Korea, not one of the major powers amongst them, except in the
sense that Japan can be classified as a mjaor power -it certainly
is in an industrial sense but not a military sense -but it was
one of the significant developments of recent times I would. think,
looking back over the six mnths, the point at which I viould say
perhaps the most significant development had occurred for me,
external to the events inside this country, w-as the moment when
I was invited by the Prime 1vinister of Thailand to go and sit
the first foreigner in history in the Cabinet of the Government
of Thailand. This was to me a symptom of the newr spirit that is
emerging around these countries of Asia, a setting aside of the
past Prejudices, past failures in co-operation. And this is one
of the real dividends that has been secured for us by American
resolution and determination in South Viet N~ am, assisted by what
the United Kingdom has been doing with other Commnonwealth forces in
Malaysia and in resisting Indonesian confrontation policies in Borneo.
Now these are just illustrations which I give you of the
sort of thing that has been crop'Ang up through the year. Its
been a year crow-, ded with incidents and developments of this sort
and these are to touch on some of the external matters. 
Internally we've had the changeover quite an historic
changeover to a decinal currency system. And lest anybody
think us freakish in this matter, New Zealand will be moving into
decinls next year, the United Kingdom will be followving in due
course, and most, therefore, of the countries and peoples around
the world will be operating under a decimal system of currency.
Inside Australia, the sort of change we have to contend
with these days is that the electorate no longer respects the
division of power betveen the Comonwealth and the States. I am
sure it would suit John Bloomfield, it would certainly suit us
and our respective colleagues in our governments, if he
electorate would allo, us to go ahead as the constitution
intended us to go. He is, of course, an authority these days
in the field of education. But this doesn't prevent the
electorate from demanding that the Comnonwealth also come into
the field of education and the provision which ve, through our
Budget, and the State Governments, through their Budgets, need
to make in order to meet what has been described as an education
explos ion, is almost capaole of wrecking the stable assembly
of a Budget for all the other purposes of government at this time.
These things are occurring while we're coping in the Federal
sphere with a record provision for defence, and increasing
provision for internctional aid, which the electorate also is
pressing for these days. And, taking them together, the
Comonwealth and State Governments are almost at their wits end
literally to find how, without zo imposing burdens upon the
conaunity that incentive becomes damaged, they can make ends meet
and sustain a stable economic situation in respect of their own
administrations. Ue've just been grappling w., ith thais problem
in Canberra. I came back from overseas over the weekend to run
into a gathering of the representatives of industry on Monday, and
on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday had the full 1vUnistry meeting
on the problems of our own Budget in Canberra.
And so, Alan, you will see that the fruits of office,
while they look alright on the plate, sometimes prove both costly
and difficult of attainment. I've been greatly stimulated by
this six months of office, but I never thought I'd have to work
so hard in my life. I felt that the Tru.' surer of the Conmorriealth
was the hardest working man; I've been miaintaining that theory
not for 8 years, heaven forbid, but for 7 years as the former
encumbont of that high office. I know that Sir Robert Menzies
used to work very hard. I'm quite convinced that he wasn't
wrked as hard in his life as I have been in these last 6 months.
However, he might argue that. But I think I can claim that
because it is a changing world; it is a turbulent, restless
world. How many of us of my generation when we were boys used to
know much about what went on north of this country. Most of us
if we got as far as getting a collection of the postage stamps
of the countries concerned would have become about as well-informed
as the average Australian statesman of those days on what went on
in our north. Our eyes were turned to the British Isles and
Europe. We hardly had an awareness of their existence there
was a funny little country called Indo China we didn't know much
about. The relations between Singapore and Ilaya were also
mysteries to us. But over recent years these have become facts
life for us. 
S6.
Now I don't want to imply and some of the things I've
been saying lately might lead to that impression-that ve don't
have a future in relation to the rest of the world, that our
future is all in Asia. That would be quite silly because, apart
from questions of international policy, two thirds of our trade
is still outside the Asian area. The significant thing is that,
even while we've been in office, and I go back now to the beginning
of Sir Robert's long period of leadership, the percentage of
Australian trade in this area of the world has moved up from
to 33%, and the trend is steadily in that direction. We're
dealing now with a billion and a half people and this is more than
half the human race, and as the years go on their proportion of
the total population of the human race will tend to increase more
than that of the rest of the world because not are they no less
fertile than the rest of the world, but improving public health
measures are keeping more of them alive beyond the point of low
life expectancy which was their lot in earlier years.
Now these are some of the factors which lie ahead for the
policy-maker of this country; they help to contribute to the
judgment which Lord Slim recently expressed to me when he wrote
saying what a fascinating time to be Prime Minister of Australia.
Well, it is a fascinating time, because, not only are there
challenges and opportunities outside Australia but inside we are
embarked on one of the most exciting phases of national development
which measure up in excitement and promise to the rich days of
the gold finds in Australia of earlier years. Here in a year in
which we've had to contend with the most serious drought in the
last 20 years, the economy has moved on steadily for most people
almost without fluctuation. We've got a much broader base to
the whole economy; we have been able to continue in strength
through all these difficulties.
Now, we meet here tonight as supporters of a Liberal
candidate in a Liberal electorate, and, indeed, I have the honour
to be the Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party.
And I think we can claim that Australia's strength inside Australia
and around the world is in no small degree attributable to the
basic principles that we stand by in our Liberal faith and the
brilliant exposition of those principles by the man who was Prime
Minister of this country for 16 consecutive years. It is my
honour to succeed him and I can tell you and I think this
ought to be mentioned seeing that I'm laying emphasis on the
Liberal element inside the policy formation that through those
years we have operated with a coalition; its boen a friendly
coalition and has worked effectively and happily; and what I'm
sure will interest all in this room tonight to know is that the
relations which existed with Sir Robert's leadership of cordial
collaboration have continued with no lessening of wan-th or
effectiveness of co-operation in the coalition which I have the
honour to lead. ( Applause). And this means strength for
Australia. We can present to the world the picture of a strong
government; our opponents are in disarray; its hard to find these
days a serious political discussion as between the Government
Parties and those of the Opposition. You pick up odd items about
Sthe rightwing asking the D. L. P. to give them some sort of
protection or the left wing saying if there is a big enough loss
of seats at the next election then the left wing will be able to
take control. Well, if this is the way they want to argue it,
or discuss it, let them do so. We carry the responsibility of
national leadership and in these days, with the sombre tasks still
ahead of us in South Viet Nam and elsewhere, those are weighty
enough responsibilities indeed. We have no lack of advisers
from a variety of sections of the community. But, finally, here
L 
7.
as in the united States and in the United Kingdom, a responsibility
for leadership has to be taken by the democratically elected
government of the day. And in that weighty task and responsibility
its a great encouragement to me personally to know that my ov'M base
is so strong and that heiearound me I find those who are helping
to keep the fortess of Hig. ins staunch, firm and strong.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, Alan spoke of an address.
It's been a lengthier one perhaps than even he might have bargained
for. But these are just a selection of the matters which have
been actively engaging the attention of the busiest Government in
the history of the Comronwrealth of Australia. I hope that in the
period which lies ahead and the rest of this year, we'll prove it
one of the most effective years in the history of the nation and
that, given the support which we at least feel to be our just due,
we'll go on from strength to strength in the year's ahead. And
may you be with me all that Thank you. 



dUTll ; LUkI; ñ ON AT 1EDT-L ILLILY,
TOWPSVILLL, QUEE. NSLAlJ 29TH JULY__ 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister. Mr Harold Holt.
M'r iayor, . Mr Premier, Ministerial and Parliamentary
Colleagues, Chief of the General Staff, Miss De Lacy and Gentlemen,
This is a very happy thought on the part of the
1' ayor, a very generous and hospitable thougft, to have so
representative a gathering of the To. insville strength, plus the
r. any visitors who have coie here for these two functions, at this
pleasant luncheon gathering here today, and I do appreciate your
kindness, Ir Mayor, in arranging this.
It is a notable occasion, as you rightly stress.
For me, a very happy one, because we do sincerely believe in this
cause of northern development, and to see manifestations in these
two practical achievements of a strengthoning on the academic
side with the first university in the northern part of Australia
in a tropical area of Australia, and the launching of a great new
military establishment, itself the outstanding establishment of
its kind in a tropical area, this is a double which many municipalities,
11r Mayor, or the rural areas would certainly welcome if that
good fortune came their way.
I am sorry to learn that it has brought with it
some of the problems of groi. ing pains to which you have rmde
reference. At the thrce layers of government Federal, State and
Municipal government we are all in severe financial straits.
Now this doesn't add up very happily for the taxpayer, but I may
comfort the taxpayer by saying that we have reached a point with
some of our taxes that as we increase the tax we get less money
back by way of revenue, so vie don't get much encouragement to
tax you more heavily when that is the way you respond to our
treatment. But I can assure you, Mr Miyor, that the Premier has
already told me today of the difficulties of his own State and of
one of its most important industries. I have had from the Premier
of Victoria and the Promier of Now, South ales signals of distress.
My colleaguos know of the vonics we went through a week or so back
as we prepared our own Budget details, so I think we will have to
go on praying for rain and the increased revenues that come from
good seasons. Droughts still mean much to us in the loss of
revenue, in the loss of carriage of goods by railways and the
other con: Lercial activities associated with them which affect the
budgets of governments. Althou h we weathered the effects of this
last, or current, drought remarkably ' well, I think in an earlier
period of Australian history it would have meant economic disaster.
It has nevertheless taken its toll on the economy, and we have
felt some discomfiture from it.
But don't let us dwell on that rather gloomier aspect
of our affairs on a day when we are able to point to developments
of a constructive and positive kind in the life of this comraunity.
Townsville is a very remarkable city. I think there can be few
in the Commonwealth and, indeed, few in the world which can claim
greater diversity of a. ctivity and of interest. You have got your
rural wealth and activity, the cattle, the sugar, the mineral wealth
/ 2 
-2-
that proceeds from your lead, zinc, copper and matters of that
sort. You have a tourist potential second to none I don't
know any resort around the world that can so consistently live
up to labels as Tonsville can. I have visited several of them,
and for consistency of sunny vieather and pleasant climate and
this accessibility to reef islands and the fishing ñ n the area
these things help to mark this city out above almost any other
that could be mentioned. I regret to have to report one serious piece of
disillusionment. Arising out of this luncheon here today, I
was relishing, as no doubt several of you were, these deli. ghtful
fish sticks that we have been eating for lunch and I was asking
which particular reef fish this was, only to be told that those
wore imported fish sticksl Now, I think you've got to do
something about that Mr Mayor. We claim that we have fish
beyond number in the waters of the reef and it seems a
contradiction in terrs that that beautiful fish we relish so
much and that I pursue so actively has to be replaced by imported
articles eating into the trade balances of this country.
Well, Mr hyor, you have a bright prospect ahead
for this city. It is in a sense the capital of the north of
Australia. It will go on from strength to strength. It will
have a much more richly diversified com~ unity activity because
the academic society of the university makes its own contribution
to a more richly fulfilled life, and at the same time, the lively,
young; er, vigorous members of the Services the Air Force and the
Army stationed here they, with that little bit of military pomp
and circumstance, will add something to the diversification and
enjoyent of life in a community such as this.
I hope to be able to come back year by year
because I am sure that year by year, Townsville will become an
increasingly attractive place to visit, and an increasingly
enjoyable place in which to live and attend to one's affairs.
You have a prosperous future ahead of you, and quite obviously
you have in the imaking of a great northern city a cause for which
you and your fellow councillors can labour with enthusiasm in
the years ahead. Our best wishes to you. You will be receiving such
co-operation as Comronwealth and State Governments can give to you.
There will be various points, particularly in relation to the
university and the Service establishments at which you will be in
direct contact ' with the Como. onwealth Governmont. I hope we treat
you kindly. If you feel we do not, then I give you direct access
to the person of the Prime iinister.
So, Gentlemen, this happy occasion has been made
possible by the Lhyor and his colleagues. We thank them and hope
that under their leadership, this will be a city of which all
Australia can be truly proud. 



OPENING OF THE TO01ASVILLE ARMY BARRACKS
TOWSVILLE, QUEENSLAND 29TH JULY, 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Major-General Mr. Premier, my Ministerial Colleague, Chief of
the General Staff, Mr. Mayor, Parliamentarians, Ladies and
Gentlemen and all distinguished guests assembled here today:
This, as I said this morning at the first of the three
functions which are making my day in Townsville such a memorable
one for me, is a very happy occasion. Here we have symbolised
in this morning's ceremony a great new university; the first
university in the tropics of Australia. And now here this
afternoon we have what my colleague the Minister for the Army
has just described to you in some ietail as the outstanding
military establishment tD be set up in Australia, with Townsville
as its home. I think Townsville can claim itself fortunate to have
achieved this quite remarkable double. It is said that the pen
is mightier than the sword and I suppose that argument still
continues. Well Townsville has both, and Australia neeas both.
I don't know whether over the long period of years
ahead, the University of Townsville will estalish itself as
dominant over the military establishment. I suspect there will
be encounters of an enterprising kind occasionally between the
inhabitants of one establishment and the inhabitants of the other.
But I hope nothing occurs which would be contrary to good order
and discipline in either of these major establishments we are
setting up here in this great Townsville area, the show place of
the northern tropic part of Australia.
This in a way symbolises what is going on throughout
the Commwnwealth at this time. You and I can consider ourselves
fortunate, I believe, to be living in our country in a period in
which it is going through an exciting phase of development and
national progress. Included in that progress has been the necessity
to give greater emphasis to potentialities of the northern part of
Ausiralia. Historically, and for various economic reasons, the
development of the south has proceeded to a greater extent, but we
recognise that if this continent is to be held secure, if we are
to 4evelop its potentialities then we must press on vigorously
with northern development. What could more clearly express that
determination than these two major establishments, one in the
academic field and the other in that of military security.
Now, the Queenslander, and in particular the Northern
Queenslander, has always been more conscious of the defence needs
of Australia than people in any other part of the Commonwealth,
and this proceeds, no doubt, from your geographical position. Y3u
are more conscious and sensitive to the fact that you are close to
the danger areas of the north. It is much the same distance from
Saigon lo Darwin, for example as it is from Brisbane to Perth
and those who live in the northern part of Australia realise tAeir
proximity to the danger spots of Asia. And so it is appropriate
that there should be established here in this northern city of
Australia a modern, large, military establishment.
You may be interested to know Mr. Premier, if you
haven't already been told this, that the decision to establish a base
/ 2 
-2
here was not primarily a military decision. In fact, I can perhaps
for once be forgiven if I publicily narrate a military secret,
But the military advice to us when it became necessary as a result
of the expansion to which the Minister for the Army has referrel
to set up nemlitary bases the military advice which reached
us was tat this shoulid be done in the Mornington Peninsula of
Victoria. There were some good technical reasons for that, and
it facilitated co-operation with other services and it wastprobably
a considerably cheaper way of getting the military result tan a
decision to establish a militarybshe. Buwenecaet
consider this in Cabinet, we felt that there were other factors
which outweighed the purely military cnsiderations the development
of the north the security Of he north, the fact that the
people of the north had a right to feel that in their area of the
worl bi 7 things wore moving which were contributing to the growth
of Australia. These were some of the considerations which came
into our minds when we considered the technical problems. And
so the decision was taken, and I am sure it was a decision we in
Australia will never regret. Certainly Townsville will never
regret it because it will bring to your community joining the
other members of the Australian Services already here a
substantial community of people. For the most part, they will be
young, lively and vigorous people with their families, and they
will undoubtedly add to the diversity and richness of the community
life of Townsvil le.
In terms of trade, looking at these thing,, s in an
economic sense, undoubtedly this will add to the population in
a considerable way because there will be those comihg to the
district who service the people who are in a military establishment.
This is a cumulative process whereby the needs of one
have to be satisfied by the services and activities of others.
And so you will find a secondary growth for Townsville from the
establishment of the barracks here.
But today we think beyond that to the contribution
which this barracks and the people w~ ho will be mann ing it make to
the future of Australia. We have, as I stressed this morning,
only a small population in this vast continent. So we must
contrive as best we can that the people of Australia are people
of quality, are people fully trained for the tasks which t hey
are to per{ orm and that they manifest inside Australia and
out of it the ; est characteristics which we believe make up the
Australian temperament. And in what better environment for
these purposes could young men be trained in the service of
Australia than in this sunny, stimulating, invigorating atmosphere
that they have here in Townsville.
Now, it is part of my duty today to gve a name to
these barracks. gave a -reat deal of careful thoughttohi
because this in itself is a 0contribution to morale and enthusiasm
that develops in a partictlar military venue. When we discussed
the problem, we thought what could be more fittin than that we
should select the name of a very distinguished Queenslander, a
great fighting soldier and more than that, a great fighting_
administrator. These barracks will be named after a native-born
Queenslander who reached the highest level open to him in
Australian military service. He became ChiefI of the General Staff
and later Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, the highest
body in the military services of this country. From there, having
g iven distinguished military service, both fightin service in
time of war and this service of leadership and1adm inistration in
a period of peace, he became the first Australian-born Governor a* / 3 
5
of the State of Queensland. And so it is with pride, and great
satisfaction, that I name these barracks Lavarack Barracks, after
Sir John Lavarack, the former Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff
Committee, and the former Governor of your State. I am sure it is
a choice you will all applaud.
And now as I proceed to the formal task of unveiling
the plaque which will name the barracks, may I on behalf of mself
and my colleagues of the hovernment, congratulate all those who
have played a part in promoting this great project, the work of the
Minister and his colleagues in the Army, the co-operation which
we have received, and for which we are suitably appreciative, from
you Mr. Premier and from you Mr. Mayor. This eamwork is
enali ng the wor here to go aead expeitiously and satisfactorily.
I only hope that I will be aoble to come back year by year and see
the progress which will have been made both here and at the
university. It will be a constant attraction to be added to the
many others I feel in the pull that North Queensland makes to me
when I am in the south.
Thanking you for your co-operation, I conclude with
my best wishes to all who serve in this establishment. May
Lavarack Barracks make a permanent contribution to the security
of Australia to the morale of Australian military forces, and may
it earn for itself a reputation of pride which will mark it out
amongst the great military establishments of the world. 



FOUNDATION STONE CEIYDONY AT TO.. JNSVILLE
UNIVERSITY, TOWNSVILLE, Q'LD. 29TH JULY, 1966.
Speech by the Prime Minister. ' Mr. Harold Holt
Mr Chancellor, Mr Premier, Mr Vice-Chancellor,
Members of the Advisory Council, Dr Back, and Members of the
Staff, Mr lMayor, Other Distinguished Guests Mr Prieatly comes
into this at some stage of the address and Ladies and Gentlemen;
I feel very appreciative and indeed moved,
Mr Chancellor and Mr Vice-Chancellor, by the kind things you have
said about me personally and my participation in this very happy
function. It could hardly fall to the lot of a Prime Minister of
Australia to have a happier day for his official tasks than I am
experiencing here in Townsville on this particular day. This
morning I have the opportunity to lay a foundation stone for the
first university in the tropical north of Australia, then I go on
this afternoon and help to launch the establishment of a great
military base here which will add to the security, strength and
the diversity of life in this part of the world. This combination
is for me a very felicitous one and made the more so by the fact
that we meet in typically Australian surroundings on a glorious
sunny day quite tp to the travel brochure which so rarely lives up
to expectations. Here in Townsville you have delivered the goods,
and with M', rs Holt I am delighted to be here for the purpose of this
function. I start vwith something of a disadvantage. It is
quite obvious to any of you looking at the platform that I am a
very new Prime Minister and therefore I am underdressed for the
occasion. ( Laughter) WIhen I look at the Premier, this resplendent
creature, I am only grateful that he didn't bring this out for the
last Premiers' Conference. I would have found him quite irresistible
had he done so. But the Mayor has shown his consideration for me
rather than leave me isolated in civic uniform. He has foregone
his own robes of office and sat with me here in this rather dreary
outfit which marks the normal attire of the man of affairs in these
quickly moving times. But what a wonderful thing to see growing around us
not just a university but one which by its distinction of
architecture, its modernity, its appropriateness in the glorious
setting in which it finds itself will be a show-place in the life
of Australia in the future. It is a proud thing for Townsville,
it is a proud thing for all of us to be able to share the experiece
of today, and the contribution which this university will make to
the life of the northern part of Australia, and then reaching out
to Australia as a whol-, can only be speculated upon at this stage.
But no-one doubts that it will be a significant contribution for
Australia, and I personally do not doubt that it will be making a
valuable contribution to the well-being of the people in Asia and
South-East Asia generally.
Here we have a seat of learning that will be facing
problems that possess some novelty in academic circles. There are
problems which are special and peculiar to a tropical area. There
is a proximity here to our north. ern neighbours which will make this
university a focus of interest for them. There is the close
/ 2 
-2-
association you will be having here with the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research, and I understand a School of Advanced
Studies is to be established here alongside you also. Now this
combination of activities cannot fail to contribute notably to the
well-being, to the advancement of the north of Australia, and
having put our hands to the job, it is well it should be done
so handsomely as the planning of the university would indicate to
you. It is not, of course, so very long ago that the
Commonwealth Government was almost a stranger to activities of
this sort. Under the Constitution, education has been a matter
in the province of the State Government, but as the years have
gone on, the electorate which has proved so demanding in other
directions has also turned its attention to education. Indeed,
I suppose education is one of the most sensitive areas of government
at the present time, both in the Federal and the State sphere.
Certainly it is a subject matter w/ hich we cannot ignore if for no...
other reason that the burden on government budgets these days has
become heavy indeed. As I said in lielbourne only a week a. o, we
are almost at our wits' end wihich is perhaps the right sort of
phrase to use in relation to a problem of education at our wits'
end to know how we are going to finance the pro; gramme recommended
to us in the next triennium.
But what has been called the education explosion
has manifested itself as far as arree concerned in expenditure in
this last Budget year of 130' i and that is just about double what
the bill was three years ago. From what w-e Coe of developments
ahead, it is quite clear that the Commonwealth will be making a
very large contribution in the future as will the States. Indeed
when you mentioned, I. 1r Vice-Chancellor, that in a not so very
remote point of time you could get your education for fourpence
a -eek, I ,-ondered whether progress had been entirely advantageous
fron the point of view of governments.
~ ie have a small population in this vast continent
of ours. f! ear e building it as rapidly as no can with our
irigration programmLe and with such encouragement as we can offer
to those capable of forming families to go about that task in an
enterprising way, but we still have by standards of our neighbours
to the north a very small population i. n a very large area of land.
And yet increasing responsibilities are being requested of us and
we face up to those in a spirit of acceptance. We feel Australia
can make a contribution to a better . orld order in this area of
the world in which ve find ourselves.
One of the consequences flowing neces arily from
this is a need to have people of quality. If we have a few
people, then they must be good people, they must be -ell trained
people, people with a sense of responsibility, people who possess
the characteristics which we regard as the high-uater marks of the
Australian temperament. It is through institutions such as these
that we can lead our people on to better standards, that -o can
encourage them to make a more valuable and far-reaching contribution
to the area in which we have our being.
And so, Ir Chancellor and Iir Vice-Chancellor, you
have the good . ishes of us all in the future development, the
future success of this institution. I couldn't feel happier that
it has been placed in a to'., n which is making its oun presence
felt significantly in the gro; wth of Australia. Townsville / 3 
-3-
epitoises Australian growth at its best diversity of activity
in a splendid Australiansetting; it has almost all the assets a
community could hope to find around it in climate, in charm of
appearance, in diversity of activity, And now to enrich and
further diversify the life of the community, you will have a
large university population, you will have an added Service
population which contributes its own measure of colour and
ceremony to the life of the community.
You, r I'ayor, I think, can look forward with
satisfaction to the Townsville of the future, and all here feel
confident that in the better Australia of the years ahead,
institutions such as this University of Townsville will be
making for the more notable Australia of the future.
And so e w: ish you well. e from the Common: ealth
and I am sure you, Mr Nicklin for your part will be doing our
best year by year to meet the increasing financial demarnds you
will be making upon us. At least will know that our funds
have been spent in a cause which w. ill produce for us richer
dividends than almost anything else that Comonruealth and State
funds could be devoted to. You will find in us a willingness
to help. For your part, if you ma. ke the most of the opportunities
which arise hero, you will be providing residential accomodation
and servicing students from this whole northern area. The very
demands for these services have already far exceeded the
projections comteraplated for them when these were made in 1963,
and e can anticipate that with the general growth of prosperity
in this area and greater industrialisation in so many directions,
population will grow and the requirements for university
education will grow. A successful future, therefore, for this
university, and in order that the building can proceed without
any danger of falling around us, I have to lay a stone which
apparoitly is going to enable further construction to proceed.
And so, ' Ir Chancellor, if you will lead me to my
task, I will perform this important duty. 



ST. STEPHEN'S DAY CELEBRATIONS
PADDINGTON TOWN HALL,-SYDNEY AUGUST. 1966
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This is for me a very happy arnd stirring occasion because
: I come to you both as the present Head of the Australian Government and
also, as our Chairman has reminded you, as the former Minister, who
can regard himself in a sense as the godfather of many of you in this room
tonight. I have had now, many years of service as the head of a
Department in an Australian Government, altogether, I suppose, about
18 or 19 years. Seven of those years were spen! with the portfolio of
Immigration and I don't recall any time in my public life which gave me
a warmer and richer sense of satisfaction than those years I 3pent as
Minister of that portfolio, helping to build the Australian nation that
is progressing year by year into the promising future that awaits us.
Now this function tonight is, I think, a very happy
expression of the blending into the Australian community life of the
traditions, the customs, the cherished recollections of many
nationalities who have come to settle in this country. I know that for
the Hungarian people, the celebration of St. Stephen's Day is an
occasion of great significance, an occasion of intimate recollection,
perhaps even nostalgic recollection of the history of a people who have
contributed so much in the history of mankind to the development of
the human personality. Although many of you today are fully Australian, both
in the legal sense and in the sense of the full adoption of your new
country, we can think of you for the purposes of our gathering here
tonight as the Hungarian community in Australia. And here you are
recollecting the things that help to build character and personality
hope in the years that were with you before and in ihe years that are
with you in your adopted homeland.
Now one could imagine that in a less favourable
environment a national community such as the Hungarians might have
wanted to conduct an occasion such as this exclusively to themselves,
but it is a mark of your own feeling of Australian citizenship that you
gladly welcome into this gathering the head of the Australian Government,
other Parliamentary representatives and many Australian friends. Now
we appreciate this. You may recall, some of you, that several years ago,
as Minister for Immigration, I was at a gathering at which the
Hungarians were represented and the other national groups in the
community life of Sydney, and I said then that they must not imagine that
we Australians of native birth in any way resented the fact that the
national groups should maintain their customs and their traditions, sing
the songs of their country, and preserve those things which they cherish
from their former homeland. Now we meant that, and I remember
illustrating that comment with a reference to the Scots in Australia, and
no-one could wear weirder costumes than the Scots. Certainly no-one
could play weirder music than the Scots and yet Australians had managed
to tolerate them very satisfactorily for many years.
The Hungarians, of course, have their own special
attributes. I was told many years ago that the most beautiful women / 2 
-2
in the* Worlcanie from Hungary. ( Applause) I don't want to lose too
many Australian votes by saying that the Aussie girls can't match the
Hungarian girls, but i. am quite certain that we have lost nothing from
your presence as a continuing element in our midst.
Now it is a stirring thought, ladies and gentlemen, that
in the Australia of today, one in every five is either a migrant of the
post-war period or a child born to migrant parents. Indeed, if you take
the younger age groups in this country, one in every four is a migrant
of this post-war period. One in every four in employment in our
manufacturing industry. One in five of the work force of the nation.
This constitutes a very considerable addition to our national strength, but
also in subtle and sometimes undiscernible ways, personalities, the
traditions and habits of life of those who have come to join us are making
their impact on the life of the Australian people. I speak as a fourth
generation Australian when I say I think it is a very much pleasanter life that
we enjoy today because of the variety that has been brought to us by so many
national groups who have come to join our community in these post-war years.
In that influence, the music, the culture, the science and the
skills of the Hungarian people have also made a significant contribution.
Tonight you celebrate an influence in your lives which has
been something moulding character, something which has served as an
inspiration over the centuries for the Hungarian people in order to
preserve an identity, an identity through centuries of domination; whether
that domination lasted for a short or long period of time, it has sought at
times to crush the spirit of the Hungarian people and their own traditions.
And yet such has been the strength of character, the toughness of fibre
of' the people of Hungary that you have preserved that entity and the
traditions which you are cherishing here tonight.
We, your fellow Australians, can rejoice with you in an
occasion which is moving to you and because of that becomes significant
for us. The things which St. Stephen worked for and brought into your
country are to be found in their own form in this country of ours. He was
a great statesman, a great reformer. He was devoted to his people. He
gave them a religious fervour and faith which has withstood the test of
pressures through the centuries. It is proper that the memory of this
great man, influencing the development of your national history should
be honoured in this way. We in Australia can't point, in the life of our
own country, to centuries of history and tradition. Those of us who come
of British stock, even if we are removed, as I am, by three generations
as a fourth generation Australian, we still have a heritage which has
shaped the institutions of this country, and I believe that you, too, have
come to appreciate that democratic heritage.
Here you can breathe the air of freedom. Here you can find
opportunity. Here you have found the incentive which has enabled you to
build a life, a prosperous life, a happy life, a secure life in the community
of Australian people. Because you and we cherish that spirit of freedom,
we are determined to play our part in its preservation, either inside our
own country, or if the challenge comes outside our shores. The Australian
people in two world wars fought on European soil and suffered nearly
half a million cas~ ualties in the cause of freedom. So it is not surprising
that at this time Australian men, some of them of Hungarian origin, are now
in Viet Nam, fighting again for the cause.
Freedom extends to our institutions. We can point to free
elections. W can point to a free press. But we must always remember
that freedom is never free in the sense that freedom can be preserved
without cost. And some of you in this room tonight fought a battle for
/ 3 
-3
freedom, and you went into exile from your own country only when it was
clear that if you did not, freedom could not be preserved.
I remember very vividly in 1957 going in Austria to the
border and watching the points across which there were still many
Hungarians coming. I went to the camps in which there were still
many Hungarian refugees seeking a new homeland, and it was as the
result of the arrangements that we were then able to make that some
14, 000 of you came to this country. And what was Hungary's loss
became Australia's gain.
You have shown a high sense of responsibility in the
country of your adoption. I don't think I know any national group which
has a higher proportion of its settlers taking up naturalisation inside
Australia. I have had through my time as Prime Minister, and then
through the years, the longer years as Minister for Immigration, no
cause that I can recall to regret, through any episode which has occurred,
that we should have welcomed so many of you here. You have done well,
you have behaved as responsible, contributing citizens to Ai~ stralian causes
and we value your presence with us.
The ideals which St. S t ephen gave you, you have cherished
with us and they have contributed to our own Australian way of life, and it
is the hope of myself and my colleagues that over the years ahead you will
continue to find happiness with us, that your prosperity will march with
the prosperity of the Australian nation. A grea~ t Australian Governor-
General in the person of Viscount Slim, whom some of you will remember,
wrote to me recently and said, " What a fascinating time to be Prime
Minister of Australia" and what a fascinating time to be part of Australia,
part of its growth, part of its promise, part of the years, the shining years
which we see ahead of us, because we have every confidence that given
freedom from war, given opportunities for the development of our national
resources, this country will become one of the leading nations of the world.
Wc have no wish to lead or to be in the rating of leadership
or amongst the leading nations simply for selfish ends. We know that
left to ourselves, we can build a life a happy life, but there are
responsibilities, and we haven't shrunk from them whether in the military
field or in the field of international aid, and perhaps the events of the psist
few days in Viet Nam are symbolic of the Australia of the future. Brave
men serving their country with devotion, skill and courage, and helpirgto
build the greater Australia of the years ahead.
Now in that growth and greatness, your community will be
playing its part. It will be helping us with the variety which comes from
centuries of culture in which we have had no part, but you can become part
and your traditions can become part of that Australian nation made up of
people of many nationalities. I believe we have succeeded in avoiding
some of the problems and errors which developed inside the United States.
We studied what had happened with their migration programme and we
applied those lessons in the development of our own, So it is that we have
had far fewer social problems, far fewer nati;-mal frictions. Indeed, with
a Good Neighbour M-. vement joining in the work of integration, we have
had an experience which has proved itself to be the greatest peace-time
achievement of the Australian people. You are part of our success and
tonight we salute you for the way in which you have joined with us and
become an integral part of an Australian family.
I wish you all happiness in the years ahead and together
may we go on to build the Australia to which we all aspire. 



ROYAL COMMONWEALTH SOCIETY LUNCHEON
LONDON 8th September 1 966.
Speech by the Erime. Ministeir Mr Harold Holt
Your Grace, Ladies and Gentlemen
Our Chairman and I have attended a number of Commonwealth
gatherings, usually uncomfortable, but by no means as agreeable as this
meeting we have in company with you today, and I speak a little feelingly
because I think I've spent one of the more uncomfortable of my mornings
in the service of the Commonwealth this morning at the Prime Minister's
Conference; One of our delegates has been going for a couple of hours and
is still in play. I don't mean to keep you anything as long as that, and indeed
I felt that thiere were about three matters that I could hope to cover and then
at question time perhaps we will supplement and broaden out a bit what I've
been sayin-y or touch on other matters which could be of interest to you.
The three things I thought I would canvamwith you today would be
first the contrast which exists and I speak now not as an old Prime Minister
but as an old campaigner whose first ministry was in 1939 and attended the
first of the Post-War Prime Ministerial Conferences when the New Commonwealth
was emerging. And there is a contrast, of course, to be painted between the
conditions under which Prime Minister Conferences were held then and how they are
held at this time. The second thing was to say something quite briefly about Rkodesia.
which quite clearly is the dominating issue of the Conference briefly, because
we are still in discussion on it and I've not yet made any comment myself in the
Conference. although I would have hoped to do so this afternoon. but for the
rather lengthy contribution which seems to have absorbed most of the working
time so far today. The third aspect which I hope to have time to touch on arises from
some of the things I've been reading. more particularly over recent months
following a couple of visits I made to Washington.
I'd always re~ arded myself as a fairly staunch supporter of the
Commonwealth of Nations and, in particular. of the British -Australian coqnection.
but I see myself described by some as having sold out to the United States or
having thrown in my lot with America. Well, of course. there are some very good
reasons why Australia should be close to the United States, which you will
appreciate, but I would hope to find time to tell you something of the continuing
link which exists between this country and Australia, not merely links of sentimentalthough
these are powerful but material links of trade, mutual problems of
security in the area, and other matters of that sort.
Now, firstly, contrasts between the Commonwealth Conference as
I first knew it. when one could gather all the delegates into No. 10 Downing Street.
It was, of course, in those days a white Commonwealth Conference; there were
no difficult racial problems to concern ourselves with. The delegations fitted
comfortably into No. 10, the discussions were cosy and intimnate, from men of
like -minded views on the problems of the world. It was all very agreeable and
it helped to knit us together very closely indeed, and there is today. of course,
a quite remarkable contrast as a result of the evolution that has gone on since
the second world war. / 2 
-2
The new Commonwealth was given its first expression in the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conference of 1948 when we had
India Pakistan and Ceylon added to the former white and aaropean racial team.
but since that time of course, there has been the proliferation of other
membership and also certain changes inside the composition of the old
Commonwealth with the result that as we sit round the table at the present
time there are the four old Commonwealth countries of European racial
derivation rhe United Kingdom Canada, Australia and New Zealandand
with the full teamn there would be 19 others from Asia and from Africa
and other parts of the world. There are 22 Delegations represented at this
Conference, quite a good muster considering the subject matters to be discussed,
but one of the questions which we shall all be asking ourselves increasingly as
time goes on is a sort of mental debit and balance sheet so far as the Commonwealth
is concerned. I know that there are many people that have their doubts about the
continuing value of the Commonwealth, some of them outside this country and
some of them inside it, and I don't think we have been assisted in forming an
objective judgment by those who arrive on these shores threatening to withdraw
unless their terms are acceded to. This, not unnaturally, provokes a reaction
amongst many people inside this country that the United Kingdom might be more
comfortably placed without such ungenerous or unfriendly or critical associates
inside the Commonwealth. Now I think bath of these developments are to be
regretted. They are both, in a sense, understandable and it calls on our
patience, our wisdom, our tolerance to see them in their true perspective.
But if there are to be these uncomfortable problems in an uncomfortable world.
perhaps we are better off and I incline to that view myself subject to what
emer-yes in the course of the next few days we are, I believe, better off having
these exchanges, however searching and even acrimonious around our own table,
able to round off the sharp edges of discus nion with the personal and intimate
contacts we have outside the conference room itself. That surely is to be
preferred to the alternative of long-distance exchanges; either at the United
Nations or some other international forum.
I'm quite certain that the Commonwealth has been a force for good
in the years which have preceded our present situation. It has and I speak as
a veteran parliamentarian who has attended many Commonwealth Conferences in
the Parliamentary field, and quite a number of conferences of Prime Ministers
it has undoubtedly contributed to a better understanding of each other and our
problems. it has established personal contacts which have bred respect for the
other man's point of view, and has developed a better and more realistic
appreciation of his national position and so all these things are advantages.
But on the other hand must be weighed the cost to the United Kingdom in terms
of international confidence. If it is to be a punch-bag for visiting delegations.
some questioning the good faith of the Government of the day, some asserting that
there are racial prejudices which are complicating the solution to these difficult
questions then it may well be that Great Britain pays a price in international
respect and confidence which is far outweighing the advantages which the
Commonwealth currently brings to it.
These are matters of judgment which can be resolved. I think more
fittingly by a United Kingdom Government weighing up the ' Pros and Cons' than
by those of us who can take a rather more objective view of what lines of criticism
are being developed against this country. But I've heard a great deal in recent days
which I believe is neither fair to this country and is not practical in the political
measurement that we bring to policies directed at particular problems.
Now, just to give an illustration surely the best and most effective
answer to any charge that the United Kingdom has allowed racial prejudice
to distort its view of these questions is the nature of the gathering in which we
participate at this present time. As I said, it's not so long ago it was an
entirely white and European community of representatives European as to
race, at any rate and outlook. But by the de~ iberate choice of those who were. 1.3 
-3
at that time the members of the Commonwealth and, in particular, in response to
British leadership, we have seen emerge the Commonwealth of Nations multiracial,
representative of all the national groupings at least all types of
national groupings, differing creeds, all the differences which we are conscious
of, those of us who have an enthusiasm for the Commonwealth or have attempted
to contribute to its continuance and successful operation. These are the cliches
of Commonwealth, in a sense.
We know that embraced in our membership is about a quarter of the
world's population covering about a fift'i of the world's total area, and it would be
a remarkable and welcome achievement if over the period of years we could
demonstrate to the rest of the world tiiat this multi-racial association succeeds,
that it has brought people closer together, it has helped to solve difficult
international problems and it has promoted economic progress. national
security and a general situation of peace. Now these are the great objectives of
our Commonwealth community and it would be, I believe, a tremendous sacrifice
of aspiration if. because of irritation or our own frustrations or, indeed, the
irritations and frustrations of other members of the Commonwealth we were to
find withdrawals or damage being done to the structure of such magnitude that the
Commonwealth ' lid not possess a continuing existence and a hopeful future. And
so over the critical days which lie ahead of this particular conference I hope that
these thoughts will be uppermost in the minds of the Delegates. and that they
shall apply the test of what is fair, what is practical, to the suggestions and
solutions which come to us around the table.
Now the second matter that I wanted to mention was a passing
reference to the question of Rhodesia and~ here. perhaps, is the illustration of
my comment that much of what I have heard has been neither fair nor practical.
When the United Kingdom's own good faith is brought into question in this matter,
those who make these charges I believe ignore the relationship which has existed
over the years between the United Kingdom and Rhodesia.
When it is urged that force be employed then, in my view. that is
an impractical course. I would very much question whether a Parliament in
the United Kingdom would give support to a Government which directed force
against the people Rhodesia when the possibility of other solutions had certainly
not been fully exhausted.
We in my own country have seen this as a special problem between
the United Kingdom and its former colony, but we have, for our part subscribed
to the programme of sanctions which was agreed upon and our current
arrangem ents apply to about 96 percent of our former imports from Rhodesia.
But there is, I believe, in this issue a test of the good se nse, a judgment of what
is practical and what is fair in relation to the United Kingdom itself, and when it
is known. as is the case of course, that the United Kingdom which could have
resolved this matter of itself and through its own policies has brought the
Commonwealth as a whole into conference with it, that again is I believe, a
substantial answer to any charge of bad faith or failure to deal with it in a
Commonwealth spirit.
I can't go over the ground of the Rhodesian issue in any detail because
the discussion is still before the Conference. I haven't spoken 012 it there, and
although our practices are changing, I think not necessarily for the better in
relation to public disclosures, I at least would like to say rather more to my
colleagues before I say a great deal on this in public. But perhaps it's
reflective of the changing situation, that I make that comment about the changing
procedures. In earlier times it was an intimate, confidential discussion with
Prime Ministers reporting back to their cabinets and the world hearing very
little about what went on beyond the rather sterle language of the communique. 
4-r
Well, all this has changed, I repeat not necessarily for the better, the
highest common denominator of agreement that we seemed to be able to work
out on this business was that Delegations aould roake known their own views to
the press, but were enjoined not to discuss the views expressed by others, and
as somebody said when this suggestion was made, " That's a counsel of perfection".
Well, we've now reached a point where, I gather, on one earlier occasion
I don't know whether it's repeated on this one. countries have engaged the services
of professional Public Relations Consultants. Obw heads of Delegations give
a direct interview to the Press following the contribution that they have made
inside and all this marks a contrast between what had gone before and the current
situation. But are we to condemn the whole system on account of what may seem to
some of us to be imperfection in its practice? Perhaps in the current state of the
world and with the sensitivity on these issues of race. of colonial evolution that
kind of public use made of what is regarded clearly by some as a political forum
or a means of national propaganda, this is part of the refriction on the machine in
modern times. But out of it all, although I confess that I came away from this
morning's discussion a little more pessimistic than when I went in about the future
of the Commonwealth. I've still retained in my own heart an optimism that when we
come to the end of the Conference talks we'll have felt that it has been of value to
have these frank exchanges together to carry away with us a mre realistic awareness
of how developments in particular countries are affecting the Governments of that
country or of zeighbouring countries and in this way at least assist towards a
more effective solution of the perplexing international problems which are vexing us
all in these difficult times.
Now let me turn from that because I'm not -unmindful of my undertaking
to answer some questions. Toput the question to myself I was just writing some
notes for this this morning. I did it in shorthand terms by Baying " How British
is Australia? I wouldn't have thought I had to ask myself that question but when I
read these Press commentaries that Australia is going through a metamorphosis of
ideas and attitudes and policies which is tending to weaken our link with this
country well this is I won't use the word ' nonsense' because there have been
changes of a quite important and material kind which I shall refer to but it
misreads the Australian situation altogether to imagine that there is not a strong
continuing link of affection and mutual interest between this country and our own.
it's not the same relationship which exists with our powerful friend the United
States. Th Srelation ship with the United States is a relationship of friendship, of
comradeship of mutual interest in that area of the world. The relationship with
this country is for most of us a relationship of family of kinship and there are
these different attitudes ' idach obtain as between friend and friend and between
members of a family and one is very conscious of it as we come here or as you
come out, as I hope you do. to see us.
But let's face quite realistically together some of the changes which
have been occurring. I refer first of all to immigration. It may interest you to
know that since the second world war a total of 2, 400. O J people in round figures
have come to Australia as long,-term or permanent arrivals. They haven't all
stayed there of course, but most of them have. by far the overwhelming proportion
of them have stayed there, and included in this total -and this is sometimes overlooked
is the fact that more than 5UJ percent of these arrivals have been British,
and so. Fithough in some ways you'll discover some changes in community living
in Australia we get better food and drink than we used to get ' Thanks to the
arrival of Italians and Greeks and Dutch and Germans and other nationalities
you can get almost any type of meal including Chinese and Japanese cooking as you
want it. Australia has at least on that account become a very much more delightful
place to live in but more than half, I repeat. of the immigration has been still
from the British Isles. A 
Now this t-irmportant when I go on to the next detail, and that is
that of the people living in Australia today one in five has either been a post-war
migrant or the child of a post-war migrant, and when you get down to the younger
age groups say up to 30 or 35 or thereabouts the proportion becomes
significantly larger one in 4 of the young people in Australia would have been
either a migrant or the child of a migrant. Some people knowing these figures
have assumed from it a weakening of the British composition of the community
well. I give you the other figure again to offset that for you've provided us with
something more than half of the total and the tendency. of course. has been for
these other nationalities I've mentioned to make their useful and helpful
contribution at the cultural level, at the community level, in productive terms,
adding skilld and their own enterprise to the national effort, but the country is
still overwhelmingly a British community.
Now I don't say that its attitude tends to become more British in the
sense of emulating what goes on in the British Isles. If we're going axywhere we're
not going American, we're going Australian, and there is. I think a stronger sense
of nationalism a feeling of growing pride in Australia its achievements, its
potentialities, even its hazards as our own people see a larger place for themselves
in relation to the affairs of Asia, and this is certainly worth bearing in your mind if
you are to inderstand what is happening out there.
Now there's been a great deal of talk in this country, I know. about
what again has been described in shorthand terms as a defence policy east of
Suez, or a British effort east of Suez, and I've been myself irritating enough to
try to demonstrate to people in Governmental and other high places that this must
not be either overlooked, forgotten or ignored in relation to the future of this
country. Heaven knows, we all appreciate the burdens which the United Kingdom
has carried for the rest of the world, and I'm not seeking to add to those. We shall
be carrying ourselves a greater share of responsibility as we grow in strength as
we shall in the years ahead, and again our great ally in the Pacific, the United
States. in recent significant pronouncements from President Johnson has made it
clear that the United States sees for itself a continuing role in relation to economic
progress in Asia and the security of the free countries of Asia. You get a
reflection of this in a recently-formed association of countries, what we call the
Aspac Group, the Asian and South-East Asian group of countries, which have come
together for reasons of mutual interest. They include Japan. Thailand Korea,
Vietnam Malaysia, the Phillipines. Australia New Zealand, now which is the
9th? anyway there are 9 of us there in that area of the world. It's not a strong
defensive combination or intended as such but recognising that we have joint
interests in the successful development of t rade, of exchanges between our two
countries, no dominance by azy particular major power, but a recognition of
common interests making association desirable.
This is a quite remarkable contrast of course, with the situation of
a few years ago when Japan was the country that we had been fighting. Today our
trade with Japan is second only to that of the United Kingdom. By next year it
wl. certainly be our first customer n current trends. Just to give you one
illustration of the way in which our trade will be building in future years, we
currently have iron ore contracts negotiated with the Japanese to a value of
over one thousand million pounds sterling and these have yet to get fully under way
and we believe this to be only the beginning of a growing trade in this commodity so
basic and vital to the steel industry of Japan.
Our trade with that country, I think I can give you a figure or two on it,
has grown from about six million pounds in 1951 our imports in 1949-50 were
000, 000 sterling and our exports S19, 000, 000. iaasyear Itport
hld grahaft m 000, 000 to œ L 2, 000. 000 and exports from the
œ 19, 000, 000 to œ 188. 000, 000. Our trade through buth-East Asia and
Asia generally well, trade east of Suez has built up from 16 percent of our total
trade in 1951/ 52 to 33 percent in 1965/ 66 and the likelihood of that increasing is
established by trends in the trade curves with the various countries of the area.
/ 6 
* 1 
-6
So, vYien you put allithese-things together I think you get somne explanation of
Aust~ alian attitudes which have seemed at this distance to reflect even a
change of orientation a change of sympathy and if not of allegiance at least of
association, but when you see the basis for these things, the security contribution
which the United States makes to us through our treaties under Anzus The
Australian and New Zealand Treaty with the United States and the Treaty
arr'angements made with this country and with the United States under the South
East Asia Treaty Organisation. these things quite clearly -have their impact on
Australian attitudes. This growth of trade on a quite dramatic scale with countries with
whom trade was almost non existent 10 or 15 years ago, this ap. in is effecting
the concentration of our outlook which was in my early days in public life almost
entirely directed towards the British Isles and Europe generally. These days at
least a large part of our attention is given to the possibilities developing for us to
our north, and of course out of trade and security arrangements there is a
growth of personal contact.
It was not entirely for the significance that has been attributed to it,
that my own first visit as Prime Minister outside my country was to a group of
countries in South-East Asia rather than to the more traditional sources of
Au stralian contact and association. I say it wasn't with quite that significance.
because my role and intention was to see our own troops where they were stationed
in that area of the world.. But in a result it developed into a quite sizeable
diplomatic exercise and I was interested to see subsequently that the countries of
Asta themselves were reading into this an Australian interest, a lively interest in
our future with them which they were welcoming. Well the need for it is clear
and I think that Australia can, by the growth of our own economy and our contacts
with these countries, make our own international contribution to the objectives
of Which the United Kingdom ad the United States have in relation to the world
ge~ ierally. We are helping, we believe in this way to preserve freedom for
thcose peoples of Asia who feel threatened by communist aggression. We are
striengthening the economies of the free areas by the increasing trade, increasing
aid and eventually we would hope through these massive programmes which the
United States has in contsmplation.
Now please see all these things in their perspective. but this doesn't
detract in any substantial way from the feeling that Australian people have, that
our destinies in the future as in the past will be closely linked together and that
the problems which you face both in relation to your internal adjustment and the
problems in relation to the rest of the world will always be of acute interest
to us and of sympathetic concern to the people of my country.
Now Mr Chairman I haven't left all that time for questions I
apologise for going, not as long as my colleague from an unnamed Commonwealth
country, but longer than I had intended. Thank you very much.
Que stion How important S~ ir, to Australia is the continued presence of British
troops on the ground in Malaya?
Answer Well we think there is an importance which goes beyond the security
consideration measured purely in military terms. The rather curious arrangement
which has built up over the years whereby a Commonwealth force has been
stationed in Malaysia and a large naval base has been operated out of Singapore,
these establishments have wi~ th the troops located at them been a stabilising and
moderating factor we believe in the affairs of the area, and I know that this view
is shared by the Government of Malaysia and certainly the Government of Singapore
and when we had our talks earlier in the year with Mr Healey we made this fact
sufficiently powerfully known to him to have some impact we believe on British
thinking and we welcomed the decision which was then made. We don't ask for
large forces to be there, but we think that you people in the United Kingdom underrate
your own influence and the character and strength which Britain still possesses
around large areas of the world. 17 
-7
Question I wonder-' whether the Prime Minister would be good enough to tell
us whether the future plans of Australia contemplate the early arrival of Asian
immigrants, particularly the country with which they now have trade worth
000, 000, 000 and the trade it is said is likely to increase.
Answer I am asked as to whether we contemplate an influx of Asian immigrants.
I do not. We do have in Australia at the present time a considerable influx of
Asian students to our schools and universities amounting to about 12, 000 or about
percent of our total university population and the figure is tending to grow. This
is one of the useful ways in which we are proving helpful to the people of Asia
and indeed if we were to say to those students that they were to remain on in
Australia when their courses were completed, I think the friendly relations
currently existing between Australia and the Governments of the area would
quickly be affected for the worse. They want the students back with them to help
them with their own problems. But I don't think It's generally realised that
attitudes in Australia are rather more liberal and sensitive on these questions
than is usually conceded to them.
I said, half jocularly when a question somewhat along these lines
was put to me as I was leaving Australia " Well. you know a country which has
just elected a Chiniaman to be Mayor of Darwn and a Japanese to be Shire
President of one of our Victorian Shires and has invited an American Negrq
Dean Dixon to run the Sydney Symphony Orchestra can't be too racist in its
general attitudes" and I don't know of any complaints of discrimination inside
Austa~ tlia, A.@ j. complaint of discrimination on racial grounds.
But the question of immigration on the large scale it is not as if
there hasn't been some history of these matters in the past. There were times
in Australian history in the past when the migrants came in as a result of
encouragement and it was because of the social and racial disturbances which then
followed that restraints had to be applied. There would be no answer to the
population problems of Asia to be found in our own country on a basis of Asian
migration and indeed if one talks to the political leaders of these countries I
think they recognise the value for them of a strong-growing homogeneous Australia
rather than one divided by a plethora of minority elements contributing to
national weakness. But in the administration of the policy, we do have room for humanity
and good sense. An Asian who marries an Australian takes up citizenship by
that fact alone. The children are of course Australian children and there is room
inside the policy for admission on a permanent basis of Asians who have some
special contribution to make to our national advancement.
Question Sir, can you see a future growing up in Australia as a buffer say
between Asia and the rest of the Western World?
Answer Well, I should hope we wouldn't have to regard ourselves as a buffer,
because I would trust that the relations between Asia and the rest of the Western
World will be cordial and co-operative. Certainly that will be so of the kind of
Asian countries with which we are associated in the Aspac Group.
Australia is not a large country in terms of population although we
are large in area and I believe large in potential. But we don't claim the
capacities of a major power to the extent that a national capacity for friendliness
and a well-developed spirit of mateship can contribute in our discussions in Asia
to better relations in Asia and other parts of the world well that will be freely
forthcoming. Question Is it true there is growing opposition in Australia Sir to your
Rhodesian Policy? 
-8
Answer I amceRtinjy-not. consctous of it if there is. I don't think Australians
have followed with anything like the same detail developments in Rhodesia as they
have, for example in Vietnam which is an issue of very much more direct concern'
to us and to our security as it is seen from there at any rate. But there has been
in Australia as a carry -over of a comradeship in arms of two world wars and
the admiration for the early settlement under difficult conditions in that part of
the world of British settlers in particular a friendliness and a sympathy which
does affect the public attitude to this particular question. That has not~ however,
prevented either the Government, the Parliament and the people from supporting
the policies we have pursued of maintaining sanctions against the present
Administration. Question What will be the future of the Commonwealth if all the African
countries walk out of the Commonwealth?
Answer Well? Hope that's a question we don't have to answer.
I would certainly have hoped that there is sufficient responsibility
and tolerance and recognition of the quite serious and damaging effect it would
have around the world for us to avoid any action of that kind. However it is
a question which events will answer before all of us are very much older.
4 1 b 



FEDERAL COUNCIL OF THE LIBERAL PARTY
OF AUSTRALIA
Held at the Hotel Canberra, Canberra, ACT 1CFPH OCTOB3ER., 1966
Mr. President and Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It's a matter of very great pride, I assure -you, Mr. President,
to have this privilege of addressing Council for the first time as Prime
Minister. My association with the Liberal Party, of course, goes back to
its formation. It has been a matter of continuing regret for me that I can't
claim to have been one of the founding fathers who met at Albury on that
historic occasion, but I think I can justly claim to have been the first Member
of Parliament to have risen to his feet at a public gathering and declared
himself a supporter of the new party. And so my association goes back to the
formation of the Liberal Party, and it is not inappropriate that having had, I
think, seven years as de facto Chairman of the Policy Committee, entrusted
to that task by m y former distinguished predecessor, I should have had this
closest of associations with liberalism from the outset.
Indeed, I really begin to think about my advancing years when I
recall that I am the only -member of the Liberal section of the Cabinet to have
been in the Cabinet at the time of its formation in 1949, and to have been in
the Parliament, of course, for many years before that. Perhaps it makes one
a better Liberal to have been active in the Parliament in the days when
there were no Liberals with a capital and very few with a small
certainly on our side of politics, at any rate.
I see it as a matter of pride, Mr. President, because one could
hardly conceive an organisatlon which more effectively allowed a government
and a party to express itself in terms of its political policies and aspirations.
If you were to be looking around the world for a model of the relationship
which should exist between a parliamentary party and an organisation which
had developed to support the principles of that party and to assist with its
policy, thenl know of no better model that I could recommend than the Liberal
Party of Australia. Here we have been able to build on experience which the founders
of the party possessed. We have the greatest asset of all, perhaps, in a
philosophy of liberty, of freedom, of personal initiative, of free enterprise
and I say this is a priceless asset because if one is faced with a difficult
problem in the political sphere, if you ca n turn to the principles and
philosophy of liberalism, then that particular problem becomes so much the
easier to resolve. It's a great advantage we possess over our political
opponents. They have no policy, no philosophy for the modern, growing,
expanding, exciting enterprising Australia of these times. They have a
musty, doctrinaire, obsolete policy of which they seem to be thoroughly
ashamed at election time.
I recall that in recent elections, Mr. Calwell has undertaken
that the policy won't be resorted to for at least three years. How can one
subscribe wholeheartedly to a political policy and programme if you are not
prepared to go out and fight wholeheartedly for the philosophy and policies
of your own party. But that is where the AustralianLabor Party stands today,
as I hope to exemplify to you in one or two instances as I go along. It seems
to be suffering from a sort of schizophrenia. It starts off with an attitude / 2 
-2
and refuses to follow through the logical consequences of the attitude it has
adopted. I have just put that in the broad at this stage. I shall hope to
illustrate it for you as I go along, but it would be well if outside this
particular room and far beyond, the delegates and branches from which they
come, and the State Divisions from which they come, if there were a
realisation throughout Australia that here you have in the Liberal Party, a
parliamentary party working in the closest and warmest, friendliest
of co-operation with its political organisation. It is a live and vital political
organisatiori, able to assist us in our policy determinations by the very
effective work of our joint policy committee of whom half the members are
drawn from the Parliamentary party, and others from the State Divisions and
assisted by the policy discussion of our annual council meetings.
What a contrast:. Here, no attempt to dictate to those who
have been elected by the people to serve them in the Parliament, but a
partnership in which there is discussion, there is persuasion, there is
co-operation, but never at any point in the history of the party has there been
attempt at dictation to those whom the people have elected. We have always
recognised inside this Liberal Party that the final responsibility must rest
with the parliamentary party and in those States where we have the
opportunity to govern at this time, the responsibility with that government,
assisted but not compelled by the organisation of which we form a part. There
is nothing faceless about you, Sir ( turuing to the President) nor those around
us. I was just going to make the comment that there are some rather
distinguished, certainly handsome faces to be found around the room, and I
would want for no better manifesto than to have a series of photographs of
those wvho comprise the advisers to the Liberal Party through its organisation
and those who for themselves claim the right to tell the parliamentarians In
the Labor Party just what their policy should be and how they should vote.
One of the encouraging things about the Liberal Party of these
days is the forward-looking character of its policies and of its membership.
It is not surprising, although certainly this hasn't been the historical
experience of the past, that a younger generation of Australians is turning to
the Liberal Party rather than the traditional turning to the left of a younger
generation. I had an interesting confirmation of this, rather indirectly, in
a document which reached me from the Students' Representative Council of
Victoria following a referendum conducted on the issue of National Service.
Now, not surprisingly, there wasn't a large university percentage vote for
National Service. I am a former university student myself, with a fair idea
of how I would have noted In f act, the particular scheme of National Service
which operated in my time was no more popular than that which operates at
the present time. I will have something to say on National Service before I
conclude. But the point which intrigued me in this document was that
they analysed the voting attitudes and then related them to the political
outlook of the students concerned. They gave the precise figures. Those
who supported the Liberal or Liberal and Country Party totalled 1, 179.
Those who supported the Australian Labor Party 671. Those who supported
the Democratic Labor Party 221; the Communist Party 20 I was glad to see;
undecided 501. But it was rather revealing that, despite the unpopularity
with them of National Service, there were still 1, 179 of them prepared to
vote for the Liberal Party as against 671 for the Australian Labor Party.
When you throw in the Democratic Labor Party, which on these issues of
Viet Nam and National Service strongly support the Government policies, you
will see that the combined vote just about doubles the vote for the ALP and
this from the younger, intelligent area of the Australian community as
reflected in these particular educational institutions. I thought it was
certainly informative and encouraging. / 3 
-3
I want now to say a word or two about National Service.
In the address I give you tonight it would not be practicable to cover the
many issues we will be discussing in the course of the election campaign.
So I have selected a few which are highly controversial and on which we have
a clear view and attitude ourselves, and I hope we can rely upon your staunch
support on. these as we move into the campaign.
But let me say a word or two about National Service.
Perhaps I should preface it by saying that one of the features of our political
experience at this time is that we have to learn to live with our geography.
In my early days in Parliament, our attention was concentrated on the
British Isles and the countries of Western Europe. To a much lesser degree
the United States of America came into the picture. But for most of us in
those earlier years the countries to the north of Australia represented some
rather picturesque stamps in an album without very much else beigg known
about them. They just didn't enter into the scheme of things. Our trade with
them was small, our contacts with them quite minor. Those who could
afford the price of a journey overseas spoke of going " home", by which they
meant the British Isles, and two or three weeks on the " Gontinong" that was
about all their ambitions ran to. If you could come back with a suitcase
absolutely covered with labels of all the fancy hotels you had stayed at that
was a memorable phase in a lifetime.
But we have become increasingly conscious over recent
years and made very conscious of it at the time of Pearl Harbour that
destiny had placed Australia in a world very different and alien to the kind
of world we formerly lived in. We were a European projection into the
Southern Hemisphere, but it became obvious that we had to begin pretty
smartly to think of ourselves as geographically, at any rate, part of the
Asian scene. This now presents to us some of the most exciting and
promising potentialities for the future of this country. One has only to study
what has happened in the way of trade over recent years. The nominal
trade we had with Japan in the years following the war, even in the early
1950' s, was not great. Today it is more than four and a half times what
it was in the early 1950' s yet both we and the JApanese believ e that we are
really still living on the threshold of the trade experience that will develop
between our countries. Australia is a great supplier of foodstuffs, raw
materials, and yet with a manufacturing capacity which, on some items, will
enable us to compete in the markets of the world.
In the motoring industry, the products of General Motors and
other companies have been successfully sold around the world in competition
with those produced by countries with a longer experience in this field than
ourselves. If we can hang on to our price levels and our costs, then although
as far ahead as any of us can see we will be relying upon our primary industries
for the major part of our export income, we can still conduct ourselves in a
manner to be competitive on some of our manufactured items.
But speaking of our place in the geography of Asia, part of
the background may be seen In respect of what we have done in Viet Nam and
about the National Service Scheme which has become associated with it.
Why are we in Viet Nam? We are not there because we are trailing along
at the coat-tails of the United States of America. Three Presidents of the
United States, one after the other, have decided that it is of importance' that
their country should be giving assistance in the struggle in Viet Nam. I have
said before and I say it again, that when President Johnson succeeded the late
President Kennedy, the greatest concern I felt as an Australian Minister in
the national Government was that under this new Administration, the
Americans might decide that they were going to pull out of the struggle in
Viet Nam because, in my thinking, Australia's security is far more
directly involved than that of the United States itself. The United States .* 9/ 4 
-4
wants to see the kind of world in which aggression does not pay off; but for
Australia, looking at the long-term consequences of successful communist
penetration into South Viet Nam, there could be no security for as far ahead
as we can see. It would have been a disaster of the first magnitude if it had
occurred. So I hope that when we have the privilege of welcoming the present
leader of the American people it will not be out of our minds that his own firm
resolution and determination and clear -sightedness have kept the Americans in
Viet Nam and now looks like carrying the allied forces and the South Vietnamese
people either to a victory or a position of strength in which negotiations can
be carried out for the benefit of the people of South Viet Nam and for the
greater security of Asia as a whole.
I stress this because first of all there is a disposition to think
that this was all President Johnson's idea. But he is the third President in
a row to have felt this way about South Viet Nam. In the same way, some
people think it is my bright idea to have troops in South Viet Nam. Well, my
distinguished predecessor had no doubts in his mind as to the course Australia
should follow; nor did his Cabinet; nor do my supporters. I don't know any
item of policy on which I could claim that the two Government parties are more
firmly united than they are on the issues both of our presence in South Viet
Nam and the National Service component which we -have found it necessary to
Introduce into the regular military forces of this country.
We take up unflinchingly the challenge which Mr. Galwell
repeatedly throws down to us that the main issues of this forthcoming election
are to be the Government's policy in South Viet Nam, our presence there, and
the introduction of National Service with some of our national servicemen
forming part of regular units taking their place in Viet Nam. This particular
policy of National Service was adopted after the Government had taken the
decision to build up the strength of the Regular Army. The current goal is
000 or thereabouts. It was taken after repeated efforts had been made to
recruit volunteers up to the number desired. But with well-paid jobs plentiful
in Australia, the response was quite inadequate when the Army's high
rejection rate was taken into account. I don't complain myself about the high
rejection rate the Army maintains. There is a very good reason for insisting
on a high standard. Australia, which can ill-afford any extravagance in the
use of its manpower, needs a highly efficient, mobile, well-equipped regular
force capable of being placed to the best national advantage. And it must be
stressed because the implications of this . never seem to enter the skulls
of our political opponie nts that National Servicemen are integrated into
units of the Regular Army.
Now just view this against the Labor Party policy, which Mr.
Cal~ vell and his supporters proclaim, of withdrawing National Servicemen
immediately from Viet Nam and then bringing back the remainder later,
after we have had discussions with our allies. I would like to be a fly on
the wall while the discussions with our allies take place, We might need an
interpreter there to sort out what some of them are saying. But I think the
Americans could express themselves in pretty blunt terms.
There is a sort of schizophrenia about the Labor Party and its
policy attitudes, because I don't think they can be oblivious to the importance
to Australia's security of resisting communist aggression, yet they seem to
be quite unmindful of the consequences to Australia's treaty arrangements if
this sort of policy was pursued. The truncated units would be incapable of
performing effectively. Those that remained behind would be, for most
practical purposes, out of action until units could be reformed, presumably with
reinforcements of regular volunteers to be sent from Australia. Australia
would play a quite inglorious role as this adjustment went on. While our
allies were doing the j ob of resisting aggression and helping to clear the
* 0 111/ 5 
Viet Cong and the Ncrth Vietniamese-out of-areas-of South Viet Nam as
their military successes developed, there presumably would be Australian
units, truncated to a substantial degree, just sitting there and waiting for
some rebuild in their strength. But why rebuild them in strength if you
are going to hold discussions with your allies about taking them out at the
first available opportunity.
This seems almost incredible in a country whose shield is the
strength of ANZUS and when the strength of ANZUS is the strength of the
United States of America. No-one has any doubt in their minds about that.
But it is almost incredible that this one sure source of our strength should
be so recklessly destroyed by a Labor Party incapable of seeing Australia's
interest in straightforward and direct terms. Can we ever imagine an
alliance with the United States would be the same again if Australia, a party
to ANZUS and SEATO, behaved in this fashion? Yet this is the Labor Party
of today. It is c o chance event that they should adopt this kind of attitude
to National Service. They were only able by the narrowest of margins to
muster minimal approval for the North-West Cape station, and even then on
terms which, had they been in government, I am sure the United States
would have found unacceptable.
There is another interesting matter to which I would direct
your attention. It arose out of the action of Mr. Sam Benson, the Member
for Batman, in accepting his expulsion from the Labor Party because of
his membership of the Defence Action Committee. He made a most
interesting revelation which resolved what had been something of a mystery
in my own thinking. That was the occasion of the invitation to a delegation
of six Labor men to visit Singapore, an invitation issued by the Premier of
Singapore, Mr. Lee Kuan Yew.
He had been down here as a guest of the government a short
time before, and frankly, it had seemed a little odd at the time that he should
issue an invitation to half a dozen members of the Labor Party to go and
visit Singapore. But Mr. Benson has now given us the reason, and he says
that they were invited because Mr. Lee wanted to tell them how disturbed
he was by the attitude of the Labor Party to Viet Nam, because, ladies and
gentlemen, don't imagine we are the only people who are concerned about
the treatyin Viet Nam.
If you read the statements of the spokesmen of such countries
as Thailand, the Philippines, or the countries on the periphery of Asia and
Malaysia also you will find there a general concern and acceptance of the
threat which is posed to them. What for some people may be a rather
academic " domino" theory of one country going after the other is regarded
as very far from academic in the eyes of the leaders of the countries I
have just mentioned. And Mr. Lee and I am quoting Mr. Benson's version now, not
my own got them there to tell them how concerned Singapore was that if
Viet Nam fell, Singapore would feel gravely threatened. They were expected
to pass this information on to their colleagues in order that there might be
a more realistic appreciation of the threat to this area of the world.
Accordi ng to Mr. Benson, he did discuss this matter with his own branches,
but, again according to him, as far as he was aware, no other member of
that delegation did so, nor have they uttered anything publicly since then
which would have conveyed any inkling that this was the story put to them in
Singapore. / 6 
-6
I think they had a responsibility, if that story was put to them
in Singapore, to make it known, whether they approved of it or not. At
least it was a contribution to the discussion the store of knowledge we had
in relation to this area.
Now some people find National Service according to their
description of it as immoral or undemocratic. But have they studied
anything of history? If they have, they would appreciate that it is of the
essence of democracy that people should give service to their own country'
when the need arises. Several of the most solidly-established democracies in
the world have maintained their own systems of National Service, including
the United Kingdom, the United States, Italy, Greece, France, the Netherlands,
just a few of the countries that one could mention.
I want to say a word or two about our decision to include aliens
in the National Service scheme. This was only taken after a good deal of
thought and considerable diplomatic discussion with their representatives
here and in their own countries. But what must be remembered and I
think this distinguishes the Australian position from that of most other
countries is that the immigration programme has brought hundreds of
thousands of settlers from foreign countries to Australia. There are, for
example, in Australia approximately 270, 000 people of Italian origin,
130, 000 of Greek origin and more than 11,30, 000 from the Netherlands.
Surely it is not unreasonable that the quite limited number of nationals from
these countries who would be called up for National Service should make a
contribution to the security of a nation which has provided new opportunities
and a prospering existence for so many tens of thousands of their fellow
nationals. Or is it expected that the &amp; fence of this half million people I
have just referred to should be solely the responsibility of native-born
Australians? It must not be overlooked that for those who feel so strongly
about National Service and wish to avoid it, there is the option of joining
the Citizen Military Forces, provided that they enlist in the CMF before
the ballot inducting them into National Service is held. Aliens have the same
option to join the GMF. They have even longer to make up their minds
because they have to be two years in the country or aged 21 before they
become subject to the call-up. In the last extremity, any alien who feels
so strongly about this that he would prefer to leave the country before being
called up is permitted to do so.
Now let me just say something about the economy. This is always
a matter of interest to governments and to the individual citizen. The
Australian economy, throughout our period of office, has been pointed
firmly in the direction of development and rapid. national growth. Indeed,
we point to the greatest era in Australian development which has occurred
since the Liberal Country Party coalition came Into office at the end of
1949, and it is our determina tion that this national expansion shall continue.
It has been affected in its pace in recent times, first by the factor of defence
and secondly by the incidence of drought on a severe scale in New South
Wales and Queensland. Defence has been a major preoccupation of the
GJvernment for the past three years. We have had to cope with the challenge
presented by Indonesian confrontation of Malaysia and communis t aggression
in Viet Nam. We have certain responsibilities, not only in relation to our
home defence but for the security of Papua and New Guinea. Confrontation
has receded, but the struggle in Viet Nam still goes on. We have never
allowed this preoccupation with defence to diminish our interest in the
condition and progress of the economy, or to weaken our determination to
push on with expansion in its manifold aspects. / 7 
-7
I would like to remind you that Australia's attempts at
national growth have met with serious obstructions, particularly in the
course of this century. It is worth reflecting on this because the United
States of America declared its independence in 1776, just twelve years
before the founding of the first settlement in Australia. At that time, the
population of the United States was less than 4 million people. Today it
is over 190 million people. We are still hoping to reach the 12 million
mark. The major factors which held back Australian progress were the
two world wars and the depression of the 1930' s. This little country,
as it then was of less than 7 million people, sustained half a million
casualties in two world wars. We lost more people killed in the first world
war than the United States. This must never happen again while we can do
anything to avoid such a national catastrophe.
The policy which the Government has been pursuing, the
programme of National Service and the build-up of regular armed forces,
are the things which can do more to save a needless loss of Australian
lives than simply relying on a response In times of emergency of volunteers
to meet a critical situation.
' Th is is not a Government of warmongers. It is not a Government
which is unmindful or regardless of young Australian lives or young
Australian opportunities. We are here to conserve these things, but to
conserve them by policies which ensure that Australia will be able to play
an honourable and effective part in the security of the general area in which
we live, but which will not be looked to to pour In hundreds of thousands of
relatively untrained young Australian manhood should some critical
situation develop there. Have this in your minds as the critics turn on the
scheme which we have developed. Ask them what is their alternative.
What is the Labor Party's alternative to the schemes that we have for the
defence of this country? I have heard Mr. Calwell talk about the fresh-faced
boys that are brought in under the National Service Scheme. Does he
realise how many of the volunteers were younger and are younger than the
men we are bringing in under the National Service Scheme? What is
their policy on these matters? I invite you to say, " I have listened to them
closely and I have no clear mind as to where the Labor Party stands" Nor
do they, because each member seems to have a different interpretation and
a different view of what Labor is proposing to do.
Now we have had a quite acute economic problem of diverting
resources on a considerable scale for defence purposes without interrupting
the strong even flow of economic growth. I believe that we can claim that
we have made this adjustment with skill. I pay a tribute, as I am sure
my colleague the Treasurer would, to the splendid advisers we have in
the Treasury of this country, men who are honoured throughout the
financial world all around the world. We have been able, therefore, to
conrbine development and national growth with a stability which has provided
us with some of the soundest foundations of any economy to be found around
the world. The economy has taken on board a really big defence effort.
Expenditure this year estimated at 000 million is more than double that
of 1.962/ 63. This has been done without seriously retarding essential
growth and without producing a selous inflation. Our current stability
reflects the strength, the resilience and adaptability of an economic
structure which rests on firmer foundations than have e ver before existed.
Our external position remains strong and with the favourable
seasonal trend, we should have a big export income. In the years ahead,
the development efforts which have been put into mineral, beef and other
primary production should be coming in in support of an enlar ged export
s / 8 
8-
income.. Discoveries of oil and gas should also relieve to some degree
our dependence on imports. While we appreciate the capabilities of our
economy, we should never underrate the difficulties of bringing great
developments to pass and keeping growth going steadily and strongly up
to the full physical limits of our usable resources. This is a task which
calls for intelligent foresight, careful forecasting and intensive day to day
studies of the immediate trend of things. We know very well how quickly,
and at times dramatically, a promising situation can take a turn for the
worse. As the year proceeds, the economy should feel the effect of the
higher average weekly earnings now being received and the stimulus of
demand from higher farm incomes.
The employment situation has held well. We watch this closely,
of course, at all times since we have the responsibility not merely of keeping
an existing work force fully employed but adding to their number year by
year as the new army of school-leavers becomes available and the Immigration
programme adds its massive contribution. This year, the potential
increase has been reckoned at 120, 000 which will require a rise of about
3 -per cent. in our civil employment for the year. To cover an increase
of that magnitude there -has to be, among other things, a substantial
increase in manufacturing employment, and for that reason In particular,
we have been keeping a close watch on the trend of consumer spending
which is the largest determinant of activity in the manufacturing sector.
Recent figures of building approvals suggest that dwelling
construction is going along extremely well. It is worth noting that approvals
for other forms of building showed a sharp dip earlier this year, ran at
quite high level for some months thereafter; they showed some fall in
August and the latest figures are again promising.
Our holdings of gold and exchange are over 200 million and
we have behind them untouched drawing rights with the International
Monetary Fund to the order of $ 600 million. In such basic respects as
these, there are good grounds for confidence in the general trend of the
economy. Difficulties can, of course, arise. Such as, for example, the
sugar industry which has been affected at the present time by the disastrously
low price for sugar on world markets.
The motor car industry is passing through a difficult phase, and
these situations have to be closely watched and where necessary, met as
they occur, just as we met the drought situation through last year. If at
any time we judge the general position of the economy to be slower than
is desirable, we will not hesitate to take expansive measures adequate to
meet the needs of that situation.
Now the final thing I want to mention, and I wil I do so much more
briefly than the subject deserves, is the contrast in attitude between our own
Government, with its view of an expanding Australia, and that of our
Opposition on the subject of overseas investment. Again this schizophrenia
shows up because the Labor Party is wholeheartedly behind the immigration
programme they are all for importing people but they refuse, apparently,
to accept the consequences. If you import people, if you are to give them
employment as well as to sustain the pace of your own economy, then you
must also import capital, and I for one am not afraid of the consequences
of importing capital. On the contrary, I am quite convinced that apart
from its economic benefits, it adds to the security of this country. If tiere
is 000 million of investment from the United Kingdom or from the United
States, as the figures roughly suggest at this time, then there are thousands
of dollars of good reasons why they liave a pretty strong interest in the / 9 
9-
welfare and security of Australia. This country can't hope to defend itself
in the area in which we find ourselves with 100 million restless, turbulent
people just above us in Indonesia and all the ferment and yeasting that is
going on in Asia at this time, simply of our own resources. If me attempted
to do so, you could put up the shutters on a deveic pment programme for
this country. And here we are building great industries, new skills, new
techniques, opening up avenues of employment for our people, opening up
sources of revenue for the Commonwealth Government which it in turn can
devote either to the assistance of the States or the welfare of the Australian
people in defence, social services, or any one of a multitude of avenues to
which our f inances can be usefully directed. We are told there must be an
Australian equity and I like to see Australians putting their savings into
these ventures where they can. We are not a thriftless people. There is
only one country in the world which applies a higher percentage of its gross
national income to capital investment than Australia and that is Japan. We
invest 27 per cent. of ours, against 17 per cent. in the United States and
per cent. in the United Kingdom. Ninety per cent, of our investment is from
an Australian source. That extra 10 per cent, is what helps to make us grow
at a more rapid pace than we could contrive for ourselves. And If these
industries prosper, then we take a large Australian equity from them in the
form of 42-2 per cent, of their profits, and if they want to remit dividends
overseas, 15 per cent. of tax on those remitted dividends.
All around Australia you can see the evidence of the growth this
hhaavs eb rao duigrhetc tu sA, utshter anlieawn oepqpuoitryt unini tiGese nietr ahla sM bortoourgs h-Ht ousld. enT'sr, u eb, utw we ed ognet't 42-2
per cent of their profits, and they have, over recent years, exported overseas
to a greater value than the remittances they send overseas, so there has been
no suffering to our external balances.
Look at the transformation David Brand will tell you about it
occurring in his State with the great investment there in mineral development
which will help to build an Australian export Income in the years ahead.
We are lucky that most of this investment is coming to us from big countries
with which our people readily assimilate, and the executives from those
countries who come out here readily assimilate in Australia. If any of my
State colleagues have had an experience of being pushed around by any of
these people, I would like to hear of it from them. I never have, and I don't
believe that they have. The capital, once it comes here, almost wli-hout
exception, beds down and adjusts itself to Australian policy, Australian
philosophy and helps to serve the Australian people.
Well, I have mentioned these things, ladies and gentlemen,
becaus~ e they are in the realm of public discussion at this time. I have only
sketched some of the answers to them. But my final word to you Is that this
great Liberal Party has a tremendous and continuing national responsibility.
Nobody in his senses, looking at Labor In disarray, with a team I ncapable
of giving Australia the government it needs in these times, could imagine
Labor in office for years to come. We havc. had the responsibility ofleading
Australia through these new, enterprising, adventurous years of the
post-war period when a new chapter has openecd in the history of this country
and that chapter is by no means concluded. There is a new era of change
which we have to recognise, the explosive, difficult, delicate issue of raceto
which we have to adjust ourselves, live with -n this area of the world, both
as members of an Asian region and as members of a Commonwealth of nations
in which these days there are only four of the old members left, out of a
total of 23 to be expanded to 26 in a few months' time. We have to tread 
lCour
way carefully, delicately, but at the same time when occasion demands it,
firmly, in this kind of company. Now, can anybody conceive that the Labor
Party, as at present constituted, can do that task for Australia? Of course
not, and so the responsibility rests with us and rests in particular with the
Liberal Party to give the leadership that the nation requires. Each and every
one of us, whether we are members of the Parliamentary party, whether in
the organisation itself, whether we come from a State Division on its executive
or from one of its branches, has a contribution to make, not only to the
Liberal Party but through the Liberal Party to the welfare and security of
Australia. A n d it is because I believe that most fervently I am proud to
have the honour of your Parliamentary leadership, and I hope in that leadership
that you and I and my own team together will write new chapters of
Australian history of which succeeding generations of Australians will be
fully proud. 



PRESIDENT JOHNSON'S VISIT TO AUSTRALIA 1966
Hol tFaIifba. mx Airport, Canberra, A. C. T. OCTOBER, 1966
Mr. President and Mrs. Johnson, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Well, it has really happened! We have been waiting for a long
time for the President to come to visit us. We have been hoping that he
would come to visit us and now, as a product of this great conference which
is to be held in Manila, we have him here in Australia with us.
Mr. President, this is not only a notable visit. It is an historic
visit because you are the first President in his period of office ever to visit
this country indeed the only one and it is historic because you are on your
way to what we believe will be a conference directed to our hopes of peace and
a better future and, we believe, fruitful in the results that it will produce.
Although the air of Canberra is chill and brisk, as it so often
is, our welcome is warm and tremendously sincere, and you will find that
warmth of welcome wherever you move around Australia or wherever
Australians are to be found. Those unfortunate enou~ gh to be unable to see
you in the cities, will follow your movements with close interest and attention
as you move into the cities of Australia and on your journey north.
It is, of course, not surprising that there should be a warm
welcome in Australia for an American President, because indeed there is a
welcome In Australia for any of the citizens of your great country. We
Australians have always found it easy to be on terms of close friendship with
you. We have reason to appreciate what the United States has meant to this
country, and in our time of greatest peril we recall with gratitude the
contribution you -made to the security of this nation. And so the American
people stand warm and high in the hearts of the Australian people.
But we welcome you not merely as the leader of this great people,
Indeed the leader of the free world in these difficult times, but we welcome
you and Mrs. Johnson as two warm likeable human be-ings whom we have come
to admire and respect, and I am sure that as we in Australia get to know you
better as we hope to do in these days of your visit, there will be established
between you and the Australian people a lingering bond of affection which will
persist down through the years.
Now, Sir, I am not proposing to offer you on this occasion a
spate of Parliamentary oratory. You will be subjected to quite a barrage when
you lunch with us tomorrow. But I do want you and Mrs. Johnson to know,
and through you, the American people, whose friendship we value so much,
that this visit has been welcomed tremendously by the people of Australia.
We hope that you will find in the visit interest and enjoyment with us, and you
will go away feeling not only a better knowledge and even deeper appreciation
of the Australian people and what they mean, but that you will treasure through
your lives the memories of this, the first Presidential visit to this country.
Finally, there is the circumstance that you, Mr. President in
your period of office have revealed a close and deep awareness of the problems
of Asia, and in particular of South-East Asia, and this is something which we
appreciate tremendously. We think it means much for the peace and progress
of the world as a whole, and your positive contributions to the aspirations you
hold could be a landmark in the history of the world. We wish you well, and
success in the endeavours you will bring to these great objectives.
Mr. President and Mrs. Johnson Welcome to Australia: 



PRESIDENT JOHNSON'S VISIT TO AUSTRALIA 1966-
LUNCHEON AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt 21ST OCTOBER, 1966
Mr. President and Mrs. Johnson, Honourable Premiers, Ministerial
Colleagues, Your Excellencies, Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies and
Gentlemen Yesterday I was privileged to express on behalf of the
Government and people of Australia a warm welcome to our distinguished
visitors, the President and Mrs. Johnson. Today we bring to that welcome
the National Parliament of Australia and those distinguished guests who are
here with us. And joining together in expressing that welcome are the
Leaders of the three principal parties represented in the Parliament.
Government and Opposition may differ on many things but
this is one of those occasions, too rare perhaps, but welcome when it comes,
when we can unite in harmonious agreement as to the subject of our discussion.
You will find, Mr. President, as you travel throughout Australia that the
warmth of welcome I have expressed is echoed and reaffirmed wherever you
travel in this country. The first visit of an American President to Australia could not
fail to be an auspicious occasion, a distinctive occasion, and also a happy
occasion. A happy occasion because our two countries have enjoyed a close
friendship for many years, a friendship which radiates throughout both our
communities as I have discovered wherever I have travelled in your own.
Arid I know that Americans coming either as visitors or to stay in Australia
for short or long periods find themselves quickly on a wavelength with us
and speak in warm and even affectionate terms about us, and this is as it
should be. And it is not surprising that this should be so because we are
inheritors in common of so much, as I am sure you will agree, Mr. President.
Eve n in the words of the grace which I uttered earlier this
afternoon, you get an expression of our common devotion to liberty, to freedom,
to independence in our own communities and an urge to help others obtain and
secure and maintain the independence to which they aspire.
We have a common language. We don't always speak it in
the same manner, but the differences that are discoverable between us, I
think are less than some of the differences we discover in our own community.
We are just saying farewell, Sir, here to one Member of the Parliament who
didn't speak very often. It was said he didn't do so because he required an
interpreter when he did. He is a Scotsman'. But he proved the other night
when we had a farewell function to our retiring Parliamentarians that when he
needed to speak, he could speak to very great effect indeed and was very
clearly understood by all.
And this is so of the American people. I don't know how hard
they find it to follow the Australian accent, as we perpetrate it from time to
time, but we get the message from you when we hear your compatriots in
their speech to us. And what a wonderful tradition it is and inheritance it is
to have this common language, we together admiring the language of
Shakespeare and together able to absorb something of the wisdom of a
Benjamin Franklin, a Jefferson or the stirring sentiments and philosophic
depth of an Abraham Lincoln. This is part of our common heritage. ./ 2 
-2
You and we have drawn heavily upon the p olitical experience of the Mother
of Parliaments at Westminster. Our Parliament more closely resembles it
than does yours. The founders of your Constitution were troubled by the
danger that too much power might reside in one area of government and so by
a process of checks and balances you set out to try to balance executive with
judiciary and with Parliament, but in the result, such is the pressure of
modern circumstance, you have produced in the United States the most
powerful executive in the history of mankind.
And you, Sir, have that awesome responsibility in the world of today.
Sometimes, no doubt, a lonely responsibility, but at all times a responsibility
which weighs heavily upon you. Those of us who have watched and come to
admire your tenure of the office of President have realised with what earnestness,
with what sentiment and feeling and intensity you concern yourself
with the problems of your office. We have marvelled at your skill in
achieving through the Parliament of your own country, although you don't
have the direct com mand of it that a Prime Minister with an assured majority
can exercise in the United Kingdom or in this country, but despite that
difficulty you have succeeded in having adopted by the United S13tates Congress,
I think a higher proportion of bills that you have proposed to the Congress
than any President before you in history. That is a remarkable achievement
in itself. But we are not merely friends, we are allies as well. You are the
powerful ally, we are a staunch ally, I hope at all times. And we in
Australia have a full recognition that the security of this country depends
tremendously upon our treaty arrangements with you under ANZUS and under
SEATO. If I may say so, Mr. President, it is under our ANZUS arrange
ments we feel our greatest security lies, and Australia has not forgotten
those anxious periods in the second world war when we ye re closer to invasion
by an enemy than ever before in our history, and the Battle of the Coral Sea
was fought which was the foundation of our subsequent safety and security,
and this then led on to the great campaign under your distinguished General
Douglas MacArthur. This diningroomn of ours has honoured many distinguished visitors
monarchs, statesmen, soldiers but this occasion marks one of the most
distinguished and notable in the whole history of the Australian Parliament.
For us, Sir, this is an occasion in which we honour you and we honour that
wonderful woman who has been such a helpmate to you throughout your long
political career. Mrs. Johnson is welcomed in herself. This tour will be
a great success not merely by virtue of the high office you enjoy but because
Australia will like you and does like you both as very human and lovable
people. You, Mr. President, don't want to go down in history as a warrior
President I think I can say that from the knowledge that I have gained of
you since we first came in touch with each other. You were kind enough,
from the time I took office to assure me that you wished the close and
intimate contact that had been developed between my predecessor and
yourself to continue. I am glad to say that I was also accorded this privilege
by the Prime Minister of Great Britain. Then there have been our personal
meetings. And I have learned through these things that you have an
aspiration which is not a military aspiration, not that of a warrior. You
bring to mind what I remember being taught in my schooldays that "' peace
hath her victories lio less renowned than that of war". You are devoting
yourself to great victories of peace for the future. You have an aspiration / 3 
3-
for a great society in your own country, you have an aspiration for a better
world order in other parts of the world for security for peoples, their
independence. -You want to see their standards of life improve, their
life expectancy improve, hope to dispel the despair that has afflicted
countless millions of the world's population down through the ages. This
has brought you to study the Asian scene where more than half of humanity
resides and which will grow in population even more rapidly than the
remainder of the world. You know there is a short life expectancy, a low
per capita income and you feel with all the power that flows from a country,
which in a relatively short time counted in human history has built up
so enormously its economic strength and power, that you can bring that
strength and power, the techniques you have developed and often pioneered
to the assistance of a needy world.
And we in Australia feel that in Asia at any rate there is a part
for us to play with you as well, and you have encouraged us in that belief.
Now, we are going together to the conference in Manila and we are
striving there to restore peace to a troubled area of the world and we are
striving there also to lay the foundations of that better world to which you
aspire. There is much that an Australian cculd myon such an occasion its
tWe, but we want to hear from you, not the three Australian political
leaders, and I have certainly spoken as long as I should on these matters.
But I have wanted to bring home to you that there is admiration and affection
for you in this country, both as the representative of a friendly country with
whom our destiny has been bound through many conflicts df war -Dd tiany
tasks of peace. We see our destinies being linked together for as long as
our two countries survive and we see importance in the strength of
friendship and the closeness of our alliance.
Because you are so forcefully devoted to these great objectives
we welcome you and we honour you.
And now I ask my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister, if he
will join me and support me in the toast which I propose to offer and I shall
then invite the Leader of Her Majesty's Opposition to join also in conveying
a warmth of welcome to our distinguished guests. 



CITIZENS' DINNER
MELBOURNE
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
3RD NOVEMBER, 1966
Mr. Chairman, My Lord Mayor, Mr. Perrett, Organizing Genius Noel
Curphey, Distinguished Gentlemen I don't say " Guests" because I'm
not too sure about that
I suspect you've been mulcted as most of us have this sporting
week here in Melbourne. But thank you very warmly indeed for the way in
which you have not only greeted the toast, and if I may, Mr. Perrett, I
would like to say how much I thank you for your generous words and for
this scroll which I shall cherish as long as I shall live and which I believe
will be carried around as a reference for such employment as they may
need by the members of my family.
I am particularly appreciative of what you have had to say about
that remarkable woman, my wife. It is not generally known that her second
name is Kate not Kate for short, but Kate for long. And Kate is the
daughter of a Scots -born McDonald. So if I can't become a Knight of the
Thistle, at least I am keeping close to the Scots! She also happens to be
so we believe on her paternal side, a direct descendant of Charles Dickens,
and I only wish she had taken time off to write a speech for me tonight as
appropriate as that that Mr. Perrett has just employed. But having read
this rather lyrically-expressed description in the menu and having heard
that warm-hearted and somewhat ebullient tribute from Mr. Perrett, I feel
a bit like the company that has decided it hasn't quite lived up to its
prospectus. At least while the words are still in the prospectus it feels it
has got to keep on trying and declare a useful dividend sometime. Well
that is what I am hoping to do for this wonderful country which it is my
great honour and pride to lead as Prime Minister at this time.
A very great man in my judgment at any rate who served us
magnificently as Governor-General, wrote to me some little time ago on
a matter which had interested him, and he concluded what he had to say in
his letter to me with the sentence: " What a fascinating time to be Prime
Minister of Australia! And surely there is not one of you around this
room who wouldifr echo that sentence. There may be all the problems, all
the worries, all the tribulations I thought I'd reached the peak of these
when I was Treasurer. I used to look at my distinguished leader and think,
" tIt's all right for you, all this honour and glory, while I'm doing so much
of the work in the background here". I suppose Billy McMahon feels that
way about me now. But when I discovered that I was the goldfish in the
bowl, I realized how much one had foregone of some of the pleasanter
things that one found to do in earlier Ministerial representation. But it
is a well-accepted sacrifice that's not the word, because it is an honour
and a distinction which I treasure, and I hope that I can prove worthy of it.
You've been kind enough tonight to encourage me to believe that already
: in somewhat less than a year I have been able to project not only my own
individuality but something of the thrusting, eager, individualistic
adventurism of this wonderful country of ours to the rest of the world.
And I believe this is how the rest of the world is viewing us at this time. 
-2
It Is, as was so well said, a fascinating time, and I will say more about
that a little later.
I should warn you that Noel Curphey has organized everything so
magnificently that the band that you have heard playing so splendidly here
tonight actually comes from the heart of my electorate. You may have seen
me go along a little earlier and tell the boys how well they were doing. Well,
this is not entirely related to the events of the next few weeks, but I hadn't
seen much of them since January and one doesn't want to be overlooked In
these matters entirely. But he thought of everything, and as I look around
this room here tonight, I not only sense a friendly warmth but I can see so
many friendly faces of people who have known me from my earliest days
in politics, some even beyond, and people who are eminent in their own
class. Now Keith Rigg down here, he is known to you as a very capable
executive in his own area of activity. But If you had seen Keith Rigg leading
me on to the field in my shorts as the youngest member of his cricket team
at Wesley, you realize the awe in which I still hold Keith Rigg. At least he
got up close to Test standard and I worshipped him as a younger member of
his school. And I see other people who are leaders in their own sphere. Now
right down here In front of me is Graham Kennedy, the king of televisioni
and how often when I've been asked to do a stunt In front of this terrifying
medium have I thought, " I only wish I had this fellow's savoir faire and
technique for this particular operation". All around, you see, there are
the leaders. Now on my right here is the man I always believed brewed just
about the best beer to be found anywhere in the world, until Maurie Nathan
had the " courage" to take him on! I should tell you, giving me my guidelines
a little earlier, Noel Curphey said to me, " Now there are not going
to be any other politicians or public servants here tonight" and as you will
have discovered, both categories at times can prove difficult or embarrassing
to a Prime Minister. I saw two very distinguished members of the
Commonwealth Public Service of yore here tonight-, both carrying wellearned
knighthoods, in Sir Giles Chippindall and Sir John Jensen, and I
dips my lid to them figuratively. They are great men who have done great
work for Australia and may I say to them how delighted I am that they
should have come out tonight to honour me in this way.
But we do have a wonderful tradition in our Public Service which
we ourselves have inherited from the British Public Service, and I mention
this because I know there has been some controversy in relation to one
member of the Service in recent times. There is this well-founded
practice in England, firmly established and with very rare exceptions,
followed here, that the members of the Service do not enter into public
discussion or controversy. There are very good reasons for that because
there is a special relationship which exists between the Public Service in
this country and the Parliament and the Ministry.
Now, this is not universally the case In the United States. They
have a rather different system. The Secretary of a particular Department
is by practice the Minister of that Department. He is the policy-maker.
In our country, policy-making responsibility is carried by the Ministry and
the individual Minister of a particular Department. He brings his policy
recommendations to his colleagues in the Cabinet and they either accept
them or reject them, and what is then accepted becomes the policy of a 
-3
government, exclusively drawn from the Parliament and responsible to
that Parliament. It can only survive while it maintains a majority support
in that Parliament, and eventually when election time comes around,
responsible to the electorate which put the Members there in the first
place. And so under our system, the public servant is not the policymaker
In the sense that he takes the decis ions on policy. He is the
administrator, and he must be prepared to serve all parties who may
secure a majority vote with the same faithful service, the same objectivity
as he would any other. It is for him to carry out the policy which the
government, responsible to the Parliament a. nd to the electorate, has
decided upon. Now, it is quite clear that there are occasions when, with
the authority of the Minister concerned, explanations are publicly given by
members of the Service. During the introduction of decimal currency, I
asked my officers of the Treasury to go around explaining how this thing
was to work, and they did with objectivity and discretion, and that is the
way the system works and should work at all times.
Now, if there are departures from that tradition without the
authority of the Minister, then It is to be regretted, and I merely mention
the matter here tonight to a body of very responsible and experienced people
because I don't want any doubt either in Australia, or importantly for us
at this time, outside Australia. Whereas in the United States the Secretary
of the Department is also the policy-maker, I don't want anybody to have any
misunderstanding as to where we are. W7% e, as the Government, I as the
leader of that Government, we are responsible to the people who have the
democratic decision as to whether they approve or disapprove of the things
we are doing. The Public Service, very properly, is protected against
arbitrary Ministerial action or capriciousness, and they are protected
because their role as administrators is clearly recognized.
That doesn't mean that men of the calibre of Giles Chippindall or
John Jensen haven't in their time been respected and trusted advisers of
their respective Ministers, but they have known that the Minister has the
responsibility for the decisions which are subsequently taken and that
guided their own advice and their own actions accordingly. And they also
knew that at the turn of the political wheel, they had to give that same
objective advice to whoever succeeded them as the democratic choice.
Now, gentlemen, I don't want to dwell on purely political matters
heire tonight. A. very dear colleague of former times of mine, who I know
is a friend of many of you in this room, once describing a critic said of
him, " You know, this fellow would put politics into the Lord's Prayer".
Well I find that on the eve of an election, anything almost that is said
becomes political by whomever it is said close to the political scene. And
so if I appear to be political at any point in what I say, do have that reservation
in mind: Would I have thought this political if he had said it six months after
an election has occurred? I don't wish to be political in any party sense.
But I do wish to say something to you tonight about this marvellous
country of ours, its opportunities and its problems. When you consider
that we have an Australia approximately the size of the United States of
America in area if you leave Alaska out of the picture I always have to
make that reservation, otherwise it spoils the comparison. And even leaving
Alaska out puts me out of sorts perhaps wi-th people in that country, so rich
in promise but so cold in appearance. Therefore to makce the comparison 
-4
apt, and I think it is good enough, we talk about what I might loosely
term metropolitan United States and Australia. We have approximately the
same area of country to hold and administer here in Australia, and we like
to think of ourselves as a young country that is not doing too badly. We
are pushing on with our growth and our development, but whenever I get
a little too complacent on that score, I remind myself that when the United
States made Its declaration of Independence, in 1776, the total population
of that country was less than four million people. just twelve years later
our first settlement was established by the landing at Botany Bay. Well,
they are now moving up to their two hundred millions of people. They've
become the mightiest economic and military power in the world. They've
done It by giving expression to the spirit of enterprise, those principles of
individual freedom and personal liberty that I believe every man and woman
in this room cherishes in this country of ours. They've gone out, they've
taken their risks and finally they have come to a point where, having put
Europe back on Its feet after the ravages of war, they, under a leader who
has the courage and the imagination, the vision and the drive to see that if
those same prlncples and that same drive, that same generosity were to be
applied to the free countries of Asia, then the whole future of the world could
be transformed for the better and that is what he aims to do.
I have come, I think, to know this man very well and the longer I
know him the more I find to admire in him and, more, I am touched by his
sincerity and the earnestness of his determination to use the tremendous
unsurpassed power that rests in his hands for the betterment of the human
race and that was manifested through our recent Conference. It must have
emerged in his contacts with you all here in Australia, but in Manila we had
as successful a Conference as I ever hope to attend with as warm a cooperation
amongst the seven heads of government sitting round the table
there as I ever expect to experience. Not just as a " Council of War" as
opponents and critics tried to present It, but as a meeting of people who
wanted security, of course, for free people in Asia as indeed they would
want it for free people everywhere, but who wanted also to see a world in
which there was a prospect, some hope, some prospect of advancement for
the hundreds of millions of people who are living today in conditions which
we would regard as under-privileged, under -nourished, under-educated,
under-provided for in practically every way that we consider dear and
proper for ourselves.
Now we are a very fortunate people, not only in the country we
occupy but because of the standard that others who have gone before us, and
we In our turn, have been able to achieve. It is quite a remarkable thing
that this country, a small country in terms of numbers, should have built
up in not very hospitable territory, one of the highest living standards in
the world, that we should be able to point to the highest percentage of
home-ownership in the world, that among the amenities of life we should
rank third in that necessity as It has become the motor car that despite
the fact that we have to bring capital into this country for our own
development we rank amongst the first four or five countries in the world
in the aid that we give out to others per capita of our population; these are
all things that we can take some modest satisfaction about. We have just
come through a year, or two years, of great difficulty for this country,
not felt so much here in Victoria, but one of the most severe droughts in
Australian history. Our sheep population which normally climbs up by
several million a year dropped by 14 millions. In New South Wales they
lost 25T, of their cattle population and yet we maintained a level of
employment and activity which for this country was remarkable, facing 
conditions which not so many years ago would have spelled economic
disaster for us.
We have built in a lot of insurances around ourselves. We have
now the variety, the diversification of Industry and enterprise which
enables us to meet these shocks as they come along and I am sure most
of us who have had a fairly long experience of government were heartened
by the way in which Australia took, without scar cely a falter in its stride,
this severe handicap of the severe depression in New South Wales and
Queensland of the last couple of years. It involved us as a Government in
some quite unorthodox and unusual actions in the way of drought relief,
in fostering the sugar Industry, in providing the finance for those whose
stock had been affected to replace the stock, or at least provide the means
by which this could be done.
But this, I am glad to say, Is not only the modern approach. We
have all managed to learn something out of the more tragic experiences of
the past. I came into politics in the 1930' s. When I stood for Parliament
we had just come from a period which would be scarcely credible to the
young people of this generation when thirty out of a hun dred trade unionists
were registered as unemployed. These things pass quickly from our minds.
The Government today would probably be thrown out of office if it allowed
21to 3% O of unemployment to develop and stay there without being able to
take action effective action to remedy that position. When I came into
politics 8 or 10% 0 of unemployment was regarded as, well, not a bad state
of affairs. In 1937 the Trade Unions successfully applied for a prosperity
loading on the Basic Wage when the registrations were around 8 or
But we have learnt something and in the last twenty years full
employment hasn't been a visionary goal, It has been a reality almost
without exceptional months during that long period of time. Now I know
that occasionally those who have to carry on a business, who have to look
at their order books, look at the state of profitability of their industry,
they feel that things are by no means as good as they ought to be and that
there has been an experience of which many of you in this room I know have
shared. But when you consider the long haul, that virtually since the end
of the war, this country has never had, except for one month in that period,
more than 3% 7 of registered unemployment ( and that is in one of those
months which incorporates the registration of the school leavers who had
yet to be placed it didn't last for longer than a month), we can count
ourselves as pretty fortunate people.
Now I said something about savings and that brings me to the
point this is not merely a prosperous country, but that prosperity is
spread with justice, with equity, with fair dealing around the community
as a whole. I went to the trouble coming here to get the latest figures that
I could take out on how the Australian people are currently situated in
relation to their savings and I found that there are more than seven
million life assurance policies held in this country of eleven and a half
million people, that the cover taken out well it was in 1965 which is the
latest figure I have ( at the 31st December) and the later figure would be
considerably higher but then it was just 15 billion dollars of cover under
those policies. When we come to Australians' capacity to save I say
this because there is a disposition in some parts of the world or amongst
some people to think of us as a rather thriftless lot but in point of fact 
-6-
there is only one country recorded in the world that saves a bigger
proportion of its gross national product for fixed capital investment and
that is Japan. We save 2757, the United States 175%, the United Kingdom in
1965 18% O. I haven't got the 1966 figures. These are from the United
Nations Bulletin of Statistics. But that's a pretty remarkable thing to have
in this country. With the ravages which occur from time to time, the
drought and floods which eat up savings that people have accumulated against
such emergencies, It is remarkable that we should rank next to the
industrious, enterprising people of Japan as amongst the great savers of
their resources in the world.
So we don't just wait for capital to come flowing in from other parts
of the world; 90%. of our investment comes from our own resources. We
are very glad to have the extra spurt to our development that comes to us
from the capital which comes in from overseas and there have been many
useful, happy marriages between capital from overseas, from the United
Kingdom, from America or some other part of the world and an Australian
enterprise. That's the way we like to see it with a good Australian equity
participation in the enterprise that is developed here In this country. It is
one of the matters on which we have been working as a Government. But
we know that if we are to grow we have to bring in people. We bring in
people to an extent which in relation to our population is considerable.
We'd like to bring more. We've absorbed those people very successfully.
I don't know any country which could claim a more successful
absorption of the migrants who have come here than Australia can and
this is largely because I believe there Is that national characteristic of
mateship, that willingness to help the fellow who is battling to find his
way In life which Is so prominent a feature of our community life, and
that has helped to make It a success. When I was Minister I wondered how
we would get on with the unions about this business and how we'd get the
various crafts to take these people in with them; how the community would
absorb them; how generously would they treat them; how warm-hearted
would be their acceptance of them. What a tremendous success it has
been. On Saturday I greet here the Prime Minister of Malta and we have
in Australia the second largest community of Maltese in the world. It is
not a community in the sense that they're packed tight in some pocket and
living under themselves but spread around as the Italians have spread, the
Greeks and the Dutch and of course the largest influx of all at the present
time, I'm happy to say our kith and kin from the British Isles. And this
is how we would want it. But If we are going to bring people we have to find
the employment for them and we can't absorb them on the land because
although the rural industries have achieved miracles of performance by the
way in which they built up their productivity, they are doing it with fewer
people than they did probably before the Second World War. So, largely,
we have to look to the manufacturing industries and the service industries
in order to absorb our growing population. And I think when you see the
figures, the next lot of figures out on employment, you will realize how
successfully we are absorbing those who come in, the school leavers as
their time comes to go into the working community, the industrial and the
commercial community. What opportunities persist in this country of
ours! Now we are favoured in two other ways. One by a bountiful
providence, which although it has provided us with soil that takes labour 
-7
and skill and new techniques to master for complete success, has given
us a fabulous treasurehouse of mineral wealth which we are just beginning
to discover perhaps not even fully but we are discovering in great
abundance at this time. Who would have thought in the years when I
first came into politics that Australia would turn up the second largest
bauxite reserves in the world or rather the largest single reserve
of bauxite in the world.
In the 1950' s we had a policy of clamping down on the export of
iron ore. Our known reserves didn't amount to more than about 4CUC
million tons and now somebody has turned up successively, one after the
other, discoveries, quite remarkable discoveries In Western Australia,
and our present reserves are estimated at somewhere between 15, 000
and 18, 000 million tons of Iron ore of rich grade.
In recent weeks, phosphate rock, one of the great deficiencies
of this country, has been discovered, I hope in considerable quantities.
That has yet to be established or made known. But the nickel discoveries
of recent times, the manganese deposits which B. H. P. are working success
fully on Groote Eylandt; almost every month, or it seems to those of us
leading busy lives, every week, some great new discovery adding to our
natural wealth is turned up. Fortunately we have had the enterprise and
so far we have been able to marshal the capital either from overseas or
amongst our own resources to see that these things are brought to
fruition. But It's not that aspect of Australia that I turn to finally with you.
It is what Australia has discovered of Itself in relation to its own area of
the world that has suddenly become tremendously vital and exciting for us.
Again in the early years I spent in politics, governments, ministers and
the community as a whole had their gaze directed to the extent that it
went outside the Commonwealth of Australia to the British Isles, with
perhaps one journey In a lifetime to the Continent of Europe. This was
the sort of dream that people who were able to accumulate rather more
wealth or savings built up in their minds, to get back to what was then
described as " home", to the British Isles and then perhaps a few gay weeks
on the Continent. That was about as good as anybody would hope for. To
the North of us were countries barely known, certainly not thought of
great consequence to us. Those of us who In our schoolboy days kept a
stamp album would get the postage stamps and think they were very
picturesque. And that was about all that It meant to us. It took Pearl
Harbour, the events of the Second World War, to make us realize haw
close we are to our neighbours in the North. I went up to Vietnam earlier
this year. I left Canberra still answering questions up to the end of
Question Time at 11. 15. That evening I was talking in Singapore to
members of the Government there and the following morning I was talking
to Australian troops in Saigon. That's how close all of this is to us.
Saigon Is closer to Australia than Brisbane Is to Perth and when
we had a Conference of Commonwealth Prime Ministers In London quite
recently I had to remind some of our African colleagues at one stage
because they spent the first six days of an eight-day Conference talking
about Rhodesia and, admittedly, it is a difficult problem, the situation
there. But finally I had to come in when they proposed another adjournment
on this matter and say, " Well look, we've been talking for six days on this
one matter while we haven't mentioned the affairs of nine-tenths of the rest
of human kind". And to bring the point home I had to point out that Saigon
was very much closer to Darwin than Salisbury, the capital of Rhodesia,
was to Sierre Leone. It was the Prime Minister of that country who made 
-8
the longest speech of the Conference. " In fact", I said, " we are a thousand
miles closer to Salisbury where we are and It is time we started talking
about Vietnam and the problems of this area of the world.
But they are not only problems of danger, and we know at the
moment that we are involved in a great struggle there. When I say we
are playing a small and relatively modest part, I think we can take pride
in the fact that our part there is not seen as small as the numbers might
otherwise suggest because the skill and gallantry of our soldiers has made
its impression on the United States and all other peoples of the world and
certainly upon our allies In South Vietnam. We are all under debt to them,
and you made a passing reference, Mr. Perrett, to National Service. Let me
say that In Vietnam a National Serviceman Is at one in purpose in endurance
and In courage with the Regular Servicemen whom he has gone to join.
And while I am on this subject let me just say a word. VWe were
talking about migration, about the decison to call the aliens into National
Service. I know there have been complaints and criticisms about this in
some countries. Not all! I was very pleased to see what the Prime Minister
of Malta had to say on this subject. I thought it was full of good sense and
a sense of the fitness of the situation. And that is, we haven't thought to
call up any young man of the appropriate age group who doesn't declare
himself an " intending permanent resident of this country". And if he has
come here with the firm and declared intention of staying here permanently,
well we think it appropriate that he should take the same chance with the
native-born Australians in the defence of this country. And I say to any
who choose to criticise us from these other countries, we have in Australia
at this time a community of about 270, 000 italians, 130, 000 Greeks, 100, 000
Dutch, some of them of course naturalized, but these were their origins.
Does it seem unreasonable that some proportion and it is a small proportion
of their fellow countrymen of the appropriate age group should join in helping
to protect them, their families and their possessions? I think It is entirely
right and proper.
I said that the thing I was really wanting to draw attention to finally
was the Australian situation in this area of the world. We have come to
know something of the problems of the area, but also something of the
tremendous opportunities that will open up for us. Three-fifths of the
world's population live East of Suez and they're tending to increase more
rapidly than others to the West of Suez, not merely because they're a
prolific people and have normally a high birthrate ( partly induced by the
fact that in past centuries there has been a very high death rate and a
relatively short life expectancy) but because public health measures are
Improving and medicine and treatment are Improving, so that population
is growing more rapidly than popul ation West of Suez. And it is in all
probability that the population of the area will have doubled by the end of
this century. Now that presents in a sense some dangers for Australia but it
also presents tremendous opportunities for us. We are a natural supplier
of raw materials and foodstuffs with great scope for expansion In all these
directions. Here are the growing markets of Asia as consumers increase
and their standards of living increase. And in this context just imagine
what it could mean to Australia if President Johnson's dream of a better
Asia, better educated, better fed, better clothed, better housed, better
serviced by industry, building their own industry, what that can mean to
this young relatively under-populated country. 
9-
Perhaps that is the thought, Mr. Chairman, that I should leave
with you in your minds tonight. We are living in an exciting country, at
an exciting phase of its history. We are accepted in a way which would
not have seemed credible to us so many years ago. When I came into
office, thanks to the great personality and capacity of my predecessor,
I was Immediately offered by Prime Minister Harold Wilson, and by the
Pr esident of the United States, President Johnson ' t continue the same
intimate communications and correspondence that had been built up over
the years by Sir Robert Menzies with the leaders of these two great
democracies. From the outset I was welcomed as a trusted friend,
colleague and confidant and the influence that Australia is able to exert
by our own communications, the views to our two great friends in these
countries, is of tremendous consequence to us but also makes Australia
a very much larger figure in the opinion of the rest of the world. Don't
think that we are dragged along at the coat'-tails of either of them. We
are consulted, we are trusted, the views we put are respected and I have
reason to know that on occasion they have been in themselves quite decisive
in their interests. And so we face together a future of gr eat promise, not promise of
things which will come to us simply because we wish it so but because of
an energetic, friendly people, who find that the means are there if we have
the courage and the enterprise to take advantage of them. And It is my
fervent hope that I will have a few more years yet as your own political
leader in which to play some part in making of this Australia of ours the
land that all of us wish it to be.
Thank you for the way in which you h~ ve honoured me here
tonight. 



EMAGEEMAGEDEMBARGOED POLICY SPEECH
1966
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT
8th November, 1966
NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA UNTIL 8 P. M. TUESDAY, 8TH NOVEMBER
EMBARGOEDEMBARGOED
6" s 
S. POLICY SPEECH
This Policy Speech my first as your Prime Minister
outlines the course my Government will follow if you re-elect us on
November 26. Between now and polling day, our Australian democracy
will be involved in a great debate about many aspects of policy. You will
be taking part in a national stocktaking. The policies you support with
your vote will bear directly on your well-being and the welfare of the nation.
These will be critical years for Australia, but they hold great promise for
our advancement. They should be years of steady national progress
progress, fortifying our security, and strongthening the base of our economy.
As yiou view this forward prospect, you find Australia well
poised for progress. You must feel it in your bones, as I do, that the next
decade may rank as the greatest in our history.
The Government I lead, is, as you know, a coalition between
members of the Liberal Party and of the Country Party. Wie have worked well
and happily together as a team. That unity and teamwork will continue. It
stands in contrast to the disunity and disarray of the Australian Labor Party
which presents itself as the alternative government. It is indeed the only
alternative government within your chot ce.
You will be making this choice at a time when our country is
moving swiftly into a new and historic era. You have only to look at the map
to realise this. The new Parliament will face a challenging period, calling
for what is best in the Australian character. But it can be, we believe, an
era of great opportunity, and we are growing not only in strength but in
maturity. How we are to carry forward the development of this continent
and how best we can make the nation secure, forms the very core of this
election campaign. In asking you to return my Government, we are also asking you
to confirm principles and policies we believe are right for Australia at this
point of our history. They bear on our national integrity and self -respact,
our obligations to friends and allies, our standing in the free world and the
tempo and character of our own growth and development. Al 1 that we plan
and hope for Australia must not be put at risk so far as we Australians can
order events by what occurs outside Australia; and we have much to hold
fast to and build upon inside our country. We are building for tomorrow on
strong and stable foundations. We have squeezed into seventeen years what
some countries have taken one hundred and fifty years to do; what some
countries have never achieved.
11,1e Australians regard our personal freedom, liberty, and
opportunities for enterprise as essential to our way of life. Yet these things
are under constant challenge, chiefly by those, whether at home or abroad,
who believe in an all-powerful State. Our political creed places the highest
value upon human personality' to encourage it, not to suppress, to strengthen
it, riot to weaken. The Socialist basis of the Labor Party is reactionary, its
doctrines are musty and its vision blurred by lingering bitterness from
battles of the past. In recent years, the ALP has become divided into
embittered factions. The Labor Party is not only out of time, but out of tune
with the nation's thinking. In its present disorder it plainly can't give
effective leadership or competent government. / 2 
-2
You have only to look at the Labor Party's response to one of the
most critical challenges of our time. It refuses to ackn~ owledge, or it runs
away from, the great central fact of modern history the tremendous power
conflict between the Communist world and the free world. The foreign policy
of every country is affected incessantly by this conflict. It has been the cause
of personal tragedy, much bloodshed, much waste and much destruction. It
has brought tyranny to some countries and the fear of oppression to others.
Yet the Labor Party dismisses all this as a bogey. What a delusion!
On the one hand there is the desire of free people to win for
themselves a better way of life: On the other, the design of the Communists to
force their way of life on others.
During this campaign our political opponents will try to confuse,
or turn your minds from the central questions which the very history of our
time has raised. We are no longer a small, insular, protected country
sheltered from the storms and stresses of the world. Wie are not a large
power, but we do take pride in being a nation, and pride in what we have done
to build it and hold it. But that recognition of achievement carries with it
responsibilities. It is our belief that the Australian people are equal to those
respons ibilicies. Later I shall have more to say about what is happening in South-
East Asia and South Viet Nam, but the support we and others are giving in
South Viet Nam is not only helping the people of South Viet Nam to resist
Communist subversion and aggression. It is providing a shield behind which
a new Asia can emerge and grow stronger. The presence of ourselves and
othe~ r friendly forces there is not a commitment to war, it is a commitment to
peace and freedom. But it must be such that the Communists will learn that
free Asia, and the friends and allies of free Asia, will not lose heart, will
not be worn down, but have strength and staying power to defend the right
of every people to choose their own social and economic order. Together
we shall be helping to give the people in these countries the food, the skills,
the education and the strength to lead their nations to a better way of life.
That is the kind of involvement we look to with Asia. We all
want peace and a peaceful solution of problems and conflicts. We can even
be on friendly terms with countries that have fundamentally different ideologies
to our own, so long as they don't try to impose their ideas on us by force, by
subversion or any other means.
These are matters of great significance which I shall develop
later. But I move now from this broad introduction of the issues of the
campaign to some of the domestic proposals we have in mind for the next
three years.
DOMESTIC PROPOSALS
The economy, despite one of the most severe droughts in our
history, is in good shape. It has continued to expand. So has our trade.
Our own efforts and savings, aided by a continuing flow of capital
investment from overseas, are enabling us to maintain full employment with
a growing population. We have one of the highest standards of living in the world. We
have continuing policies, many of which require increasing annual expenditures.
But, in addition to these, we have a number of new proposals, which I will
outlIne. First I mention education. / 3 
-3-
This is important to every Australian and vital to the nation.
Our record in this field is proof of our sincerity.
Education is the responsibility of a number of authorities. Each
has its role to play.
For our part, we have assisted in meeting the needs of the
universities,' the establishment of advanced colleges of education; we have
helped technical education. WIe instituted grants for school science blocks.
To assist parents and students we have greatly enlarged the Commonwealth
scholarship scheme for university education. With the establishment of
colleges of advanced education we have provided a similar scholarship system
for them. Commonwealth scholarships are also available for the final two
years of secondary education and for technical education. We have given
special taxation allowances to parents for education expenses.
We now propose further assistance to education.
We will provide eight million dollars a year over the next three
financial years for the construction and equipment of new colleges for teacher
training throughout Australia.
This money will require no matching grants from the States. It
will be used by us to build colleges on sites selected by the States, on condition
that the State does not reduce its expenditure on teacher training, and on
condition that at least ten per cent, of the places at the new colleges are
reserved for teachers not bonded to State Education Departments.
Winners of advanced education scholarships will be able to apply
those scholarships to a teacher training course in any training college to which
they are admitted. These scholarships carry the same benefits as university scholarships
and will be available to unbonded students.
Our scheme to provide science laboratories and equipment to all
schools has been highly successful. We intend to do more.
In the next financial year and subsequently, we will double the
amount available to independent schools for these laboratories.
We believe this will ensure that in four years every science
teaching secondary school in Australia, whether Government or independent,
will have the science teaching laboratories and the equipment it needs
provided with the financial help of the Commonwealth Government.
We believe the time has come to establish a Commonwealth
Ministry of Education and Science and we will do this.
This Ministry will be responsible not only for education, but
also for certain areas of scientific activity. CSIRO will function within the
new . Ministry.
SOCIAL SERVICES I turn to social services. 
-4
All through the life of the Government we have carried out our
policy of giving to the needy the assistance we can afford as a government and
nation with many other obligations. It has been our practice to review all
aspeczts of our health and social service policies each year when we consider
the Budget. We have liberalised the means test progressively. We now
propose further liberalisation. I shall elaborate on this in a supplementary
statement. We will enlarge our social service programme on four fronts
We will raise by one hundred and fifty-six dollars the limits both of
property and income within which pensions will be payable to the
aged, the invalid, and the widows.
We will expand the scope of the Aged Persons Homes Act, particularly
in regard to housing the needy, by making local governing bodies
eligible for our subsidy.
We will1 further assist the disabled in the community by capital
assistance on a two dollars for one dollar basis to sheltered
workshops, and by a special allowance to disabled persons employed
in those workshops.
* We will make annual grants to certain national voluntary agencies
working in the field of social welfare.
HOUSING Australians want to own their own homes. This is an ambition
we have fostered. No country can point to a higher percentage of home ownership.
More than half the homes in Australia today have been constructed
since we came to office in 1949.
In the last Parliament we introduced the Home Savings Grant
Scheme which has already benefited sixty-four thousand young couples. We
also introduced the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation.
We will now give the Minister for Housing new discretionary
powers designed to meet cases of harship under the Home Savings Grant
Scheme. The discretionary powers will date back to the start of the scheme.
Details of these are set out in a supplementary statement.
Further, we will extend the scheme to benefit widowed persons
aged less than thirty-six years who have one or more dependent children.
The limitation on the value of the home, including land, will be
raised from fourteen thousand dollars to fifteen thousand dollars.
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT WATER CONSERVATION
Since 1949, we have consistently carried out our policy of
national development. For us this is a wide and embracing term. It means
people as well as physical resources.
One aspect of national development is vivid in our minds from
the recent drought. This is the conservation of that precious commodity
water. 
We believe a programme of water conservation related to
national needs should now be drawn up by us with State Governments.
We have in mind a national water resources development
programme. Its purpose would be to increase water conservation activity,
to reduce hazards of drought and expand primary production.
VWe envisage that the States will maintain at least their existing
levels of expenditure in this field, from their own financial resources. We
shall invite the States to put forward programmes of additional works they
woul. d propose for Commonwealth financing. We, in turn, will make a
contribution to enable additional works, selected on their merits, to be carried
out. One cannot, at this stage, be precise about the capital requirements
of our programme. We contemplate, however, that the contribution
to be made by the Commonwealth for selected additional works could amount
to fifty million dollars over the next five years.
WOOL_ A soundly-based research effort is essential to this important
industry's prosperity. So is an energetic, imaginative and well-directed
promrotion campaign. The Government is prepared to increase the scale of its
contributions for wool research and promotion when the present arrangements
expire next June. For the ensuing three years the Government would provide
funds on a dollar for dollar basis subject to a maximum annual contribution
of fourteen million dollars for a programme agreed upon by it and the wool
indus try.
DAIRY INDUSTRY The present five-year plan finishe-son 30th June, 1967, and my
Government would consult with industry bodies on the details of a further fiveyear
plan. We would discuss with the industry the level of the annual subsidy
allocation; the Commonwealth's underwriting of the equalisation arrangement
for butter and cheese; and plans for diversifying markets abroad.
SUG; AR We have shown our determination to maintain a strong and
prosperous sugar industry. Recently we have made loans available to canegrowers
and millers distressed by dmnught.
The nitrogenous fertiliser subsidy introduced in August will be
of particular help to this industry.
The 1966 season's production was affected by drought and
abnormally low export prices. 7./ Ie have bolstered the return by loaning the
induStry nineteen million dollars on concessional terms.
The Commonwealth/ Queens land Sugar Agreement is due to
expire on 1st August, 1967. We have assured the Queensland Government we
will consult fully with them and ascertain industry viewis on all matters
associated with the industry's position bef ore renewing it. This agreement
has provided valuable protection for the industry. ./ 6 
/ 7
-6
We are persisting vigorously with our efforts to negotiate an
international sugar agreement. Our aim is to ensure our producers
remunerative prices for satisfactory export quantities.
EXTENSION SERVICES
My Government has a programme which assists rural industries
considerably in research and extension. Some eighty million dollars has
been made available through joint industry/ Commonwealth schemes for
research by State and Commonwealth Departments, universities and the
CSLRO. The results must be passed on to the farmer. For this improved
agricultural extension services are necessary.
We have now embarked on a five-year programme. Under this
the Commonwealth's contribution to extension services will be increased by
four million dollars above the present level of one point four million dollars.
STABILISATION SCHEMES FOR WHEAT, COTTON AND DRIED VINE FRUITS
At the appropriate time, my Government will go into discussions
with the wheat, cotton and dried vine fruits industries for the re-negotiation
of stabilisation schemes having the obj ective of sustaining in respect of each
a stable industry.
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT
The development of the North. Commonwealth, State and
local governments, privae individuals and companies are all involved in the
whole pattern of northern development.
Apart from our own explorations, we have encouraged private
enterprise to undertake wide-ranging exploration of the resources of our
north. Mineral and oil discoveries have resulted.
Development has followed actively. New railways and ports,
and vast new processing plants, are being built.
Currently, capital projects totalling more than two thousand
million doIllars are in train. These works are giving new e mployment and
creating new communities.
Our great new resources some still being discovered must
be effectively utilised. It is desirable that there should be an Australian
participation in the ownership and control of those resources along with the
industries growing out of them. There are instances in which more capital
is needed to exploit these opportunities than existing Australian companies
cant marshal. New arrangements and facilities for the provision of capital
have to be devised. This is not an easy matter, but the Government has
been working actively and earnestly upon it, as have people and institutions
inthe world of finance. We are confident we shall find practical means of
meeting this objective. 
-7
BEEF ROADS S i n c e 19 61, we have provided almost thirty million dollars
to the Queensland and Western Australian Governments for construction of
beef roads. This has been money well spent. It has contributed to the
development of the beef industry in Northern Australia and to our export
earnings from beef.
We know the industry is capable of further substantial expansion
and that prospects for beef exports are bright. But a still further improved
road system is essential for any major expansion. This would promote the
development of our northern areas generally.
Current ani igiements for the financing of beef roads end in
June, 1967. We will discuss with the Governments of Queensland and Western
Australia a fifty million dollars programme of beef roads extending over a
period of seven years.
This would represent an even greater contribution to this wcr k
than in the past. Vie are doing more also in the Northern Territory.
The new programme ther4 extending over five or six years, will
begin early in 1967-68.
TOURISM W e s ee a n ex pa n d ing future for the tourist industry.
Our annual grants to the Australian National Travel Association have been
increasing substantially, and, in 1966-67, were eight hundred and sixty-two
thousand dollars. Increasing activity and expenditure providing growing
exchange earnings for us require the establishment of an Australian Tourist
Commission set ' up as a statutory body.
We believe this would have the support of ANTA, the tourist
industry generally, and the State Governments all of whom have a direct
Interest in this matter.
A GENERAL COMMENT ON OUR DOMESTIC PROGRAMME
What I have outlined by no means represents the limit of our
activities in the domestic field over the next three years. But it gives you the
trendl of our thinking.
FOREIGN POLICY
This brings me back to what I described earlier as the very core
of this election. Our domestic programme depends for its fulfilment on the
security of the nation. But the principles and objectives of our foreign policy
are at issue in this election. Our Labor opponents attack our assessment of
Austrcalia's external security. Domestic affairs cannot be separated from
foreign affairs. / 8 
8-
Our foreign policy is based on the beliefs we have and the plans
we have about the kind of Australia all of us want to see and about the kind
of society we want to build and preserve here. The security of those things
we think are good in Australia depends on the security of a kind of world that
also values what is precious both to the individual and the good society.
So we have joined with others in paying a price for the freedoms we hope to
retain. Unless there is security for all small nations there cannot be
security for any small nation. Unless principles of international conduct are
preserved in all international situations they are n~ ot likely to be preserved in
any. That is the essence of our foreign policy.
We have always seen Australia's security in tetms of world
seciir ity. To that end we have for long allied ourselves with Britain and the
United States. The basic principles and objectives of their policies are, for
the most part, shared by us. We have sought, above all things, to keep our
counrtry at peace; but to have some assurance that Australia will have strong
and reliable friends. That is why we played our part in the making of the SEATO and
ANZUS Treaties which carry with them responsibilities as well as benefits.
Because of those responsibilities, Australian soldiers are fighting
in South Viet Nam.
We know and share the genuine concern of responsible Australians
about what has been happening there.
But we believe our decisions have been right.
We seek a peaceful settlement of the conflict through negotiation.
But think of the consequences of abandoning our objectives and the people of
South Viet Nam. South Viet Nam would become a Communist state, and the lives
and Security of millions who have resisted Communism would be in jeopardy.
The impact of our complete withdrawal, as proposed by the
Labor Party, would be felt throughout South-East Asia.
We, too, would come under threat.
We have a vital interest in the effective presence and participation
of the United States as a major power in Asia and the Pacific. W~ e have obligations
arising from our treaty relationships, from our role as an ally, and from
the fact that our own international interests are directly involved in preserving
South-East Asia from aggression and from Communist domination.
It has been said that our policies in Viet Nam have damaged
Australia's standing in Asia.
This is absurd. Most Asian countries share our belief that
Communist aggression indeed, aggression of any kdid must be resisted.
Our close a,_-ociations with the free countries of Asia have undaib tedly
been strefig-aiened. t 
9-
DEFENCE I turn now to defence generally.
The centre of this problem, in global perspective, is in Asia
and hence in our own part of the world.
We must meet large expenditures for forces adequate to our
obligations, thoroughly trained and equipped with the best and most modern
conventional armaments. To finance defence on the scale required and with the necessary
personnel increases in all services, our defence expenditure has otrelady
more than doubled over the past four years.
We live in an unstable region. We see it as a basic responsibility
of the Government of a free people to be prepared for any eventuality.
NATIONAL SERVICE
One of the basic issues of this election is national military
training carrying the duty to serve abroad as well as at home.
If we are to meet our obligations, we must have trained men
immediately available to do the job. Our Army is to be built from twenty-two
thousand seven hundred and fifty to forty thousand as quickly as practicable.
Voluntary enlistment did not provide suitable men to the extent
needed. We and our advisers concluded there was no realistic alternative
to national service. The call-up has been devised so as to cause the smallest possible
disturbance to studies, employment and family commitments, and so as to
ensure thorough and effective training before a national serviceman is
required to serve overseas. The policy permits young men to make a choice
between service with the Regular Forces and service with the Qltizen Forces.
Withdrawal of national servicemen from Viet Nam as intended
by the Labor Party, would render our task force ineffective and seriously
disrupt the~ Army. It would inevitably mean loss of confidence in Australia
by its allies. Machines and money alone do not mak2-a defence establishment.
Our concept of highly-trained, mobile striking forces has been made effective
by the individualism, the intelligence, and cool gallantry of the men who
wear Australia's uniform.
National servicemen serving Australia abroad today are as one
with their Regular Army comrades in efficiency, purpose and courage.
CONCLUSION I have given a broad picture of our thinking on large questions
of policy. My supplementary statements issued tonight will give more
information on these and other aspects of policy. From experience you can
have confidence that we shall be doing all this and a good deal more. You
have seen us give prompt effect in the past to our election undertakings. We
have also taken further progressive and useful action to meet changing
conditions and new developments. I now draw all this together against the
political background. 
I 1 Or
The Liberal Party, In association with the Country Party, has
had the longest period of unbroken Federal rule in Australian history.
Our Government has remained vigorous and forward looking,
assisted by fresh talent from the ranks of our private members. The Deputy
Prime Minister and myself are the only two members remaining from the
Ministry formed when we were returned to office in 1949.
Today we are clearly more in tune with the aspirations and
outlook of Australians than our opponents. For the gimter period of our long
term of office, the Australian Labor Party has been ravaged by bitter faction
fights. Nowhere has this internal conflict been fiercer nor more destructive
than in the critical field of external security.
Even our American allies have been a target for the spleen of
the extremists in the Labor Party. Surely we Australians recognise who
are our true friends. The Labor Party, plagued for so long by the virus of
doctrinaire socialism, left-wing influence and class bitterness, seems to
have its will too paralysed to think clearly on great issues that affect our
safE. ty. The business of government and the conduct of our internal and
international affairs are not for men who cannot be of one mind, sometimes
for a week on end. Our national affairs are not merchandise for backroom
bargaining between leaders of factions.
Many times in recent years, the people of Australia have had
a sharp reminder that a Federal Labor Government would not be responsible
to the people, or even to its own judgment, but that it would be bound hand
and foot by the decisions of thirtysix people from the A. L. not, for the
most part, elected by the people of Australia and in no sense responsible
to them. This country deserves better than that. A party that cannot
lead. itself has no claim to lead a nation.
Your choice should be clear.
On the great questions of national security, my Government
is completely single-minded nited. Our opponents are confused and
divided. We believe our national policies look to Australia's future
and the national thinking of our opponents is Sndl bogged down in the past.
We offer the country strength, unity, and purpose as opposed
to disunity and confusion. Wie offer you a programme in domestic affairs
which advances national development, national security and social justice.
The choice for you is, we believe, clear-cut. My
colleagues and I have enough faith in the common sense and maturity of
the Australian people to be confident about your answer. 
SUPPLEMENTARY STATEMENTS
THE FOLLOWING STATEMENTS COULD NOT,
FOR REASONS OF TIME, BE INCLUDED IN A BROADCAST
AND TELEVISED POLICY SPEECH LIMITED TO
MINUTES. BUT THEY ARE ISSUED FOR PUBLICATION
CONJOINTLY WITH THE MAIN SPEECH.
I'-p t I " aw 
MEANS TEST
Since it came to office in December, 1949, the Government's
policy in Social Services has been to assist those with the greatest need.
In circumstances where resources are limited, the Government's policy
has been to continually improve the position of existing pensioners and to
progressively liberalise the means test in order to permit increasing
numbers in the lower income groups to obtain pensions. This policy
will be continued during the life of the present Government.
Very significant improvements have been brought about. In
1949, s single person with an income ( including income from property) of
$ 377 per annum, or a married couple with a totalI income of $ 7154 per
annumn, were not entitled to an age or invalid pension. Since then these
limits have been more than doubled, so that today, pension eligibility is
retained by a single person until income, ignoring any income from
property, reaches $ 1,040 per annum in the case of -a single person, and
950 per annum for a married couple ( nassuming that the val;, ue of
property does not affect the rate of pension payable",.
We now propose to increase these limits still further by $ 156
per annum for both single persons and married couples. The new
limits of income before eligibility for pension ceases will be respectively
196 per annum for single persons, and 106 per annum for married
couples. Full age or invalid pensions will be payable where a single
persons's income does not exceed $ 520 per annum, and a married
couple's combined income $ 884. These income limits are increased if
there are children. Expressed in terms of property, what we propose is equally'
liberal. In 1949, no age or invalid pension was payable if a single person
had property valued at 500 or 000O in the case of a married couple.
Because of the progressive easings of the means test, the corresponding
figures today for property, apart from the value of a home, motor vehicle
and certain personal effects, are $ 10, 80,0 for a single person and $ 20, 320
for a married couple. Under the further improvement now proposed, a single
person may have $ 12, 360 in value of property, and a married couple $ 21, 88C,
provided there is no income other than from property, before losing
eligibility for pension.
The means test on widows' pensions will be similarly eased.
For example, at present, a widow with one child may receive a full pension
if~ her income does not exceed $ 520 per annum, and she retains eligibility
for some pens-Lon until her income reaches 404. These limits will be
raised to $ 676 and 560 per annum respectively.
As in the case of age and invalid pensioners, a widow with
children may receive an extra $ 156 per annum for each child after the first
without affecting her pension, which is increased by a further $ 78 per annum
for each such child. Thus, the amount of income which renders her ineligible
for pension rises by $ 234 per annum for each child after the first.
If a widow with a child or children has no income other than from
property, she will receive some pension until the value of her property reaches
$ 16, 040. / 2 
-2-
HOMES FOR AGED PERSONS
During the twelve years the legislation has been in operation,
the response by the churches, charitable and other voluntary agencies and
the public to the Aged Persons Homes Act has been magnificent. We have
recently widened the policy under which grants are made on a $ 2 for $ 1
basis, to permit eligible organisations to give greater attention to the
aged who are frail and infirm.
We will widen the scope of assistance by including local
governing bodies in the organisations eligible under the Act and accepting
contributions by them towards Aged Persons Homes as qualifying for
Commonwealth matching subsidy.
It is our hope that local governing bodies will sponsor aged
persons homes in the areas of their administration and that particular
attention will be given by them to the housing needs of pensioners. / 3 
3
HELP FOR DISABLED
Another area in which we believe the greatest effectiveness
can be obtained only if there is a marriage of government and voluntary
effort is in relation to sheltered workshops.
Vie will forthwith begin consultation with both voluntary and
other agencies with a view to granting capital assistance on a $ 2 for $ 1
basis towards the expansion and establishment of sheltered workshops
conducted by voluntary agencies throughout the Commonwealth. We have
in mind that this aid should run not only to workshops that aim to restore
the disabled to outside employment but also to those that will provide
employment under sheltered conditions to those who have a permanent
residual disability. Vie will introduce a special allowance for employees in
sheltered workshops. The allowance will be reduced when earnings exceed
a certain limit but will be so arranged that employees will receive a net
increase in income for each increment of earnings.
The effect of these two measures should provide a strong
incentive to the development of sheltered workshops. / 4 
-4-
SOCIAL WELFARE
Government has a predominant role in the
field of social security, but there will always be large areas in which
the welfare services of our community must depend upon voluntary
effort. Accordingly, we have decided to make annual grants to the
Australian Council of Social Services and to the Australian Council for
Rehabilitation of Disabled.
The annual grant, over the next three years, to each of
the Councils will be $ 15, 000 of which $ 1C, OCC will be on the basis of
$ 1 for each $ 1 raised by the organisation.
These two grants will be additional to a grant of $ 60, 000
for each of the next two years that the Government has undertaken to
make to the National Old People's Welfare Council to assist it in
co-ordinating the work of voluntary agencies in the field of the welfare of
t ie elderly. 
HOME SAVINGS GRANT SCHEME
In the 1963 Policy Speech, we undertook to provide a
Commonwealth grant of II1 for every 3Z3 saved by a person under 36 years
of age to assist young married people to buy or build their own homes.
The maximum grant payable to any young couple is
To be eligible for the grant, the savings must have been
deposited over a pedod of at least three years in a Home Savings Account
with a bank, or with a building or housing society, or used for purposes of
acquiring a home. Our Home Savings Grant Scheme has been in operation for
nearly 2J2 years. some 64, 000 couples have received the grant and grants
totalling almost $ 29 million have been paid.
Because the Scheme is a novel one and is still in its early
years of operation, cases have arisen where, due to genuine misunderstanding
or lar.* of awareness of all the requirements, some applicants have
failed to qualify for the grant.
While we wish all applications to be lodged within twelve
months of buying or building a home, we propose to give the Secretary of
the Department of Housing certain discretionary powers so that cases may
be treated sympathetically on their individual merits. These discretionary
powers will apply to eligible persons who bought or commenced to build
their homes on or after December 2, 1963.
The matters in respect of which a discretion might be given
are To extend the time limit for the lodgment of applications from three
months to twelve months and to empower the Department to accept
applications lodged within a further period if circumstances suggest
that this is justified.
To empower the Department to disregard ownership of " another
dwelling house" where it is sctisfied that it would be unreasonable
to regard the dwelling house as the matrimonial home or suitable
for this purpose.
To empower the Department to determine that any interest in land
that it considers appropriate for the purposes of the Act be
accepted as an " approved interest".
To give the Department a discretionary power to accept savings made
in a period of three years ending on a date not more than fourteen
days before or after the prescribed date in circumstances it
considers reasonable. The definition of the prescribed date will
not be altered.
To permit the Department to pay a grant to a person who has been
widowed on or after the prescribed date of the amount of the
grant that would have been paid to one or both of the couple if
the spouse had not died.
To give the Department a discretionary power to permit an applicant's
savings period to be broken for a short period should there appear
to be good or sufficient reasons.
All these proposed new discretionary -rs are designed to meet
cases of hardship that have akreqdy arisen. . Tllid cre tionar v po%% ers will,
therefore, apply from the date of commencement of the Schemre. 4/ 6 
-6
PRIMARY I N D USITR Y
O ur r uralI industries have set records in expansion in
the past 17 years. Production in 1965-66 was 47 per cent, above that of
1948-1949 and some 60 per cent, above the level of the immediate pre-war
years. This has been achieved in spite of severe drought in extensive areas
of New South Wales and Queensland in 1965-1966.
A farm work force of less than half a million, smaller than
in the pre-war period, has produced this phenomenal result.
Our policy is to promote efficient and expanding primary
industries to meet the demands of a growing population and secondary
industries, and to provide a rising amount of export income.
Our constant objective is to ensure that returns for rural
commodities are maintained, and, if possible, improved, and that primary
producers are able to earn remunerative incomes.
Since our election in 1949, we have paid out approximately
$ 497 million in subsidy on the production of butter and cheese and the
export of processed milk products under the various five-year dairy
industry stabilisation plans.
The current plan ends next June. We will consult with the
industry bodies on the details of a further five-year plan to apply from
July 1, 1967. / 7 
-7-
HEALTH
Our National Health Scheme, which in many
parts of the world is regarded as a model of its kind, has been
progressively improved during the past three years.
It is estimated, for example, that a further 120, 000 age,
invalid, widow and service pensioners and 17, 00Q of their dependants
became eligible for enrolment in the Pensioner Medical Service following
relaxation of the Pensioner Medical Service means test.
Also, in 1964, we introduced a new schedule of Commonwealth
medical benefits. The general effect was to increase Commonwealth
benefits by 33 and 1/ 3rd per cent.
We have reviewed the list of pharmaceutical benefits from
time to time since 1963 to ensure that full advantage is taken of modern
developments in the availability of new and improved drugs.
We will continue to improve our National Health Scheme / 8 
8-
PAPUA_-AND _ NEW1 GUINEA
We propose to continue our vigorous programmes of balanced
development economic, social and political towards which we have
allotted a grant of $ 70 million this year, compared with $ 50 million three
years ago. To this end, we are prepared, on the basis of the co-operation
of the people of Papua and New Guinea and their elected representatives, to
continue to spend more over the next few years. The object will be to
shorten the time that must elapse before the Territory of Papua and New
bieacan finance its own basic need s from its own resources.
Without this, there can be no real freedom of choice when the
time comes for Papuans and New Guineans to decide what eventual political
status they want. The further expansion of primary and secondary industry and
increased export income will be vigorously pursued in harmony with the
broad policy of economic development based on the W~ orld B ank Missions
1964 Report. The newly -established Papua and New Guinea Development
Bank will play an important development role.
In political affairs the Government will not be slow to make
constitutional changes if the Papuans and New Guineans want them, nor will
the Government press changes upon the people if they do not want change.
In accordance with this approach, the membership of the House of Assembly,
which was set up in 1964 with a great majority of elected members, will be
increased in size for the next elections in 1968. Again if the people of
Papua and New Guinea indicate a desire for a limited system of ministerial
representation, appropriate arrangements will be worked out.
The new Institute of Higher Technical Education and the new
University of Papua and New Guinea have been established to help in the
training and education of Papuans and New Guineans. In political, social
and economic matters the advancement of the indigenous people of the
Territory will continue to be a basic objective.
I confirm once again that we will defend the Territory of
Papua and New Guinea as if it was part of the Australian mainland. / 9 
9.
ABORIGINES
In the field of aboriginal advancement, we will continue
to co-operate with the Governments of the States.
In the Northern Territory, where the Commonwealth
is specially responsible, no Territory laws discriminate against
aborigines. In employment we will continue to support equality of
wages and conditions for aborigines. The Govern ment supported this
principle in the pastoral industry where substantial interim increases are
being made and where complete equality under the award will apply not
later than 1968. Royalties on minerals in aboriginal reserves will be paid
into a Trust Fund for the benefit of the aboriginal people.
We will continue to improve the educational opportunities
for aboriginal children.
Proposals are being put before the Northern Territory
Legislative Council to make land on aboriginal reserves available for
leasing to aborigines on the advice of a special Board of which the
majority of the members will be aborigines. 
10
NORTHERN TERRITORY
WN e w ill continue policies that provide a climate of
opportunity and open up further prospects of growth for the mining,
pastoral and tourist industries in this Territory, which occupies one-sixth
of the continent and is an area of special Commonwealth responsibility.
We will go on encouraging th e development of the great mineral
potentialities of the Territory in such places as Cove, Groote Eylandt and
McArthur River. At these and other places investment could total more
than $ 40G million. The pastoral industry has been developing substantially with
the establishment of export abattoirs at Katherine and Darwin and with new
techniques for improved pastures and with the provision of more credit for
water and subsidies for imported stud stock. This development will be
stimulated still further by the continuation of the beef road programme for
the Territory. More than $ 3 million will be spent on this programme during
the current year and 900 miles of beef roads will then have been completed
in the Territory. Moreover, special loans and freight subsidies are helping
pastoralists in the Centre to recover from the most disastrous drought in the
region's history. Further expansion can be expected in the Northern Territory
tourist industry which, with improved roads and facilities, has been growing
rapidly. We will continue to give financial backing to the development
of the Territory which has a higher growth rate than almost any other part
of the Commonwealth. 



a 0 " THE JOB AHEAD OF US IN ASIA"
Extracts from Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt,
at Opening of M. R. A. Conference, Monash University, Melbourne
6th January, 1967.
One of the reasons I was attracted to speak to you
today was the theme of your Conference " It's Our Job Australia".
I share your view that the job ahead for us in world affairs
and particularly in the affairs of this region in which we
live is not only tremendously important but for Australia it
is a challenge of comparatively recent emergence.
Three-fifths of the population of the world live East
of Suez and as I've said when I've been travelling overseas,
we can't turn our backs, nor can Europe turn its back, upon
the problems of the people who live in Asia. What was our
Far East in the literature of my early time in public life
has become very much the Near I'orth oT this country.
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
I would like to tell you something, since we are
speaking of our responsibilities internationally, of the way
in which Australia has grown both in influence and action in
this field. For a very long time in the history of our
Federation external relationships had a very limited interest
to the Parliament. It was hard to Let the Parliament to accept
a debate on external matters. You ad some industrial issue
that the whole Parliament would be wanting to speak on, some
domestic industrial issue the arbitration system, the social
services and matters of that kind. In my earlier years in
the Parliament it was a rarity to have a debate on foreign
affairs. Now there is no more popular vehicle for Parliamentary
speech at the present time than a debate on foreign affairs.
In the earliest period we looked to the United Kingdom.
The people who quip me because they say I am all the way with
America, at that time were quipping the Government of the day
because they said we were cIinging to the skirts of Downing
Street if Downing Street could have skirts. You follow
the idea. And people, for their own political purposes,
choose to take a statement made in one context and apply it
far more generally and widely than the facts would justify.
I don't think when Andrew Fisher saidito the last man and
the last shilling", that people interpreted that as meaning
that Australia had surrendered any independence of judgment
and action that it might otherwise possess. And when I say
that we are all the way with America in resisting aggression
in Vietnam, that doesn't im ly that we don't have an independent
mind and judgment on some o these great international questions.
I don't think, if you were to searcA his heart on the matter,
there is one of my political opponents in the National
Parliament who seriously believes that Australia has surrendered 
2
that independence which a government should possess.
You may be interested to know just how the Australian
activity has grown. In 1901 the Department of External Affairs
was established as one of the original Departments of State;
but there was so little interest in this work in the Parliament
that by 1916 the Department had been abolished. And the function
of the Department was taken over by the Prime Minister. Would
I be correct in thinking it was William Morris Hughes at that
time? He took over most of the functions of that period.
He was said to have ruled Australia with his pen. Jell, as
far as he was concerned, what little there was for External
Affairs to do was going to be done inside his own Department.
And it wasn't until 1935 that it was re-established as a
separate Department of Jovernment. I could give you the
figures on staff which I think are quite revealing, and I
am not going back to the early years of Federation. 3ut in
June, 1946 we had a total staff" in the External Affairs
Deuartment, including those overseas and those in Australia
and certain people locally engaged in quite minor positions
410. By June 1966 twenty years later the 410 had grown
to 1,570. So that you will see that Australia's growing interest
was reflected in the growth of the Department of External Affairs.
When I examined the table on this I thought it might
be of some interest to you. I was glad to find that when
you look at the geographical spread of these posts the largest
number is to be found in Asia and South Asia. There are 19
there 18 in Europe, 7 in North and South America, 7 in Africa,
3 in the South Pacific; and in addition to those diplomatic
Dosts we have trade posts growing, too, quite steadily around
the world, and there are some separate immigration posts which
help us with that programme.
REVOLUTION OF RISING EXPECTATIONS
Now what makes the task in Asia, and indeed in the
under-developed world generally, so exciting at this time is,
if I may quote the words of Arnold Toynbee, well expressed
in this passage. " Our age will be remembered not for its
terrifying crimes or its astonishing inventions, but because
it is the first generation in history in which mankind dared
to believe it practical to make the benefits of civilization
available to the whole human race." And that is not just a
belief held by the more affluent countries, what are inown
in the jargon of the day as the developed countries, by which
we usually mean the highly industrialized countries, but it
is certainly held amongst those countries which are learning
for the first time in history that mankind's age-old enemies
of sickness, disease, illiterac poverty, the lack of
adequate shelter, hunger, that these things can be conquered,
that other countries have conquered them and are going on
to even higher standards.
So there has built up what has been aptly described
as the revolution of rising expectations. And the expectations
are certainly there, and they are complicating international
life tremendously because it is one thing to stage a revolution 
-3-
for your reed6m, to establish a separate national entity;
but-it-is a-veVy much more difficult thing to go about te
more mundane an-humdrum task of supplying the needs of your
people. We are-seein' this all around the under-developed
world at this time, whether it is in Africa, in Asia, or some
other part of the globe, that the victory has been won by the
politician. He has secured his freedom, he has secured his
independence. He has a nation to lead. But the people in
that nation are able, through the various modern communications
inedia to see the more affluent and well-supplied
world around them and they want these things. They don't want
them as the end product, as is the case in most of the
developed countries, of centuries of politic al and industrial
evolution. They want them preferably in the next year and
certainly in the next five or ten years. Because it is
humanly impossible to do all these things in that time, the
discontents build up and these discontents provide the
infection for disorder, for challenge, and a threat to the
more stable and orderly forms of society which otherwise
could be maintained in the country concerned. This is part
of the challenge which all of us have to face because we
must recognize the needs, we must recognize tAe consciousness
which exists on the part of the under-supplied people that
their needs can be met, or at least they hope, as Toynbee
says, for the first time in history people dare to hope the
things which they have accepted philosophically perhaps or
with despair in centuries past, that these things are capable
of solution, and there are men, statesmen around the world,
who believe that also in countries which can make a major
contribution. The present President of the United States is
one such man who has a vision, not only of a good society at
home, but a vision of a better world order around the world
as a whole, and is prepared to contribute the wealth, the
technical skill, the co-operation, the assistance of this
country of 190 odd million people to assisting in those tasks.
This year has seen, I believe, a notable progress forward in
the thinking of the people of the United States, and certainly
of the United States administration, in relation to the
possibilities which exist in Asia..
AUSTRALIA'S INFLUENCE
Now Australia, you say there is a job ahead of us and
that might seem on the face of it to be rather large a claim
for a comparatively small country measured in terms of
population to make. but there is force in this, because
Providence has placed Australia in a situation where it can
exercise an influence out of all relationship to the numbers
of our people. In the first place there's our historic
relationship with the United Kingdom. Virtually a family
relationship, and when I go to conferences in London, as my
predecessor and leaders of governments from Australia of
other political persuasions, we are greeted as members of the
same family, and that's the atmosphere in the United Kingdom.
They have always been interested to hear what we've
had to say willing to take our views into their own
consideration, and it was typical that although I was a 
4
fledgljng Prime-Minister-when Sir Robert retired, in the
first wee4 of my own administration I had personal letters,
or messages,-from Harold Wilson and from President Johnson
asking me to continue the same intimate correspondence that
they had developed with Sir Robert Menzies. Now this doesn't
happen to every country. It happens to this country because
our views are respected. ie are known as people who express
ourselves quite robustly at times, but sincerely and with a
desire to help. And so we do have some influence on the
thinking of these two great powers, more influence I believe
even in my limited experience of just under twelve months,
than most Australians would imagine.
Then there are other reasons why we have a capacity
for influence in the region of Asia. ' e don't carry any
background of colonial power past. I think it's true that
leaders in these countries speak more frankly and freely to
us than they do to the representatives of -' reter powers.
They know that we have no territorial ambitions so far as
they are concerned. We have no aspiration to exploit their
wealth, although the charge on this, I think has been grossly
exaggerated over the years. But we have, and this again is
a bond of sympathy with us, problems of a development kind
which they face themselves and fortunately for us we've shown
a capacity to meet those problems successfully, to build
in a not highly Promising terrain and climate a civilisation
and a standard of living which ranks amongst the highest to
be found around the world. They want to know how we've done
it. They are glad to have from us some indication of the way
we go about things. They welcome the technical assistance
that we can bring to them.
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
There are at present somewhere in the neighbourhood
of 15 000 students from the Asian region studying in Australia.
Some 10% of the full-time students enrolled in our universities
are from overseas. Over the past few years, some 50 000
students from Asia have passed through our various eaucational
establishments and they can become, as so many of them do,
good ambassadors for Australia.
Perhaps our most enduring gift to Asia is in the
education opportunities we offer. Asia desperately needs
skilled tradesmen and technicians and better educated farmers
as well as graduates. Blue-collar work does not have the respect
it enjoys in Western countries and training in manipulative
skills still lags far behind needs. And here we are helping
with gifts of technical equipment to colleges with books and
with teachers. Kuching in Sarawak, is only one of the multitude of
examples which could be given. Australian gifts of earthmoving
equipment are being used to train local labour. In
Singapore we are setting out to equip a second technical
school. In Vietnam and Thailand Australian equipment and
inspectors are at work on trade training. And the whole 
r range of Colombo. Plan activities from our point of view is
largely connected to the technical assistance aspect or
equipment which can help the countries concerned to help
themselves. FOREIGN AID
It is not only by our own direct foreign aid expenditure
that we can help the developing countries of Asia and
the Pacific. We can help also by bringing their problems to
the notice of other aid giving countries which recognize we
have a good deal of first hand knowledge and contact with
our geographical neighbours.
We have been involved in the aid field in Asia longer
than most. The Colombo Plan set up in 1951 was largely a
product of an Australian initiative, and Sir Percy Spender,
now the President of the International Board of Justice at
The Hague, was the prime mover in getting the programme
established. Early in 1966 we joined the development assistance
committee of the OECD. This committee comprises the major
Western European aid donors, the United States, Japan, and
now includes Australia.
The activities of the Australian Council for Overseas
Aid, established in 1965, has the aim of co-ordinating the
activities of voluntary organizations whose projects-in devcloping
countries supplement in a valuable way the Government's
official aid programmes. Some of you will be aware of the
organizations represented on that council. They include the
Australian Council of Churches Community Aid Abroad and
the Overseas Service Bureau. There is of course a crisis of
people in Asia, and it is one of the harsh ironies or
paradoxes that as we improve health standards where everybody
wants to see them improved, and the expectancy of life in
some countries, we merely add to their problems of supplying
the growing population.
India is a case in point where quite dramatic advances
in the public health field substantially increased The
expectancy of life.
We shouldn't and we mustn't go into Asia seli-righteously
selling ' Western concepts and ways of doing things as -he best
and only course for these countries who have a history and
tradition hundreds of years, perhaps thousands of years,
older than that from which we draw our beliefs. And w9
mustn't assume that ours are the only answers and that they
must change fundamentally all the things on which they hove
built up their beliefs. 
6
ECONOMIC BACK3ROUND
I came across a table the other day which gave some
facts about Asian nations area, population, gross national
product and average output per person. And it is quite a
fascinating table, if I just run down a column and pick a
few of the countries out of average output per person. You
will see the gap which exists at the present time between
the more affluent and the less affluent peoples of the world.
Australia has an average output per person and in this table
which is taken from an official U. S. Department of Commerce
source we have the highest average output in the region of
1967 dollars per person per annum. That is spread over the
whole population. Burma
Cambodia $ i150
Communist China $ 105
India Indonesia
Japan ( which of course has made tremendous strides
industrially in the years since the First World War, and more
particularly since the Second World War) 4,878. But even at
that most people would, I think, be rather surprised to find
that their average output per person is rather less than half
in value of money than that of the Australian.
Malaysia $ 520 a low figure by our standards, but
a high figure by the standards of
most, nearly three times the output
of people of some of these other
countries.
New Zealand, as might be expected, ranking very close
to Australia, and in earlier years was ahead of us, 1B62,
to our .1967. North Korea
North Vietnam
Pakistan Philippines $ 160
Singapore q$ 450
S. Korea $ 100
S. Vietnam 115
Formosa &gt; 225
Thailand $ 120
Now, if I were to occupy your time by giving you
figures of population as well, and gross national product
figures, you would find some very interesting points emerge.
But I will just give you two illustrations from them. If you
look at this table you will see that India has a population
about 42 times that of Australia, but it has 1' ess than double
the value of Australia's gross national product and on average
output per person in money value approximately 1/ 20th that
of Australia. Indonesia, with more than nine times our population,
has a gross na. tional product only one-third that of Australia, 
with an average output per person only -/ 28th that of this
country. Now this doesr't of course reflecthe_ energy and
the industry of people in the countries concerned. There
are hard workers in every country and I suppose there are
some drones in every country. But it does reflect the degree
of industrial development, echnical skill technological
advance that one country is able to generate by comparison
with another And it is one of the reasons why Australia,
with only 111 million people, still counts as a factor,
particularly in the economic life of the world. We rank
amongst the first ten or twelve traders to be found around
the world. The countries of Asia, with the exception of Japan,
have not yet truly reached the take-off point. 3ut despite
this, there are real grounds for hope, particularly if the
area can be kept free of the senseless costs of war, and aid
can be kept flowing into sund and self-generating projects.
There is a transfer in resources from Australia for our own
aid effort. It currently takes place in a number of ways,
through contributions to the World dank and other international
bodies through membership of the Asian Development Bank,
through the Colombo Plan. and through bi-lateral programmes
such as food aid for India.
A major effort from Australia necessarily is made in
the territory of Papua/ New Guinea but our other international
economic aid contributions are substantial. The annual rate
now runs at well over one hundred million dollars, and we
are moving fairly steadily towards what has been stated as
a desired goal of one per cent of gross national product.
At the moment it has moved up to I think 0.64 per cent and
leaves us among st the first four or five nations of the world
in per capita terms in the srant of aid. But the size of
our effort of course is limited by our own vast development
needs. We have a continent the size of the United States to
develop. Our reliance on a fairly substantial inflow of
overseas capital, which accounts Tor about 10% of our total
investment in fixed assets. And our need to greatly expand
the defensive capacity of Australia, both for our own security
and to assist in the joint security programmes aimed at
producing stability in this area of the world.
In the trade field we have taken several steps
specifically designed to create greater market opportunities
for the products of the less developed countries and hence
to encourage their economic development. Imports into
Australia of a range of products of particular export interest
to developing countries are liable to substantially lower
rates of duty than are payable on corresponding products from
developed countries. In addition we have removed or are in
process of removing, tariffs on a large range of handcraft
products produced in developing countries as a means of
assistance to the traditional industries to be found there.
And, as our own industrial base grows, more capital and skills
accumulate, not only for our national or personal benefit,
but for the volume of international assistance we are able to
give. 
8
POLITICAL BACKROUND
We have to recognize the facts oflife in Asia and
appreciate that were it not for the firm determination of
the United States in South Vietnam and the.. role Britain
played in Malaysia and is continuing to play in the area, the
shape of Asia would be very different from that which exists
today and the promise of the future would be very different
from that we look forward to today. The generous commitment
of these two countries has provided stability and a real
measure of freedom. It has made it possible for many of the
countries of Asia to participate in their own ways in the
political social and economic revolution so necessary for
the well-being of their peoples and so important to us as
their near neighbours.
ASPAC is one example of growing co-operation between
the countries of Asia and we are proud to be included. There
are signs of other forms of co-operation growing the visits
of political leaders, such gathering s the Manila Conference.
We certainly hope this process will continue and that the
work of these organizations already established will strengthen.
Among the more encouraging of recent political developments
I think the following deserve special mention:-
Settlement of the long-standing dispute between
Japan and Korea. These two countries have established normal
relations and committed themselves to closer co-operation.
The close relations now existing between Australia
and Japan two countries quite recently at war with each
other. It is certainly a welcome change. Japan has become
now the biggest purchaser of Australian exports. We rank
second customer of the exports of Japan. . e look to increasing
and friendly links between our two fast-developing countries.
Indonesia successfully overcame the Communist attempt
to seize power. Its new government is concentrating on plans
for economic recovery and development. From the figures I
gave you a very difficult task lies ahead of them. Already
there are attempts being made to give practical assistance
from a considerable number of countries.
Australia has established in recent years warm
relationships with a number of these Asian countries. Even
in the confrontation period we retained links of understandg
with Indonesia. Cambodia is certainl not in the American camp but
we represent them in South Vietnam. Ve also represent the
U. S. in Cambodia. It is quite an interesting development
there and I give a lot of the credit to the French-speaking
mbassador who has established very good relations with
Frime Minister Sihanouk.
We have developed important and friendly links with
Thailand, more particularly over recent years and this aain
as a special interest for us as far as our nearest neighbour,
Indonesia, is concerned, because there has been a long
historic course of friendship between those two countries
and when the confrontation negotiations were carried through, 
9
it was, ou may remember, in Bangkok that the parties met
and in the friendly atmosphere provided by the people of
the Thai administration, they were able to make very good
progress.
STABILITY AS OUR GOAL
Our goal in Asia is one of stability. That is one
of our principal goals at any rate. We don't mean by that
something passive, conservative or resistant to change.
That in itself carries the seeds of instability and indeed
we have our own strong sense of national drive and independent
spirit and we've supported movements for national independence
in South East Asia. But our concept of stability is a
progressive one. We want in this region a constructive
assured environment in which governments and administrations
can plan and carry through with some certainty programmes
and reforms based on the rational use of resources and
conceived in the interests of the community as a whole in
which public authority is an instrumentality of the public
welfare and is responsive to the needs of the community;
and in which there is prospect of real participation on a
broad basis in economic an social affairs.
Stability brings progress. In South East Asia it is
the countries enjoying stability where conspicuously we find
development occurring, rapid change and reform and a sense
of national vitality and where the forces of modernisation
are most apparent. Another point I should note with you is
that nation-building on this constructive basis requires cooperation
from other countries in the region and a stable
external environment. A number of countries in South East
Asia today are, in fact reaching out towards regional
co-operation as with ASPAC, the Manila Conference, Developmait
Bank and in other ways and are truly entering into international
arrangements for security and defence, economic
assistance for educational and technical benefits. We in
Australia feel a strong sense of common interest and
mutuality of purpose in these matters. Despite the separateness
of our histories and of our cultural and ethnic backgrounds
our national aims and external attitudes are very similar
indeed. Respect for national independence, peace and stability,
economic development, widening opportunities and conditions
of freedom. Now this was summed up well by the distinguished
and able Foreign Minister of Thailand and he said that
although Australia was not racially a part of Asia, it was
considered as so because of the friendly interest she showed
in the welfare of the people of Asia.
aain, President Marcos, at the Summit Conference at
Manila had this to say about it: " The participation in this
meeting of the Prime Ministers of Australia and New Zealand
is a hopeful agry. These two freedom-loving nations are
our neighbours by the accident of geoeraphy but our friends
and partners by deliberate choice. They are as fully 
A 1 10
committed as ourselves to the freedom of Asia and to the
attainment of the secure and just peace indispensable to the
economic development of these combined nations. They have
much to contribute to the attainment of our common goals."
And that I think demonstrates that Australia has been
doing something of the job which your conference feels is the
responsibility that lies ahead of us.
I conclude by speaking of the goals that were set
out in one of the documents which emerged at the Manila
Conference. It was called the Joals of Freedom. It said
there, the seven nations gathered in Manila, declare
our unity, our resolve and our purpose in seeking together
the goals of freedom in Vietnam and in the Asian and Pacific
area." That document which I believe to be historic in its
impact and its implications, recites that the goals are:
" To be free from aggression. To conquer hunger,
illiteracy and disease. To build a region of
security, order and progress. To seek reconciliation
and peace throughout Asia and the Pacific."
If we can live up to those goals, all of us, not only
Australia but others in the region, then I believe we shall
be doing our job. 4 



AUSTRALIA DAY LUNCHEON
ROYALE BALLROOM, LELBOURNE 26TH JANXUARY, 1967.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
MR. HOLT:
Mr. Chairman Your Excellencies Lady Delacombe Distinguished
guests, and this includes my Parliamentary and Ministerial
Colleagues and Ladies and Gentlemen:
First, Sir Norman I must congratulate you, and I do so
on behalf of the Commonwealth Government, for the work that you
and your colleagues are doing to bring a wider and deeper
observarce of this National Birthday of ours and it must be
very gratifying to you to look around at this room today and
see how the initiatives which you and those with you have set
in motion some years ago are now producing this wider recognition.
In this part of Australia by the stimulus you have given, I
believe, about Australia generally certainly in my own experience
and this is perhaps not merel a product of any particular initiative
of any organisation, but of the degree of progress and development
and maturity that is going on inside Australia itself there is
this deepening awareness of the significance of our National
Birthday and the growing desire to recognise it and participate
in it. The other thing which I feel you must be congratulated
upon is the enterprise you have shown in making each year a
selection of the man or woman who in your judgment is the Australian
of the Year. I make no complaint that Parliamentarians are
disbarred from this very fitting recognition. Ve get our recognition
in other ways usually a three yearly interval, either favourable
or unfavourable, and we get enough of the limelight anyhow, but
it has been truly said that a great nation is a nation which
produces great people. It doesn't have to be a large nation, or
a powerful nation if it produces great people it is a great nation,
and we have confidence and pride in the quality of the Australian
people, and we do well to recognise those Australians who have
shown such distinction in the year under review that they have
earned the accolade of their fellow Austrilians and have been
honoured with this proud title. You have chosen well, you have
spread your choices through various fields of activity of interest
and importance to us and this year's selection is well up to the
high standard of your earlier selection and I offer my personal
congratulations to hr. Brabham as I did when he secured the World
Championship. I want to say thank you on behalf of us ill, that includes
my Government and your organisation and all assembled here, indeed
all to whom his warm thoughtful, generous words will come. Thanks
from us all to Mr. iAelan for th. it remarkably eloquent address to
us. I felt that we could not have expressed for Australia and to
Australia more admirably the thin-s that we are feeling at this
time, and how appropriate it is that these words should come from
the representative in this city of our great Pacific partner nd
ally, the United States of America.
has seen ouIr satyw o tchoatu ntardiveiss edblryo ugbhetc aculsoes etrh e tyoegaert hetrh att hhaans evjeurs t beclfoosreed
in their history. The tangible evidence of this is that at four
separate sets Qf meetings the Heads of Jovernment of our two
countries came together for our common purposes. Never before in
the history of our two countries have the Heads of those Governments / 2 
-2-
met so often and for such common purposes as was the object of
our discussions, twice in Washington, at Manila and here in
Australia in the course of the year which has just closed-and
that is significant, I believe, of what is occurring in this
area of the world.
It is of course, no accident or coincidence that these
meetings should have taken place with such frequency because we,
with the United States, have so much in common in this area of
the world and indeed in the world at large; our common principles
of democratic freedom, our adherence to principles of social justice,
of a prospering world at peace, is the goal to which we constantly
aspire, our common determination to play such part as we can in
improving the lot of those people who live with us in the Pacific
and Asian region*
These are things which have held us closer together our
comradeship in the issue of Vietnam, where such a massive effort
has been put forward and so much sacrifice by the people of the
United States in initiative which is vital to us and indeed important
to the free world as a whole.
You spoke, Mr. Whelan, of the influence which this small
country, small in terms of population can exert and those were not
fullsome or overly flattering words, because we recognise that this
is a fact of modern history so far as our own country is concerned
in this area of the world and various factors have combined to
produce this. I discovered in my first few days of office that
both President Johnson and Prime Minister Wilson were inviting
me to maintain with them the same close, intimate correspondence
which had been developed between them by my predecessor Sir
Robert Menzies, and this surely was an indication that this small
country has a voice which is valued and respected. Some times,
people say, we are going American in my boyhood I used to hear
people say that we used to cling to the skirts of Downing Street;
we are not going American or for that matter going English we
are going Australian; we are -oing Australian. That is why the
Heads of these great JovernmenIs respect our views they want
independent views and frank views from a friend and from an ally
and that is what they received from us. I can assure you
communication is frequent. It is helpful, informative sincere
between us all and if helps us in the common purposes to which
we aspire. And so, as this becomes more widely known around
Asia and indeed throughout the world Australia s influence and prestige
develops. Then we have had the task in this vast continent not
always favoured by climate nor seasons nor fertility of the soil,
of building one of the affluent societies of the world and you
have referred to our standard of living our high standard of
living. This impresses our neighbours in this area of the world,
who themselves have problems of development. They seek advice
technical assistance and help of various kinds from us. They
don't do so with any feeling that in that way they are demeaning
themselves. We have from their point of view no great power
aspirations. We have no colonial past to embitter the relationship
between us. And we are a frank and friendly people whom generally
speaking, they find they can like. This too, helps to bulld our
influence and the bridges of friendship that we can create in Asia
are bridges which help us all. I could give you one short
illustration. Cambodia is a country which at the present time is
not supporting our policies, indeed it has no diplomatic relations
with the United States of America. And so in Cambodia Australia
represents the United States' interests, and in South Vietnam
Australia represents the interea. ta of Cambodia. Now this is an
example of the kind of thing I have in mind when I say this
country can be of value and is recognised as having that value by
our friends in this region of the world.
It is only in comparatively recent years that we have
built up our capacity for these things. In the foundation of our
Federation in 1901 there was a place for a Department of External
Affairs in the seven States then created. But it seemed to have 
-3-
so little to do and there was so little interest in its activities
that it was abolished in 1916 and it wasn't until 1955 that we
re-established a Department of External Affairs. It was in 1946
that we set up our first Mission to the United Nations in New
York. But since that time in the 20 years that have elapsed
there has been a -rowth of the establishment of the Department
from 410 personnel to 1,570 personnel. Where there were then 19
posts abroad representing Australia, that is in 1946, today there
are 54 and the largest number of any section of the world in which
these are found is the area of Asia and South East Asia, where we
have 19 posts, 18 in Europe, 7 in North and South America, 7 in
Africa and 3 in the South Facific. In addition, of course, we have
built up our trade posts, our immigration posts and other means of
carrying Australian interests out into other countries. But you
will gather that this is of comparatively recent origin. My
Parliamentary colleagues will know that it wasn't so very long ago
that a debate on External Affairs in our House would attract very
little interest or attention. Now it is the most eagerly sought
after for participation by Members of the Parliament.
You spoke, Mr. Whelan, of the standards we have built
up and this again illustrates how Australia can have an influence out
of all proportion to its numbers. If you look at the situation in
India-and I don't say this in respect of either of the two
countries I mentioned in any reflection on what they are doing for
themselves, we know quite clearly the problems which exist in these
countries but India is a country with a population 42 times that
of Australia and it has just doubled the value of gross national
products of Australia. Indonesia, which has nine times the population
of Australia, has a value of gross national product one third of
that of Australia; and you will see that the reference made by
Dr. i" helan in carrying on some remarks of mine that we have ranked
among the top ten or twelve tr. iding nations of the world. This has
revealed that our country, small in numbers, nevertheless has an
impact both in influence and in its economic strength, its trading
capacity out of all proportion to the population of our people.
So we can, I believe, on this our National Birthday,
feel that we are favoured people, that we have achievements behind us
to which we can look with pride, yet, as the proposer of the toast
so eloquently stressed, there are brighter horizons ahead for us.
. e share that judgment and confidence, Mr. Whelan, we Australians
believe that our tomorrows will be the greatest days of Australian
history. Jiven a world of peace we cannot only expand our own
country's capacity, build our population, improve our standards
but make a growing contribution to the welfare of those around us.
So, with that bright prospect before our eyes, with a vision
of a greater Australia greater in influence, greater in strength
greater in security and prosperity wve can today in all certainty
say it is a happy birthday for Australia and may there be many
happy returns ahead. Thank you again. 



NEW ZEALAND TOUR 1967
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD
HOLT, ON ARRIVAL AT WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND 2ND FEBRUARY, 1967
Mr. Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen:
I bring to you a very warm and friendly greeting to you,
Prime Minister, to your Government, and to the people of New Zealand
from the Government and people of Australia.
I am sure there is in my own country a strengthening
feeling that our two countries should be closer together in terms of
physical contact, in our policies, and in the mutual beneficial trade that can
develop between us, and as I made in my first year of office visits to our own
Forces abroad, I felt that my next priority, having got our Prime Ministers'
Conferen ce and the Manila Conference and matters of that sort, in which
both your Prime Minister and I were directly and personally involved, that
high on the list of priorities indeed, the first journey of the year in this
year after re-election should be a visit to New Zealand. I was delighted
to accept the invitation which my old friend, your Prime Minister, Keith
Holyoake, extended to me.
My wife has had the most fleeting contact only with New
Zealand. S" he was on a journey to America and had lunch in Auckland, I
think, some years ago. It is sixteen years since I was here, leading the
Australian delegation to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference at
Wellington.
( Mr. Holyoake: Too long.)
It is much too long, as you say, Keith. I think one of
the reasons why you have not seen more of Australian Prime Ministers is
that we do meet, and my predecessor did meet with you frequently, at the
Prime Ministers' Conferences abroad and at other g atherings of that sort,
but there is no substitute, if one wishes to understand a country and get to
know it, for the physical contact with the people and with the country. I
think I have learned more about New Zealand in the last seven days as I
tried to brief myself on what I might find here and on what we might discuss
here than I have learned in all the earlier years I have had in public life.
And there have been some very interecsting revelations for me coming from
that. I knew that we had won Davis Cups together. I did not realise that
the first time we ever won a Davis Cup was an Anzac combination, or
before there was an Anzac in those days in 1907, and I learned too
( Mr. Holyoake I will have to learn this, too)
Oh, yes, Norman Brookes and Wilding. They were a
very successful combination. I learned, too, that your cadets and this
is one reason why I would have been glad to see your guard of honour
your cadets have so frequently won the sword of honour at Duntroon. And
this year at the Officer Cadet School at Portsea where I have a seaside house,
my wife tells me that two New Zealanders were the two senior boys in that
particular year, one getting the sword of honour and the other the Queen's
Medal. So that we respect you not only as worthy friends but as worthy / 2 
2.
competitors il ields of sport~ aiid other areas where we come into contact
one with the other.-I amDooking forward tremendously to this visit and learning
more about your beautiful country, having talks which will be of value I am
sure to us all, with your Prime Minister and Members of his Cabinet. And
I am quite sure that this visit will be fruitful for all the purposes that I
expect from it, and that with so much in common to serve, that our joint
interests can be assisted by interchanges of this kind.
My colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister, will be with you
quite shortly for the periodical discussions on trade matters, and I would
hope that my own visit is itself a symptom of a desire for much more
frequent exchanges at all levels of Government between our two countries.
MR. HOLYOAKE: I would just say briefly I am not going to make a speech
unfortunately the weather has upset the earlier arrangements but again
a very warm personal welcome, Harold, and I know you know we are so
close. You know New Zealanders very well, but it is grand you should
have this opportunity of meeting them and getting to know them on their own
ground. With those few words, I warmly re-echo our welcome.
4 



NEW ZEALAND TOUR 1967
LUNCHEON GIVEN BY MR. HOLYOAKE, PRIME MINISTER
OF NEW ZEALAND IN HONOUR OF MR. HOLT, PRIMS
MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
. ELLIBTON, NE ZEALAND 3RD FE3RUaRY, 1967
Text of Speech MaJ'e by Mr. Holt
Prime Minister: thit distiguished Australian emigrant, Mr.
,; att: Your Excellencies: Mrs. Stevenson and other Parliamentary
colleagues: Ladies and Jentlemen:
First, Prime Minister and I do not know that I will go
on saying " Prime M'vinister" because I am liable to lapse into
something more familiar through force of habit, but first, Prime
IMinister may I thank you very warmly indeed on behalf of my wife
and myself for what you have said so generously and in such warm
and friendly terms about us and about the people I have at this
time the honour to lead. I stand in this room recalling memories
which do not seem all that long distant in point of recollection
although it was about 16 years ago in point of time, because my
first and only previous visit to this beautiful country of yours
was as the leader of the Australian Delegation to the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association, and I recall us having eaten in this
room and hearing oratory no less extensive than that to which you
are to be subjected here today, and I have always held very
pleasant recollections of New 2ealand from that visit. You were
kind enouh to see to it that I then was able to visit some
considerable nart of this northern island, and that is really
my justification for spending so much time in the South on this
occasion. I hope in the years t. come there will be many more
visits and that I shall see very much more of this country than
will be possible even through the length of this particular visit.
It is always good to come amongst friends, and it is even
better to come amongst friends who have common interests, common
purposes to serve, who can themselves act in a way that is
beneficial to you and give you the opportunity to act in a way
which is beneficial to them.
And I must say in passin Yr. ' att, following your
reference to trade between our two countries, that it is the desire
of my Government that any agreements we make on matters of trade
should serve not just the interests of one country, but should be
mutually beneficial for both our countries, and if you find, or if
experience proves that this is not the way the Agreement is
working out if it does not serve our common purposes as fully as
we would both hope, then you will find a helpful and constructive
Australian attitude in order to make that possible, and my
colleague, the Minister for Trade, will be over here to confer with
his opposite numoer, your Deputy Prime Minister, very shortly, and
it will be in that spirit that he will do so: and that is largely
because of the feeling that we have for each other, but it is also
attributable to the recognition that a growiig, prosperig,
developing, strengthening New Zealand is of advantage and strength
and help in promoting the prosoeritv of the country I represent.
So here is enlightened self-interes't given an opportunity to express
itself, and exoress itself in an environment of friendship and
co-operation together.
You spoke, I think, Prime Minister, of the historic fact
/ 2 
-2-
that in 1901 some consideration was given to a closer union
politically-with our two countries, and there have been people
in our Parliaments since that time there may have jeen one or
two in yours: they have been less vocal so far as I have been
aware who have continued to advocate this. I view that prospect
of course with rather mixed feelins. I don't in fact regard it
as a practical prospect in the future that I can look to, because
you very properly have stressed the Few , ealand identity which
means so much to you, and your independence which means so much
to you, but I have sometimes thought of your situation and I am
speaking in particular of you, Prime Minister as oeing a very
happy and lucky one to be head of a Tovernment in a country which
has only one House of Parliament, whose Jovernment is drawn from
only one political party, and which has a unitary system of
Jovernment. Nov, I lea'd a coalition and I am on very good terms
with the members of my coalition but it is a coalition. I lead
it in a Parliament that has two Chambers and in a Federation which
has six States. Now, if there were to ue other members of that
Federation with the strength of mind and independence of spirit
that I have gathered is revealed in this country, those problems
would oe very much more complex than they are at the present time.
' hat you were saying, Mr. att, about the difficulty you have in
getting people overseas to recognise the separateness of our
countries is in one sense, I think, fortification and confirmation
of this degree of friendship that exists between us, and confirms
what you have been saying, Prime inister, that our situation is, so
far as I could ascertain it ar) und the world, unique. I don't
know any two peoples, any two independent countries, that are
closer together in appear: nce, in manner in haoits of life in
identity of interests than we find exist between Australia and
New ' ealand. And that, of course, is the -rime reason, or certainly
one of the prime reasons, of my visit here on this occasion. As
I said yesterday, I felt it Tas my first duty if I could zo abroad,
to go abroad to see our own troops serving Australia in the countries
where they were located, and this developed into something of a
South East Asian mission in the result, oecause these became
formal visits, although the original purpose was for me to make
contact with our own people and have them feel how proud we were
of them how grateful we were for the services they were rendering
us and the common cause of freedom. And then, of course there
was the conference of Prime Ministers the need to establish early
contact with those two great leaders who mean so much to both
our countries, President Johnson and Prime Minister J'ilson. You and
I were together then, later at the Prime Ministers' Conference, and
then the quite historic vanila Conference, the fruits of which we
expect to see of benefit certainly to this area of the world and
to the free world as a whole as the years go on. 3ut when I was
planning the tasks ahead for 1967, having got the election out of
the way, the first priority on my list was to make contact with
my friends here in I2ew Zealand and I am very glad that this has
been possible and you were so kind as to open That invitation up
to me. I spoke of our similarities. You chose to find some distinctions
between us in our manner of speech, and I suppose that is so. l. e
Australians are far less conscious of the fact that we have a
different and not particularly attractive national accentuation
which is observaole to others but which so frequently passes us
unobserved amongst ourselves. I had early evidence of that when
I went on my first visit to the United Kingdom again with a
Parliamentary Delegation, the C. of those aays, in 1948, and on
my first night at the Savoy I asked for a whisky and soda. The
waiter brought along a mixture which, while interestin in
appearance, didn't seem quite to suggest the specification I had
proposed. I tasted it. It was very a-reeable, but certainly was
not what I had requested. So I said, Hey, what's this you've
brought me". " vhat you asked for, Sir, a whisky cider". I am
quite certain that Keith would have no such trouble with the A. B. C.
or B. i. C. accents that we hear so effectively from him. 
-3-
Right Hon. Keith Holyoake Mine's a whisky and water.
Right Hon. Harold Holt . ell, he is safer with whisky and
waer perhaps, but if he ever did ask for a whiskv and soda
he would get it in ample measure and correctly to specifications.
There is one matter which does not seem to ha've altered much.
Perhaps I should hesitate to mention it. '., hen I was in this
room before, I seem to recall explaining to us then that this
really was not ty ical of " ellington weather and that the tood
weather would fo low later. _ ell, I have no problems on tiat
score. Coming from Australia, any rain is welcome. ,. hen I was
asked what I Thought about the climate this morning as we went
to the . ar Memorial, I said " I only wish I could transfer some of
this rain across to my own arid continent." This perhaps has
some bearing, lr. Watt, on what you were saying aoout how this
Trade Agreement was working out. I don't want to harp on this
thing, but I would like you to have this special factor in mind.
1ie have just oeen coming out and these processes of full
restoration are not always speedy from what has proved to be
one of the most serious droughts in part of Australia that we
have ever experienced. It intrigues me that when some other
country has fire, or flood, or some other natural disaster, the
word goes out around the world and the hat goes round to well
disposed countries, and wie are all hanpy to help a nei huour in
distress. 7ell, I don't say that we have been in all that distress,
but nooody seems to see drought in quite the same light, and yet
in our country drought can have consequences far more serious
financially and in relation to the smooth running of the economy
than any of these natural disasters elsewhere. I illustrate this
for you by pointing out that in this most recent drought we lost
14,000,000 sheep, and in the State of New South ales we lost
per cent of the cattle population of that State. Io'. the economy
went on. Some people seem surprised and disappointed that it did
not make the same rate of progress that we had made in more
favourable years. I think we did very well to keep the economy
running along as successfully as we d'id despite these great
national and natural losses. but I do think thAt this as had
some bearing upon the buoyancy of trade between our countries
and I hope tha with more fav') uraole conditions now restored there
should be some improvement in that respect.
You have referred Prime aanidr ' Mri. s t. eart t echoed this
that we have a great deal in common and we have many mutual interests
to serve. really are a very fortunate set of pebbles in these
two countries. . V'e h ve Joth been the inheritors of that splendid
British tradition of democratic institutions and Parliamentary
Jovernment and the acceptance of the principles of freedom and
justice, the dignity and individual liberties of our citizens. This
itself was a great heritage, and we have ueen the inheritors together
of a rich European culture which we have oeen able to apply to the
circumstances of these countries " Down Under". And we have been
favoured oy resources which have enabled each of us to build up a
standard of livin. r which ranks amongst the highest to be found
anywhere around the world. Despite our short'histories, ; e have
built these standards and that of course has a Dearing upon our
significance, certainly in this region of the world, and in the
world at large. You feel nerhaps even more acutel: than , e do the
fact that in terms of nopulation we are small coun'tries in the
world scene. : e are still pushing on to our first 12,000,000: you
are moving on, I gather, to your third million. But we would be
treating ourselves with less than the significance that is due to
us if we were simply to look at this matler in terras of population.
First of all there is the well known fact that great countries
are the countries which produce great men. They are not to oe
counted in heads of population. They are to oe counted in the
quality of the people that they produce and lew; Zealand need bow
its head to no country in the quality of the people it produces and
the contribution which these people have made to the world in many
fields of science of culture, of endeavour. You have produced your
Rutherfords, your ellers, your Hillary9, * and scores of others
whom if time permitted me I could mention, and we, your closest / 4 
friends, your allies, and your partners salute a great people
here in New Zealand.
But the other thing is that you and we by virtue of the
capacity we have shown to increase the nroduction of our countries,
do have a rating internationally out of all proportion to our
numbers, and I can illustrate this for you 1 think, quite simply
in this fashion. Let us take India and Indonesia for my first two
examples. Indonesia has just on nine times the population of
Australia. It has one-third the value of gross national product
of Australia. India, with 42 times the population of Australia, has
just about double the value of gross national product of my country,
and you can translate these illustrations into New Zealand terms.
You can see that when you have only got somethin under 12,000,000
people but you rank with one of the highest standards of living in
the world and you rank amongst the first 10 or 12 trading nations of
the world, then you do possess a significance out of all relation to
your numbers. But the matter goes even deeper than that. It is my
firm belief that if your country and mine together are to have a
greatness of destiny in the not too distant future I am not speaking
of any point of time close ahead or even in our lifetimes, but in
historical terms, in not too distant a future it will be because of
the influence, the assistance the encouragement and the example
that to ether we have been able to exert in relation to the area in
the world in which we live, and in particular in South East Asia and
the Pacific region, and we do have an influence beyond all
relationship to our numoers. I know that your views are welcomed and
respected by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and the President
of the United States. In my first week of office, I was invited
both by the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of
. reat Britain to continue the personal and intimate correspondence
with them which they had developed with my distinguished predecessor.
ow, Sir Robert was, as you know a man of international stature,
and he was so reco'nised around the world and one could understand
the great men of other countries seeking nis views and respecting them,
out when they put that same invitation to a fledglin-Prime Minister
little known outside his own country and only recently confirmed in
office I think that established that it was the views of the
Australian people that they were anxious to have, the judgment of an
Australian Jovernment, a judgment and view which would oe expressed
frankly, honestly, forthrighlly, and with every intention to help in
finding solutions which were acceptable to us all. This happens to
us, it happens to you, and we are so placed by Providence in this
area of the world and with our oackground of democratic traditions
and with our high standards of economic achievement to be able to
help people in This part of the world. And we are finding, as I am sure
you are finding, that increasingl our advice is jeing sought by the
countries of the regrion. . e don' have to muscle our way into
institutions like the Asian and South Pacific Association of
Countries, or the Asian Development Jank, or other organisations of
that sort. We are sought quite eagerly, we are welcomed
fullheartedly, and we know that we have a contribution there which we
can make. Australia and New Zealand, because of all these things which
lie open to us because in the Commonwealth of Nations, this Lreat
multiracial gathering , jwhich becomes more complex and difficult to
hold together as the additions are made to its numaers, you and we
think so much alike about the problems that arise there that our
joint strength can make a significant contribution there. And so it
goes around the world where we meet together for these international
purposes. We have a common interest in helping to build satisfactory
trading arrangements so that the nrimary products of our two countries
can be marketed on the basis of a reasonaole return to the producer
and in an orderly way, avoiding, if we can or as far as i'e can not
the hazards of the season only Providence can lQok after that for
us, and we must as realists accept the fact that there will be these
fluctuations but avoiding as far as it is humanly practicable to
so organise matters, these sharp fluctuations on world markets for
primary staples, so as to avoid all those dislocations which occur 
in our economic circumstances. In these, in so many ways, we have
common interests to serve. In this area of the world we can make
a' joint contribution to security, as we do through the Commonwealth
Strategic Reserve as we are doing in our joint contributions in
the conflict in Viet Ham looking like you, not as people who seek
the field of wr because of an appetite for conflict but searching
for a just and endurin; peace which will enable us all to get on with
the . ob of building a better world order in the countries of Asia.
So that there is every good reason, apart from kinship, apart from
natural identity of habit of life and attitude of mind, for us to
remain close together in relation to these common purposes. And a
visit of this kind and visits of your people back to us, not merely
Prime Ministers but others, can help to serve those purposes. I
would mention Mr. i. att, that we have tried to assist this in
another direction in my country uy making one of the perquisites of
the Member of Parliament a journey to New Zealand at dovernment
expense if he will choose to make that journey. This is the only
country outside of the territories under our own immediate control
to which we extend this privilege. Someone rather unkindly suggested
this morning to me," ell, this looks as if we were regarding New
Zealand as one of our own territories," to which I could only answer
you can't win: that's clear." Aut I had hoped it would be
seen as another manifestation of our intimacy, of our friendship,
and of our recognition that we do have so many common interests
to serve. Now, Prime Minister, as you krow, there were two gestures
I wish to make but just before I come to that, which is the
concluding part of what I want to say, let me make a special
reference to tourism, because you will recall I said something
on this in the course of our discussions here together this
morning. I believe that both our countries have a great deal to
offer to the tourist from other parts of the world. You have long
had a Minister of Tourism, and you have lon had a highly
successful tourist traffic. . e have had, of course some and it
has been rowing quite steadily. hen I reconstructed my own
3overnmen recently, I appointed a young and promising 1inister to
look after this special field under the general supervision of the
Minister for Trade my Deputy Prime Minister, and the Minister
for the Navy, Mr. Don Chipp as nart of his ministerial duties is
now Minister in Charge of Tourist Activities. But thinking about
this without any special knowlede of what is now being done and
something of this may already be done it did seem to me that
we could help each other in this direction if we used our own
facilities and our own resources to encourage the tourist to each
of our countries to include a visit to the other country as part
of the tour. The American who comes here might beencouraged to
go on to Australia rather than back to Honolulu. The Asian who
comes down to us as the nearest point for him or for her might be
encouraged to see something of the beauties of New Zealand. I am
sure there is room for some fruitful co-operation in this particular
field. I have raised it with your Prime minister and his Cabinet,
and I hope that this matter can be followed up quite fruitfully.
I was thinking, Prime Minister, of what little gesture I
could make as a guest, with my wife and my party on your shores,
to express the good will and the friendship symbolically of the
Australian people for your own and one thing which came to mind
was that I might be permitted to make a gift to the Jovernment
and people of two pictures quite large pictures. One of them
is a picture which has a strong historical association with your
country. Indeed, I believe it was on loan to New Zealand over the
period of The Queen's visit here and that is the picture drawn in
chalks of the murder of Marian Dufresne back in 1770 or thereabouts
a picture by Meriam. Some of you who saw it when it was over may
recall it. It seemed to us that this was a part of your history
and that this could be back with you in New wealand.. But to balance
things out a bit, I thought you should also have an example from one
of our most distinguished of the younger school of Australian painters,
Sidney Nolan, who now, of course, has an international reputation / 6 
-6-
and almost an international price I mi. ht add a picture of the
Kimberleys. in Australia. This will endure as your history endures.
I* hope for Sidney Nolan's sake his work endures and also to make
the gift more en uring I hope you, Prime Minister, will accept
these from us as a sym6ol of the good will and affection of the
Australian people.
The other matter which seemed to me to be worth discussing
with you arose partly from the fact that as I knew I was coming
here I devoted more time, I suppose in seven days, to a study of
New Zealand, its climate, its geography, its economy, and its people
than I had in the previous 30 years of puolic life, and I found
many things in my reading and in discussion about your country with
which I was not familiar, and indeed of which I had been previously
ignorant and it pointed up t&gt; me really how much better we do
need to know each other, having so much', as I have said earlier,
in common. . h-it you said, Mr. . att, about more space being occupied
in the Australian Press by news from New Zealand struck a responsive
chord with me, and I would willingly surrender a good deal of
editorial space in my own country to you for that purpose. But
quite seriously I think that, too, is a matter which the press of
my country mi. ht very well examine, and I shall look for an
opportunity o? raising that matter with them. But this being the
case, I thought " I: ow what way is there that we could encourage a
better knowledge" and I thought we might make a quite modest
commencement on this out one which I felt confident would appeal
to your Frime Minister and his colleagues, and I have suggested
that we invite to Australia under a system of scholarships, if
you could call it that, each year, two New Zealanders to oe selected
appropriately by representative peonle a man and a woman: I am
sufficiently conscious of the vote of the ladies in my State, Lirs.
Stevenson, to see that we deal evenly on this to come to
Australia for, say, 12 months, if that seemed an appropriate
length of time, to have some study perha:-s at the Australian
National University, of our history, our economy and our institutions,
but also to spend a -ood deal of their time going around Australia,
no matter how remotev they may wish to proceed, and there to see
some of our institutions in operation to see some of our develorment
projects as they come to fruition and to return to New Zealand
perhaps to go into public administration, the Department of External
Affairs, the field of journalism, or the teaching profession,
somewhere preferably where the knowledge that they had absorued
could be passed on to their fellow New Zealanders. I would like to
call them Anzac Scholars, because the Anzac spirit is still strong
in the hearts and minds of our people. 17e do have a National Day
on 26th January, but there is no day in the Australian Calendar
celebrated with more solemnity and with due observance than this
dav which commemorates the forging of that wonderful tradition
between our two countries and if it did not seem inappronriate
perhaps they could be called Anzac Scholars, but the name is less
important than the fact. I mentioned this matter to your Cabinet
this morning. I am lad to say that the suggestion was warmly
received, and if it has the approval of your Jovernment I shall see
that effect is given to it.
So Mrs. Stevenson and Jentlemen, here we are bound together by
inheritance of institutions, traditions, democratic practices,
cultures, by the geography in which we find ourselves, inspired
and stimulated togetier by the possibi. lities tht lie open to us
for positive and constructive achievement in this area of the world
in which we live, and while these things persist and they must
persist as long as our independence en ures for our two countries
then who can douot the strength and wa. rmth of the friendship between
the people of New Zealand nd Australia. And if in my term of
office as Prime Minister of my country I can do anything to serve
that friendship and to strengthen the ties between us, you can
confidently rely upon this being my purpose. / 7 
-7-
Concluding Remarks by Mr. Holvoake
' ell I'm sure you would all like me to say how much we have
enjoyed that comprehensive and quite inspiring address from our
Guest of Honour. I am sure you will also oe pleased to know that
our Cabinet has already approved in principle of the two proposals,
both imaginative, that Mr. Holt has himself produced the question
of co-operation in the tourist industry, and reciprocity in Anzac
scholarships have approved this princinle and we will certainly
follow it up. Thank you for all these things that you have said to
us Harold. Now of course the occasion is for giving gifts, and on behalf
of the Jovernment and the people of New Zealand I want also to make
a ift to the Prime Mlinister of Australia. I decided upon this gift
oe ore I knew of the munificence and the imagination behind the two
gifts which he has made. Those pictures are really priceless, they
are invaluable. To add to the ma. nificence of the gift, the
Firestone, the Maori picture I have forgotten the name now it
was until now part of a very valued collection in Australia. It is
not just an odd picture they have picked up somewhere. It is part
of their own collection, and so it is of tremendous significance that
Mr. Holt should say today " It is a part of our collection but we
th -ught rightly it beloned in New Zealand" and he is giving it
to our nation. I am quite sure that our National Art allerv or
wherever it is decided that it shall repose, will be delighted and
excited, and so will all the people of New Zealand, about both of
these pictures. Also the paintin oby Nolan. I have not had a
close study. I have asked that they should be displayed along a
table somewhere. I understand they are just outside: if you wish
to have a closer study they will be there.
Now the gift I propose it will not oe displayed right now,
but here is a copy of it. Some of you will have seen it, most of
you will have heard of it. This is a publication by one of our
noted publishing firms, A. I. Reed entitled " The New Zealanders",
an exact copy or the Folio which Her 1ajesty The Queen gave to
us as her Yift to the New Zealand Nation when she was last here in
New Zealand the original from the library of ' indsor Castle from
amongst her Collection. She thought this wis something we would
like, and we treasure it, of course. A. H. Reed have made an exact
copy of this. It is a beautiful piece of work: we think so anyway:
and I am asking Harold Holt to take this back as a very humble gift
compared with this gift to the people of ZZeeawl and to their
collection of New Zealand treasures in Australia. It is a collection
of prints by George Angus. They were made in 1846 or around that
time. They were given to Her Lajesty The Queen. They really were
in the first place I think it is shown in the script in the Folio
dedicated to His Royal Highness Prince Albert at that time. It is
quite a treasure, and I would ask you Harold, to accept this rather
humble gift, alongside yours, as a token of our esteem for you and
the people of Australia', and also as a mark of our deep appreciation
of your visit to our country so early in your long tenure of office
of Prime Minister. 7 Y 



NE, ZEALAND TOUR 1967
LUNCHEON IVEN BY IR. HOLYOAKI, PRIME MIFISTER
OF NE'J ZEALMND IN HONOUR OF MR. HOLT, PRIME
MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
': ELLINJTON, EL Z: ALAND 3RD FLJRUARY, 1967.
Text of Speech Made by IMir. HIolvoake
Right Hon. Harold Holt, Mr:. Stevenson, Your Excellencies, my
Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, and Jentlemen:
It gives me tremendous pleasure on oehalf of you all
and on behalf of all of the people of New Zealand, to issue the
warmest welcome that I am capaole of doing to our Juest of Honour,
the Ri. ht Hon. Harold Holt, Prime Minister of Australia. It is
only 12 brief months since he ecame Prime Minister of Australia,
but in that time he has already won for himself a very distinctive
place and earned a reputation for decision-making and for veing a
very decisive and active leader, and we are all delighted that
he is able to find the time possible practically a long weekend
out of a very busy life to come to meet New Zealanders on their
own ground. This we take as a great compliment to us. are
delighted also of course that his charming and elegant wife was
aole to accompany him.
Need I say that Australians and ' ew Zealanders have
always been close friends, and we always will be. I think that
our relationship is without parallel throughout the world. It is
unique. There is nothing quite like it. It is true that we are
linked together by treaty, but it is not the formal word, it is
not the printed word, it is not the treaty that really binds us
together. These things I think, are embedded deep in our
unIerstanding of each other, in our mutual respect, in our common
heritage, and in our common destiny.
' e have always oeen aware of many similarities. lie
have the same language almost the same, I'm not up to date on
this. I remember an old friend of mine many years ago telling me
that he could speak the Australian language. So I asked him why,
and he told me he visited Australia once. It was in the time of
the fight for the universal franchise a long time ago. He said
he was going down a street at King's Blank Cross and he heard two
Australians arguin, and one said " Bill, what do they mean ' one
man, one vote' And Bill said ".' ell it's simple: it's just
one blank man one blank vote." And John said if they
blanketty well mean one blank man, one blank vote, why don't they
blanketty well say so." He contended that he had in that short
time learned to speak the Australian language. I am not better
informed on what he meant or actually what happened than that.
Our languae our origins, our membership of the
Commonwealth, our mutual love of sport our determination to fight
for the liberties of man which we consider fundamental to our
mutual way of life these thinis we have so much in common. These
are, I believe, the basic truths and principles upon which our
deep friendship rests: these are the things. I do want to make
this point and Harold Holt ; would, I am sure, wish me to make it
that neither of us is either the image or the echo of the other.
* 7e have also dissimilar characteristics and these are understandable.
New Zealand is a group of islands. Australia is a great continent
one of the treat continents of the world. In New Zealand we have
almost matchless resources for pastoral pursuits, the growing of / 2 
-2-
grass almost a perfect climate as you will have noticed,
Harold. I am bound in extenuation to point out that this is
the tail-end of cyclone " Dinah" which originated somewhere in the
great continent towards our north-west somewhere, I think. On
the other hand, of course, Australia has vast supplies of coal,
iron, and very many other now very valuable minerals, in addition
to her great agricultural wealth. Dissimilar we have less than
000,000 population Australia, 12 000,000. So these are the
obvious differences between us, and that will continue to produce and
perhaps emphasise, and some people over-emphasise further
aifferences. I think this an inevitable thing. People do tend to
over-emphasise the difference oetween Jrothers and sisters, because
they expect them to be so much alike. They do not do this where
people are not closely related. These are the obvious differences
in what we can produce, what we may achieve, but what is important,
we think, is that our peoples are ooth seeking the same goals
together and in very much the same ways. 1e are moving toward
them together. This I believe, particularly in recent years
has been happening in a very great variety of settings in the
Commonwealth in the United Nations, in SEATO and AZUS, in ECAFE
the Colombo flan, ASPAC, and now in the Asian Development 3ank and
other spheres I could mention. I think it is worth calling to our
minds that some 65 years ago, when the people of Australia were
considering the question of a Federal Constitution, we were
invited to discuss this with them and perhaps take a part and
become a part of that Federation. It was considered. Those who
preceded us decided no. ie had our own special destiny: we had
our own special aspirations: and so we would keep apart. ., e
felt that we had -erhaps a distinctive contrioution to make. In
our humble way we have tried to make it. 3ut again I come back to
the fact that particul. rly in the last 25 years in this very
rapidly changing world, we have reacted to the same problems, the
same positions, the same challenges in very much the same way. The
discussions that my Cabinet colleagues and I were privileged to
have with Mr. Holt this morning only tended and served to emphasise
and underline that fact. We have ooth learned of course that we
not only cannot ignore but we desire to know our near neighbours
in the north much better the people of South East Asia and of
Asia generally. ie realise more than ever and every day that
goes past does emphasise it that our destiny is tied up with
these countries in the matter of security, culture trade. Je
can learn much from them, from the association with their old
and their rich cultures.
' e have learned to make new friends and we have
made them very much together. Yes, there are differences between
us but we do recognise that our paths lie very close parallel.
I think nerhaps the development of recent years with the tremendous
travel between our two countries of our own peoples: I am
informed about 50,000 each year now businessmen, tourists,
artists, sportsmen and the rest. This of course, is serving to
tie us much more closely together, and 1 look forward, we in ew
Zealand look forward, to a continuation and indeed a growth of
these exchanges between our peoples so that not only Parliamentarians,
not only businessmen, but the man in the street as we label him,
can get to know the other on their own ground. This is very
important indeed.
Mrs. Stevenson, Your Excellencies, Jentlemen, there is so much
more that one could say, but you will want to listen to Harold
Holt, our Guest of Honour. I am . oing presently to invite I'r.
Hugh ;. att, the Deputy Leader of te Opposition, to join me in
this welcome before I propose the toast to our Juest of Honour.
All I can say is that on your behalf those of you gathered
here: and this Harold, is a very good cross-section of all of
our people, so I know I can speak on uehalf of all our people when
I say to you that I cannot think of anybody who could possibly be
more warmly welcomed here in lellington and in New Zealand you
and your wife. May you feel this in the few days you are here:, 
-3-
may you feel this warmth of friendship exuding and reaching out
towards you. May you, as a result of th: t, take awa very happy
memories, deep memories, of the fondness o the people of iew
Zealand for yourself, your wife, and the people of ustralia
generally. You are just exactly a thousand times welcome here in
. ellin-ton and New Zealand. Now I invite Mr. Hugh . i'att to join
me in this welcome. H--1 



NEW ZEALAND TOUR 1967
LUNCHEON 3IVEN 3Y MR. HOLYOAKE, PRIIE M! INISTER
OF NEW ZEALAND IN HONOUR OF MR. HOLT, PRIME
MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
" ELLIUITON, N' ZEALAND33RD FLBRUARY, 1967
Text of Speech made by Mr. Hugh '. att ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition)
The Right Hon. the Prime Minister, the Right Hon. M1r. Holt, Your
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Could I first of all apologise for the absence of the
Leader of the Opposition Mr. Kirk, who I understand could well be
Sir in your country while you are over here. He would have loved
to ave joined y. u oday at this function. But I do want to join
with the Prime Minister in extending a very warm welcome at least
as warm a welcome as it is humanly possible to extend on such a day
as this in : ellington to welcome you to our shores a very important
occasion for us here in Iew Zealand. As the Prime Minister has
stated we are the same people: we have the same principles: we
have the same ideals: we enjoy similar standards of living: and
the more we visit one another's countries the richer we will be.
There was a time when New Zealand depended a great deal on Australia:
in fact there was a time when we were -overned from Australia
at least, from part of Australia: New oouth iales. But we grew
up and we gained our independence, our own ' overnment but we are
not completely independent of one another, neither would we wish
to be. But it is strange how many people in the world still think
that New Zealand is part of Australia. And you know somehow Sir,
that does annoy Kiwis. ' hen you are in New York or London and somebody
says to you "' here are you from": " I'm from New Zealand": " Oh,
that's an island off the coast of Australia, isn't it," And then
of course we have to explain, we have to explain that we are not
any longer roverned by Australia that we are not part of the
Australian Constitution but that we do depend a great deal on
Australia, on our friendship and co-operation one with the other.
It is only natural that we will have a great deal in common.
Incidentally, I was born in Australia, But I have never in my
whole life taken any credit for that.
One of the problems facing both of our nations at
this time is this pro.. lem of trade. Our growth and expansion has
brought immense problems with it and we are ooth concerned with
expanding our trade with the rest of the world. In the past you
have buiTt your industry. Your industrial development has been
nursed and encouraged by your aovernment's protection. It has
made Australia a treat industrial country. We admire your drive
and expansion in the field of trade and the standard of
workmanship is a credit to your technicians. ; Je are pleased to
purchase the products of your industry, but at the same time we
believe you could purchase more from us. The New Zealand-Australia
Free Trahe Agreement signed two years ago was designed to " ive
freer trade between the two countries, but unfortunately there
are some who believe that the reverse is indeed happening. I hope
that the spirit behind the Free Trade Agreement is in fact given
effect to and that the figures that have oeen produced to show
that New 2ealand is indeed in a worse position today than she was
when the igreement was signed are only a temporary indication of
a reverse, and that before long Australia will be purchasing more
of New Zealand's production. iie need to trade with you: we want
to purchase Australian goods: but we have a feeling that Australia
could do more to assist New Zealand by purchasing her production. / 2 
-2-
I have stated that you concentrated on developig
your industry. We in New Zealand have done likewise. 7e must
continue to do so. We can learn a lesson fr-m what you have
achieved in your country. You gave protection to your
industry. must'continue to protect ours, to maintain our
standard of livi n, and as long as we can both understand the
problems that each country faces well, then, we can really
achieve something. New Zealand has some advantages over
Australia. In this field Australia has many advantages over
New Zealand. One advantage we have that I am sure you would love
to have is some of that cheap electric power that we can produce
from the lakes and the rivers that you will have an opportunity
of seeing. v. e in New Zealand are using that cheap power for the
development of our industry, and we must continue to do so. You
will not have the opportunity on this visit of seeing the
foundation being laid for New Zealand's iron and steel industry
in the North Island. I wish you had. I hope you will return to
see it, and I hope you will realise that when you do, Sir, this
great iron and steel industry will mean that we will be producing
here in New Zealand much of the -oods that we are now importing
from Australia. ' ie have to do it, because we have to be selfsupporting
where we possibly can. I read from your itinerary
that you will be visiting the South Island. You will see there,
especially at this time of the year some of the west wheat
growing country in the world wheat growing country that can
produce over twice as many Dushels per acre as the wheatgrowing
country of Australia. It is not so long ago that Few Zealand
exported wheat to Australia. Last year we imrported 4 1/ 2 million
bushels, but when you pay a visit to the South Island, Sir, you
will see that this year here are 20 000 a-ditional acres of
wheat under production, and so we will only need to buy one
million bushels of wheat from Australia possibly, and I hope we
will see the day . when we will not have to buy ary wheat from
Australia. Now, Sir, that does not mean that we do not want to
trade with Australia, but we are following a pattern that you
have shown us, that we, as you, have to develop our own country.
I do believe that there is a -reat future as the
Prime M inister has said, in the tourist industry, but I do believe,
Sir, that we know you much better than you know us. we know
when obooy Si . pson wins the toss or )' oes out for a duck, or whether
the great Australian Davis Cup is eing played for or whether the
, allabies have won their matc in France or in Scotland. know
everything that you do, but when we go to Sydney or to Melbourne
we can scarcely read a word of what is happening in Eew Zealand.
I think a great deal more can oe done to advertise our country
in your country as you hive done to advertise your country in ours.
And so, Sir, I do say th', t I appreciate the opportunity of oining
with the Prime Minister in this very warm welcome to you today.
May you and Mrs. Holt have a most enjoyable few days in this
country of ours, and may you leave it with an appreciation of t; e
fact that it is worth coming back to and it is worth encouraging
other Australians to do likewise. All the very best to you and a
safe journey home.
Right Hon. Keith Holyoake
Mrs Stevenson and Jentlemen:
I give you the toast to the 3uest of Honour, the Right
Hon. Harold Holy. 



NEW ZEfL1ND TOUR 1967
RECEPTION GIVEN 3Y TiHE CAFTERURY
CHAMIJER OF COIMERCE IN HONOUR OF
THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, i,
M IHIR. O LD HOLT
CHRI2TC.. URCH, NEW Z'ALATD
4TH FEBRUARY, 1967
Text of Speech by Mr. Holt
Mr. Smith Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Mr.
Mayor, Distinguishes Juests, Ladies and Jentlemen:
I hope thit Mr. Smith will not get too far away from
me because I may need an interpreter from what he has been
telling me. However I found at Riccarton this afternoon that
they understood the language of my money and I have since
suspected that this was a conspiracy coo ed up by Keith Holyoake
who had been presented to me as a keen judge of equine form, witfi
the Canterbury Jockey Club in order to redress to some modest
degree at any rate, the gap in your balance of payments. I can
assure you that since I arrived in this country the economic position
of Few Lealand has improved appreciably: in fact, I have a little
problem to sort out o settlement of an obligation to the Chairman
of the Club ard my own High Commissioner as resources dwindled as
the afternoon went on. Bit this very happy * athering is
redressing the balance of the day for me. I began most
auspiciously in that, havin h'id the sort of weaher that one
expects in ! ellington, I cuame hopefully to the South. I was not
aware, frankly, Lr. Sith, thAt as makin a little history in
doing so, and in coming with my charmin wife, my decorative wife,
who as you see is my own secret weapon as I was hus able to
describe 1Madam Ky, out it is very grtifying to le-trn that I am
the first Australian Prime Minister to have visited the South.
Right Hon. Keith Holyoake ( inaudible).
Right Hon. Harold Holt Well, I was coming to that. You see,
we have in Can. erra a distinui shed representative of your
country. . e also h' ve a distinguished representative of the
United States. You Iknow your own representative very well
Luke Hazlett. The American, Ed Clrk, may not os so well mknown
to you, but Ed comes from Texas, and ie ha-ive always argued that
Ed was a Texan first an American second and an AustrAlian third.
Now Luke, I think, is a mainlander of tAe South first, a New
Zealander second, and an Australian third. If Keith Holyoake will
only leave him with us a little longer I might be aule to r. iove him
up in the placinks. It is for us a deliyhtful prospect to have this time
with you. It is a very long ime ago although in retrospect it
does not seem so long this is one ot the oenalties of the aging
process, tht the years seem to gallop as you get older but it
is 16 years since I w. ts first in your country, and havin. r carried
out the duties for which I was sent here by my JovernmenY as the
Head of the Australian Delegation to the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Conference, I was given the opportunity by your Government to see
something of the economy and the beauties othe Forth of New
6ealand: and so, when the arrangements were . eing made for this
visit I said " Now, I have read a lot and heard a lot about te'.
spleniid grandeur and beauty of the South of Few Z ealand.
ellington is a ' must' thit's where we conduct the official
business but I must see something of the South", and so here we
are, and the larger part of our journeyings through New Zealand / 2 
-2-
will be carried out in this very beautiful southern part of your
country. Je are. looking forward to that very much and delighted
to find that -the weather is being kind to us.
Now, Lir. Smith one of the agreeable surprises of the
day and I have referred already to some of the disagreeable
surprises: I don't suppose there's a Form Juide attached to the
back of the document you have presented to me and as for the other
gift which I certainly appreciate and regard is an honour and a
compliment: I don't quite know what the perquisites are attached
to it, but my wife, eing a realist as women generally are and
naturally cautious as most women proved to be, said Does this
mean that we have to get married again?" I would like elaboration
on that point from you before this function concludes. But this
gathering was, as I say, a very agreeaole surprise. W'; hen I found
had oeen invited to come alorn and talk to the Chamber of
Commerce, or meet the Chamber of Commerce, I had a picture in my
mind of a sort of 3oard Room and a table in which a lot of rather
stuffy characters including myself sat round together and
discussed the state of the world and the Nation, and there it was
with suitable lubrication, of course, as befits these occasions,
but I found that I came into what apeared, on the surface anyhow,
to ue a very convivial gathering, and if I can only stop myself
in time we will all be aule to oe convivial a'ain together. That
is not easy, as some of my colleagues will tell you. Jut in my
own country we have, I think, worked out a very satisfactory
relationship with Organisations such as your own. As a Jovernment
and it is part of our philosophy of Jovernment we believe that
the good of the Nation will be cest advanced if there is teamwork
between those who have the responsibility of Government and those
who conduct the Organisations representative of great sections of
Industry whether it is manufacturers
Right Hon. Keith Holyoake ( inaudible).
Right Hon. Harold Holt IKeoiwt, h , you hve enjoyed not only
a very handsome election win, but I Inow how well you are regarded
by Industry and Commerce in your own country. Jut in mind, we
have worked this out iappily together. It was not al. vays a happy
situation, out the machinery we have evolved developed out of some
of the economic problems we had early in the 1960' s, and we felt
that in order to ensure that the " overnment was acting in the
knowledge of the views held by Industry, we do arrange to meet
representative 
before the first Session of the Parliament, and before the dudet
Session of the Parliament, and Chambers of ! Manufacturers, Chamuers
of Commerce, representatives of the Banks, of the primary producer
organisations, come along and get into discussion with us. '. e
invite the trade unions, too and they have preferred to meet us
separately rather than with the others, ' rd at least on those two
periods in the year we are told quite frankly and in the presence
of each other and this Keith, I assure you has proved an advantage,
because we had found that there w-is a disposition for the
manufacturer to put his story quite vehemently to us and the
representative of the primary industries to put his story quite
vehemently to us, separately, not in the presence of each oth r, but
it is amazing how the process of sitting around together and knowing
that there was a critical voice ready to pick up aything that might
seem an exaggerated view or an unreasonably presented view of
economic circumstances or of tariff policies, and matters of that
sort, has produced a much more useful concensus of thought inside
the representative organisations, and I have been told hat by some
of their spokesmen that this was the greatest value, really, that
they have got out of these gatherings that they have heard the
other fellow's point of view and they have been aole to take that
into account in their own planning. So I just say in passing that
we value the Organisations representative of Industry, of Commerce,
of Primary Production, of our financial institutions, and we confer
regularly with them, and I am sure that out of this teamwork of a
relative v informal kind we have had more realistic and more
effective national policies. / 3 
-3-
But I wasn't here today just to speak on those matters.
That strikes one again most forcibly coming to this country is
that however much we may speak of how like each other we are
how many things we have in common, our joint membership of that
great Ahzac tradition which has meant so much to the people of
ooth countries with Anzac Day the most solemn day of commemoration
in the national calendar it is only when you get amongst the
people of the other country that it comes home t you with full
impact just how alike you are in your thinking perhans not
entirely in your speech, althoughwe do not detect these things
this may oe more apnarent to you but really an Australian coming to
New iealand, or a Iew Zealander coming to Australia, finds himself at
home. I have been struck even in this gathering here this evening
with the number of people who have come from Australia, and I have in
Australia many friends who have come to settle and to work with us
in our country. Some of our most distinguished men Sir Frederick
;. hite, Sir Douglas Copland, and there are scores of them that if
time permitted one could mention. And it is only when this impact
hits you tl; ai: you start thinking it out. You know, we are closer
in Canberra to you than we are to our own people in Perth and the
people of Perth, although they are with us on the mainland, there
is a great area of desert in patches oetween us nd them: between
us and you there is a great area of sea, uut we are closer physically
in point of time, in point of journeying. And now that I have
discovered this, as I should have discovered it lone ago, I am going
to see to it that my own visits and those of my M inisters are more
frequent. I hope those of your Frime Minister and of his colleagues
will be more frequent. As I said at our luncheon yesterday, to give
some evidence of our desire to brin. our relations closer and to
work more closely together on matters of mutual concern, ' we do
provide that any of our Parliamentari. ns are free to go and visit
few Zealand at our Jovernment's expense, because w'e believe that this
is of value to us, and we hope that it will be of value to you.
Now r. Smith, you spoke of the opportunities the challenges,
that we have to ether in relation to the regions to the north of our
countries. I suppose in my own there are some parts of Australia,
perhaps many Australians, who are more acutely conscious of this
by the mere circumstance of geography: we are right close within
lying distance, minutes almost, o a people 100,000,000 strong
in Indonesia restless, with a revolutionary philosophy, but with
great resources which in time we hope will be effectively develoned.
I can illustrate for you the feeling of some of our people when I
say that it is literally closer from Darw. in to Saigon than it is, say,
from Brisuane to Perth, and we are vry conscious, and become
increasingly so as events move more dynamically in those parts of
the world, of our involvement geogrphically economically, from
the security point of view and in a variety of other ways, and I
know that your Prime Linister is very conscious of this. Je were
together at Manilh. . e subscribed together to the Declaration and
the joals of Freedom in M. arnila, and we believe that our two countries
have the opportunity oy virtue of our economic capacities, by the
standards we have been aule to build in our two countries, by the
warmth of friendship which exists, radiating out to us from them to
exercise an influence, to be of some help, and, small though we
are to have a significant place in the scheme of things not onl
in this area, but towards the peace and proress of the -world. And
because we have the stimulation : and inspiraion of those goals,
there is a warmth and strength in our partnership which derives not
merely from our close kinship, uut a feeling that we have a destiny
to share together in the years which lie ahead. I hope that my own
visit here will help to promote those oo, ctives and will be tangiole
evidence that there is a warmth of friendship and of good will in my
own country for yours, that there is a resolve that our two countries
shall work together in harmony and close co-operation for the
objectives that we have in common.
Thank you very much from M'rs. Holt and myself for this very
warm and friendly welcome you have given us here in Christchurch
this evening. 



NE ZEALAND TOUR 1967
RECEPTION } IVET1 BY THE CAIhTERBURY CHAMB; ER OF
COIME RCE IN HONOUR OF THE PRIME MINISTER OF
AUSTRALIA, IiR. HIAOLD HOLT
CHIRISTCIJIURCH, NE7 ZEALAND 4TH FEBRUARY, 1967
Text of Speech by Mr. R. E. Smith, President of Chamber
The Right Honourable the Prime Minister of New Zealand,
the Right Honourable the Prime Minister of Australia Your Jorship
the Mayor, Your Excellencies, our Distinguished Juests, and Ladies
and Jentlemen: Eight years ago the Canterbury Chamber of Commerce
celebrated its 100th Birthday. Over the history of our existence
we have entertained many distinguished guests, and amongst us this
evening are a numoer whom we would be happy to receive as guests
in their own right our own Prime Minister, Mr. D. McNicol,
Australian High Commissioner in INew Zealand, Ir. J. L. Hazlett
New Zealand's High Comrmissioner in Australia, Sir .' iark Oliphant,
a very distinguished Australian scientist, Mir. R. Maddres President
of the Nlew Zealand Manufacturers Federation, and we have five
Presidents of Chambers of Commerce from other parts of the South
Island. To these and our other Distinguished ruests might I offer
a very sincere welcome. e are glad to have you with us. But never
before throughout our histor have we had the honour and privilege
which we have this evenin o' welcomilb as our guest the rine
Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia. On oehalf of our members
and our Distinguished Juests, may I, Sir, offer to you and to Mrs.
Holt our greeting, our respect, and our warm good fellowship.
Australia had a birthday recently. It was its 179th
Birthday and never before today has a Prime Minister of Australia
visited the South Island of New Zealand. Consequently I have been
authorised to officially welcome the Prime . linister and Mrs. Holt
on behalf of the independent peoples of the South Island. Perhaps
I should explain that I use the word " independent" in its
descriptive and not its political sense. To mark the occasion I
have been reouested to present you with a Certificate given under
the Cla of the ' reat Moa which says: " i'hereas Harold Holt,
having been born in all innocence beyond these southern shores,
is nevertheless now, recognising that he is geo: raphically underprivileged,
granted full status as an Honorary South Islander, with
all the rights and purtenances that go with it." Perhaps I could
extend our welcome a little further. I : ould welcome you as the
Chief Minister of a member of a family of nations, the family of
nations we belong to, and, like any other family, it has its varied
personalities. One of our Scottish cousins was reported recently
as saying that New Zealand should realise it is a big boy now and
someone should prise its hands from its mother's apron strings.
e11, it is true that families' interests vary as time progresses,
but we also have to admit that mother, to use this description, has
her own problems at the moment. Within this family I think it is
generally and correctly acknowledged that Australia and New Zealand
are brothers, and it is a fact that brothers, particularly if one is
bi ger than another, tend to have separate and competing interests,
but eventually I think they realise that there is a great deal to
be gained by joint co-operation. Sometimes it takes a family crisis
to oring this about. It's true, too, that brothers sometimes even
speak different languages, like Strine and New Zealand.
The Canterbury Chamber of Commerce is keenly aware of the
part that it must play in this changing world, and as evidence of
/ 2 
-2-
this I would like to present to you, Sir, a survey of Christchurch
and its farming environs which was initiated by this Chamber,
financed and puolished with the joint co-operation of four
organisations representing the businessmen, including farmers,
of this Province, and prepared, you will be interested to note,
Sir, by a leading firm of Consultants from Australia. believe,
Sir that survey demonstrates the potentials and the advantages
of this area that we know exist. . ie are cognisant, too Sir, that
as outposts in the South lacific, Australia and New Zealand must
have a closer association with their relations in the Pacific area,
and particularly in South East Asia or, as I refer to call it,
the near North. are -lad, Sir, that you and our own Prime
Minister are aware, in the words of one of our local churchmen,
the Reverend Allan Brash, th: t our children have a western heritage:
and this is their ood fortune: they also h. ve an Asian future:
this is their challen'e. This is a time of change and challenge,
and we know that you save very great responsibilities. , e
conrratulate you, Sir, on the qualities of leadership which you have
amply displayed. ,7e oelieve that you have earned this period of
rest amongst the peace and the ueauty of our mountains and lakes,
but we are confident that you will return. Gentlemen and Ladies,
would you please demonstrate the warmth of your welcome.
( Acclamation.) 



OPENINJ OF THE NODULAR IRON FOUNDRY
AT } EKERAL MOTORS-HOLDEU' S FACTORY
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
February, 1967.
Mr. ' ilson, Mr. President of the Senate, my colleague
the Minister for Labour and National Service, and many other
distinguished guests that I see in front of me here this afternoon,
and my greetings to the employees of 3MH who are also here with us.
It's a personal pleasure for me, Mr. Wilson to have this
opportunity of saying welcome to another important adaition to
Australia's range of manufacturing capacity. You have pointed out
that there are few such foundries as this to be found outside of
North America itself and I gather from the information you've been
good enough to supply to me, that not only will this new and valuable
equipment be able to supply your needs here in Australia, but that
you have a market for its products already with your Vauxhall plants
in the United Kingdom, and that the crankshafts manufactured here
will go to supplement the other automotive parts which already are
being sent to the United Kingdom from Australia. A quite remarkable
achievement in itself.
It is, of course well known to all Australians that the
manufacturing industries of this country have been playing a growing
part in our prosperous development. There are just on 60', 00
factories in Australia; more than double the number we had at the
beginning of World War II and the employment in those factories
represents an increase of 125% on the number engaged in manufacturing
in 1959. It now aosorbs through the range of manufactures around
Australia, just on 28% of our work force and when we look at the
number of migrants whom we must place in employment if they are
to build a satisfactory new life in this country, the percentage
would be even higher and certainly in this automotive industry,
it would rank among the Aighest proportions of any section of
Australian industry.
The automotive industry has become the biggest single
employer in Australia today. It absorbs, iether in production or
in repair, just on one in ' ten of ill those employed in manufacturing
industries and, thanks largely to this domestic manufacturing
capacity of automotive parts and asseaoled cars, we rank now amongst
the third or fourth motorized nation per capita in the world. I
like to think we rank third. I'm told there is a uit of an argument
whether we or New Zealand rank third, but if you talk about modern
up-to-date cars, I've no doubt that we compare more than favourably
with our sister Commonwealth country '. hich I have visited so
pleasurably so recently. And so I'm here to claim that we rank
third in the world, falling behind only the United States . and Canada.
A pretty remarkable circumstance in a country whose manufacturing
history is of such comparatively recent origin, certainly so far as
this phase of it is concerned. There is at the nresent time, as we
are all made rather uncomfortably aware as we go about our daily
occasions or our weekend excursions, a car for just on every four
men, women and children in this country and the proportion of cars
to people is tending all the time to increase.
One of the encouraging features of the growing and
diversified manufacturing capacity of the country is the expanding
success we have achieved in placing our manufactured exports aoroad
and just on 12% now in value of our total exports is made up of the
products of our manufacturing ildustries and that percentage is
tending all the time to increase. . e not only make the goods but we
are increasingly capable of placing them competitively with other parts 
-2-
of the world and some products which formerly we imported, we
are now exporting to the countries from which they came. For
example, we are exporting now, as Sir Ian McLennan would be happy
to confirm, steel to the United States and to the United Kingdom.
And I have already mentioned one of the basic components of the
motor car, the crankshaft, is to " o from this country to one of
the -reat automotive centres of tEe world, the United Kingdom, as
an illustration of how competitive we have become.
Now, undoubtably, one of the leading contributors to
Australia's success in the automotive field has been the General
Motors-Holden's organisation. They not only helped and indeed
were largely responsible in the pioneering stage for establishing
in Australia the techniques and the knowhow of the equipment and
the large scale production necessary for successful manufacturing,
but they have gone on rapidly and steadily with this process of
innovation with the kind of research and development which is
carried out in the technical area which I had the pleasure of
opening less than three years ago.
Every now and then, somebody takes a poke at General
Motors, feeling that there could be room for some Australian
equity participation and I subscrioe of course in principle to
this concept, but it would be quite a mistaken belief to imagine
that there is not a very sustantial Australian equity in suostance
in the profitable conduct of this mighty and vast organisation
here in Australia. It now has ten plants, taking on something over 20,000
employees. Through the sub contracting and supply that it
receives from other Australian owned and operated factories there
is employment given prooably to another 30 000 people, and I was
aware when I was Treasurer of the country ow much this company
contributed by way of our revenue receipts to the well being of
the Australian nation. I've ueen doing a little research on that
subject not, I haster to assure you, with the connivance of the
Commissioner of Taxes who, of course is bound to secrecy on these
matters, but I have it direct from the stable itself that since
1948 the company has paid either in company tax or customs duties
or matters of that sort a total of 357,000,000 to the revenue
of the Commonwealth and sales tax on its products has brought
us in another 0700,000,000. Now that is think you'll agree, a
very substantial equity contrioutinI to the funds availaole for
defence, social welfare or the manifold circumstances that modern
Governments have to take to themselves. And so I speak in
appreciative vein here today for the contribution which this great
company has made to the prosperous growth of Australia to the
well-oeing of our people and to the strengthening of the nation's
industrial face.
e are these days producin a widely exnanding and diversified
range of nroducts. I had to record quite recently a little talk for
the 1967 Canadian Exposition. Somebody thought out the bright idea
that unfortunate people visiting the Australian pavilion who are
looking for a little rest and relaxation, would sit in some of the
" talking chairs" we will provide. They will immediately be addressed by so."
notable public figure or an expert in his particular field. They
asked me if I would talk about our manufactures. And this is how I
happen to be so well equipped with all the statistics I have been
rattling off to you. But 1 myself was interested to learn that
included now in the range of more sophisticated products are radio
telephone equipment tr . nsistorized airways beacons, the pilotless
jet aircraft we call Jindiviks the anit-submarine guided missile
Ikara, and the anti-tank guided weapon Halkara and all of these
items have found markets abroad including the United Kingdom and
the United States. It's good I repeat, to feel that not only can
we do the job but we can to it on the basis that is sufficiently
competitive and attractive for these products to find their way into 
-3-
markets even in industrialised countries, with highly sophisticated
manufactures themselves.
Now this nodular foundry is as you've said a comparatively
rare oeing in the areas of the worlA outside of North America and
it speaks volumes for the confidence your company has in the future
of Australia and for its capacity to export a ' rowing proportion of
its manufactures to other parts of the world that you should have
established the foundry here, that you should have been capable of
doing this with Australian designers, Australian technicians and
workmen and to have produced such an impressive result as we see
around us here today. I am certain that you look forward to a
successful life for the foundry.
I understand that one of my more hazardous tasks is to press
a green button. I've never been mechanically minded, nor mechanically
efficient, and if anything goes wrong following the pressing of the
button it will be a case of human error not through any fault in the
equipment itself. And so formally declaring open, as now do, this
nodular iron foundry, wishing you and your company continued success
hoping that you in your turn will one of these days become a succe; sful
ambassador abroad for Australia, joining that select company which
includes Sarl Daum Harlow Jsae and David Hegland, I now have pleasure
in pressing the button and hoping to hell that the thing works. 



4 A P R 196?.
OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE DALWOOD WYBONG PARK
WINERY, N. S. W.
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr, Harold Holt. 17th February, 1967
Mr. Chairman of the Board of Directors, and Mr. Geoffrey Penfold Hyland,
my Ministerial Colleagues of the Commonwealth and State Governments,
members of the Parliaments of the Commonwealth and of New South Wales,
many distinguished guests, employees of this historic firm of Penfolds,
ladies and gentlemen: " If all be true that I do think
There are five reasons why we drink aber
Good wine, a friend, or being dry,*
Or lest we may be by and bye IR
For any other reason why.
Now I didn't get that out of somebody's book of quotations.
I learnt that one on a visit to New Zealand about a week or so ago, and
the Minister for Agriculture was with me and I said that one of my most
pleasant chores of the week ahead when I returned to Australia was this
official opening of the Dalwood Estate Vineyard and Winery, and he said,
" Well, this may help you. This demonstrates the respectability of wine
drinking which was expressed by -an eighteenth century Anglican priest
named Aldrich." My subsequent researches have confirmed that I felt
I knew all along, that both in the Old Testament and the New Testament
are to be found authorities for the proposition that the moderate consumption,
certainly of table wine, has been encouraged by the most respectable
authorities from the earliest of recorded time.
We find that in the Old Testament we are told that " wine makes
glad the heart of man", and the lbw Testament being rather more modern
in approach and presumably a certain amount of travel having been undertaken
in the interval, warned against the danger of drinking water. " Drink no
longer water but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake, and as one of
the most regular travellers for the Commonwealth Government I would urge
that note of caution upon you.
And, of course, there are so many valuable injunctions to the man
in public life from those who have written about this precious commodity. It
was Emerson who told us a man would be eloquent if you give him good wine,
and if I go beyond the time appointed so that we miss a second parachute jump,
you will know where to attribute the responsibility for that. And we are told
by the Germans that a day without wine is a day without sunshine, and this
would be accepted, I think, by many of us who would also agree with Horace
when he told us to drown our care in wine.
Now I myself am a great believer in temperance, including
temperance itself. I think we should be temperate in all things including
temperance, and that gives us a certain amount of flexibili ty in our approach
to the problems of life. And I am sure that it's been a great pleasure to all
of us to have come along here today as guests of Mr. Penfold Hyland and all
associated with this historic name in the wine industry of Australia, and in
these beautiful surroundings find ourselves together enjoying delightful food,
agreeable company and very enjoyable wine. / 2. 
2-
Now I mention the five reasons and I think that most of the,
if not all, can be exemplified here. Good wine we have enjoyed that.
I am told that something went wrong with the works yesterday and 200 gallons
flooded down the path inbetween these casks and will not be consumed not by
human beings, anyhow, in future. I don't know, 04ether we should rise and
pause for a moment to regret that circumstance, but we have enjoyed good
wine, Good friends, as I have looked around this room I see rma ny
people who have come from afar, from Sydney and beyond, braved the hazards
of the climate and the roads, which cannot be maintained on the quite inadequate
grant that the Commonwealth Government makes for them, but at the end of
the road of pioneering here, they are in agreeable company -and these very
pleasant circumstances. I am sure, Geoffrey, we have all felt it worthwhile
and that we rejoice with you in a day which honours the opening of this new
establishment contributing so much tc the future prosperity and progress of
the Hunter Valley. Now the Hunter Valley is itself, of course, one of the great winegrowing
districts of Australia and I predict that as people round the rest of the
world over the years come to appreciate the quality of Australian wines it will
become one of the notable wine growing districts of the world, and recognised
as such. I found it very impressive to learn from the facts supplied to me
that if there is brought into wine production the thousand or eleven hundred
acres which are under the control in this area of this organisation, the volume
of wine produced will be far in excess of that produced by all the other vineyards
at this moment of the Hunter Valley. And so this is a very remarkable
development in an area which has already contributed much to the propperity
and progress of this state of New South Wales, and here we have the elements
of a great national asset which will carry Australia's name to the approval
of those who consume its products beyond our own boundaries and far around
the world. Now one could say a great deal about the wine industry and I should
perhaps reserve that for a more suitable occasion in the Parliament. It's rather
interesting to learn as one studies the facts that the consumption in Australia of
table wine and this has been perhaps partly at the expense of the fortified
wines but of table wine has more than trebled over the past ten years. Now
that's not merely because we brought in a lot of immigrants from Europe who
have been accustomed to drinking wine as some of our people have been
accustomed to drinking beer. It's also attributable to the fact that as we
native Australians learn sonmthing of what wine can mean in more agreeable
living for ourselves, our own consumption of it has grown, and I believe it
could grow considerably more than it has. We have great natural advantages
for wine growing through most of Australia, or certainly many parts of most
of the States of Australia, an d I would gladly join with Mr. Penfold Hyland
and other spokesmen for the names that rate high in the wiine industry in a
campaign against what I might term at this point of time " snobbism' in the
consumption of wine.
You know there's a lot of guff that goes on in the consumption of
wine in public places, and the ritual that has developed around this, more
particularly over recent years, is quite terrifying to the average casual
restaurant visitor or hotel-goer. I had quite a run of experience of it in
New Zealand when I was there where most of our meals were spent out at
public places. You know. the drill that one goes through Having
settled yourselves down and got comfortable, if your host is sufficiently alert,
/ 3. 
-3
he will summmn tbe wine waiter. That will depend to some extent upon the
degree of service as to the time interval which then elapses. The wine
waiter will then present you with usually -a somewhat fly-speckled little
journal which contains what the house may or may not have to offer.
Frequently one is disappointed in finding that it's ou t of stock or somebody
else had the b ottle the night before, but a further interval passes and then
finally along comes the bottle usually if it's a white wine or a sparkling
wine, contained i~ n some ice bucket, there's a further delay while it's
twisted around and juggled about a bit, and then with a flourish the fellow
will remove the cork and he'll bring the cork over you to sniff. You are
terrified you're going to do the wrong thing at that stage. You'll either
tell him to take it back when it's perfectly good or you'll bravely say
"~ go on with it" when you suspect that it mightn't be as good as you would
hope. And then he'll give you a certain portion to taste. Now I have been
host on a good number of public ce-cas ions when wine was consumed and
I've run a bit of a mental graph on these things and I find that about two
times out of five, he never comes back to the fellow who's done the tasting.
And by the time you have gone through all these processes you're about
into the second or third course and cursing inwardly that it didn't come
earlier. Now, my upbringing on drinking with meals occurred shortly
after I left the university, at a quite modest restaurant, as it was then, but
it's become rather more posh establishment now in Melbourne, known as
the Florentino. For 2/ 6d. in the currency of those days one had a three
course meal and a little bottle of wine that was plonked on the table according
to whether you said red or white. I haven't used the word " plonked" with
any special significance, because I used to find this wine quite potable, and
if one was sufficiently injudicious, or didn't have enough work to do as in
those depression years most of us didn't, to consume that q uite small bottle
( about half the current small bottle size) and say you'd like another, you paid
an extra sixpence for that, and if you wanted lobster mayonnaise extra, you
paid an extra sixpence for that. Well some might say they were the good
old days. We didn't have as many sixpences in those days perhaps as we
do now but th-e fact of the matter was that you had a good potable wine that
had no nonsense about it. It was there from the time you started your meal
and away you went. If you wanted more it came quickly to you, and those
of you who have gone to Italy in recent years will know how you can still
repeat that process there to this day.
Now it was Omar Khayam who told us, as most of you will recall:
" I wonder often what the vintners buy one half so precious as the stuff they sell."
I'd like to just amend that slightly and put " what the restauranters or hoteliers
buy one half so precious as the stuff they sell" because I find it something of
a deterrent to sit down either at a hotel or a restaurant, pick up the wine list
and find that in their enthusiasm they've added something upwards of a 1007%
to what I know that wine can be bought at, not necessarily wholesale, but even
retail. And I think it's a very abort-sighted policy because you always think
hard about the second bottle when you know you are paying over 100% on the
price you could have it at home, and if by chance at a cheaper level you are
able to consume two or three bottles, well one is less resistant to the port
or the brandy which might follow as a logical consequence, and so I would
like to see the wine industry make its best efforts not only on Governments
and I don't reject or object to the representations we receive from the wine
industry but to use their influence to reduce the ritual so that more casual
wine drinkers will be encouraged to do it without feeling that they are exposing
themselves embarrassingly in public places and also to see that the price
reaches the consumer at a reasonable level. / 4. 
4-
Now I said that as a Government we meet the industry from
time to time. Quite obviously if one studies the facts this is a highly
favoured industry. There are very few areas of agreeable human
experience that remain untaxed by governments. I suppose love-making
is one and wine drinking is another. There are not many more that I can
think of. I perhaps should have th ought of this when I was with the
Premiers yesterday and they were wanting to open up new avenue-, of
taxation. But for our part we impose no tax burden on table wines.
I don't think we do, Geoffrey, on fortified wines. We certainly do on
brandy, but even here we have a smaller charge on brandy than we do
on the other spirits, which again creates a grievance with those wh'
manufacture the other spirits. In other words, you can't win in th-: sbusiness
of government, but none of us has ever regretted what we have
done in respect of the wine industry and the preference which has enabled
the surplus production of wine to be converted in many instances to brandy
and to give the Australian public the benefit of that lower price.
Now I don't want to weary you with anecdotes for they bristl. e
through the history of wine but there is one which I might leave with you
before I movre on, a story which appealed to me about Winston Churchill,
who of course did his best during his lifetime to assist the wine industry
to the best of his ability. And at one international conference in a very
large room Winston Churchill enlivened what was otherwise a dreary patch
of discussion by saying that the champagne he had drunk through a lifetime
would have filled that room. He had his scientist friend with him
he used to travel round with him the ? vbmber of the House of
his name escapes me at the moment but he quickly made some mental
calculations of the quantity which on average he would assume Sir Winston
to have consumed and he had to tell him that he wouldn't have filled that
large room. He would have only brought it up to a level of about tw-o feet
and the story runs that Sir Winston was in a rather depressed state of mind
for the rest of the proceedings.
But he is only one of a long line of notable public men who have
found in the consumption of wine in good company, relaxation, a source of
refreshment and an encouragement to get on with the tasks ahead.
Now my purpose, as you have been told, is formally to declare
open the Vineyard and the Winery of Dalwood Estates, but before I do that
as my final act I am going to ask you all to rise and join me in a toast, and
the toast is this: There is not with us today a very wonderful lady to whom
Penfolds means very much indeed and who has meant very much to Penfolds,
and I'm going to ask you to join me, as I am sure Geoffrey would approve,
in drinking a toast to Mrs. Gladys Penfold Hyland. I hope she is able to
hear what we are saying but if not, on your behalf and to her, I say from
all of us thankyou Gladys for all you've meant to Penfolds and thankyou for
being such a wonderful person as I find all the Penfolds are. So here's to
Gladys. And I now have very great pleasure in formally and officially
declaring open the Dalwood Estates Vineyard and Winery. 



LUNCHEON, CAN3BRRA. A. C. T.
Spech by the Prime Minister Mr. H: Lrold Holt M rch, 1967.
On the 10th Marcr 1967 the Prime inister of
Australia, Mr. Holt, attended a luncheon in the
honour of the National C. pital Plarnin. Cormmnittee
on the occasion of the final meeting oT their
three year term.
Mr. Holt first expressed thanks and appreciation
to the Committee and to . the Chairman, ir. J. U.
Overall the National Capitial Development
Com,.: ijioner.
The Prime Minister then continued
I nm here as a resident a goid part of the time as
an observer now for very many years and ' by their works ye shall
know them'. I think if th: t text is applied to you and the
members of your Committee, Chalirnan, you would get a unanimous
vote of arproval from all around Australia.
Je hve seen uildin here, before our eyes w-ith the
passage of time a truly oeautif l city and a setting hich gives
it an individua ity and marks it out as one of the really l-vely
Capital cities of he world.
I . o buck thirty-one years plus and the transformation
which hai. s occurred, more narticularly over { he recent years, is
to me truly remarkaole. I cmn remeoer when I set off on one
occasion with Jeoff Stc.: et und Jim Fairbairn later to oe killed
in that trugic accident ; hich helped to ive the airport its
name and walked from Parliament House to the National V. ar
Meorial. No., of course I : ould have to take the flippers and
the mask, and snorkel, if I -ere to attempt that journey again
and this is one of the major tr-insformations which have occurred
in the spectacular growth of the city its layout, the actual
pulling together of the outlyipg parts which could not be so
clearly perceived until the ake . as there to jive a sort of
focal centre to them.
but tnia is not . n easy ob which we hatve set you.
It . ould be difficult enough, I thin to plan a lovely city if
you could take your time acout the development of it and if you
had unlimited funds availale to you for your purposes.
Here you don't merely have the sort of restraints
which a responsible 3overnment feels necessary to impose on any
one section of n-tional growth in the interests of others, and'
although It ink re h 4ve treated the Bt-tional C-it 1 by no means
unreasonaoly, I knojz thtt you h-tve felt at times that the
limitations we have placed on you have held dovn the rate of growth
rather more thin you . ould have desired. Yet the performance itself
indicates that we haven't been too nig ; ardly in that regard. At
the thing which really complicates your task enormously, I imapine,
is that you have not merely the problem of ouilding a ueautifui / 2
R. TII'I cArIT:: II)_. L~ C01U. IS0-IOTK 
-2-
C-iital City, but of copin with a city population growing more
rapidly than in any other city of size around Australia.
You have got to satisfy the customers who are there
who feel the need for the engineering services that you've put
in; who want to see tres trow w; here they've selected a fairly
oare site as a building sile; who ' ant to feel they'ce -irt of
a fine city and you've got to do all that for them and at the
same time uild a capital which will be a source of national pride
in itself. And, I think, you have succeeded admirably in bot
these directions. The resident of Canberra must feel that his standard
of service and of accommodation compares very favourably with
that of other parts of the Commonwealth and ri-ht through the
period that accompanies this normal uroan growth. You've got
the ouilding of impressive official buildings, of building up
the commercial centres of the national city and all the rest of
it that goes with w: hat is now, I gather, just on a city of 100,000
souls, and rising, what? 100 or tiereabouts?
Commissioner About seven or eight.
Mr. Holt Yes, we have steadied it down a oit I gather. Anyhow,
that is still a very rapid rate of growth for any city to have to
cope with. You have mentioned one or two things which haven't
altogether pleased your Committee e! emoers. The critic, I suppose,
can always find room for improvement.
I, myself, have puzzled for many years and Sir
Rooert disclaimed any responsibility himselT but I could not
find anybody who would claim any responsibility for the King Jeorge
Statue and I know it is one of Doug's ambitions either to bomb
it or to remove it. Even diurin the earlier periods where there
were threats to Australian security, I could only hope that if
we were so unfortunate as to have an enemy attack, they would
choose their targets skilfully.
And so he will have my moral, parliamentary and
ministerial support in action he takes to restore that sweep,
and that sense of proportion which did previously exist in the
vista between Parliament House and the ' ar i: emorial oy the
removal of this particular excrescence.
I am glad to know that you are so amenable to practical,
sensible suggestion that ooth you and the Minister have responded
so readily to my urgings that we convert the cowtrack from the
Airrort into Ci'berra into something a little more respectable;
and the edging which is now going on again has excited my warm
approval. But to do these things in a ractical way coping
with the growing population providin stndards which will at
the one time be a model to the rest of Australia, but won't oe
so far in advamce of the rest of Australia as to create resentment
and acrimony aro nd the other Capital Cities, is a task which calls
for judgment and discrimination, good sense and a-ain I repeat,
I believe you have achieved these things remarkaoly e. ll
It is not so many yeasa. itht ; ie diplomats
appointed to this country, foud. th it fhe amenities in C.: nperra
were so. lacking, that they / had to oase themselves rather uneasily
either in Sydney or occasionally in LMelbournei 
4 -3-
I think that appointment to the Australian scene was
re. arded almost in the sense of a period of solitary confinement.
How'ever, I am sure the doyen of the Corps would concede that now
there is quite a degree ol competition to secure appointment to
Australia and in particulir to Canberra as the national centre and
undoubtedly not only has the improvement in Canberra itself helped
to attract the Diplomatic Corps to C noerra but the oresence in
Canoerra of the Diplomatic Corps with their ow'n distinguished
buildings has added to the attraction of the capital city itself.
I am told that we are now attracting just on 600,000
tourists a year. It seems an extraordinary figure to me but I
am in no nosition to c-tilene it and, if it is a fact, then I
think it demonstrates not only that Canoerra: itself has developed
great attractiveness but there is a growing pride around Australia
in the National C-pital.
I can recall as even some of my more recently-acquired
collea ues the sort of controversy that used to go on even at the
time . en we were building the lake people resentful of C: tnberra's
expenditures and contrasting this ,. ith our failure to provide so
much for the things they needed in their centre. 3ut that's been
a diminishing factor almost to vanishimn point.
And today one senses a very different spirit around
the country. People are proud of Canberra, they flock to Canberra
and in that process, I think they have learned to take a growing
interest in the national Parliament in Canberra and in all these
directions your activities have helped.
May I say to those you have mentioned who served on the
Committee for the oeriod of nine years how, grateful we are to them
for the contribution they have made and indeed to thank you all
for what you have done in this honorary way eating into your spare
time and dra-in on your professional talets, the skills and the
experience whicH you so ably possess. All this is deserving of the
appreciation of your Xovernment of the . iustralian people.
So thank you very much for all that you have done and
all that you will ie doing for the growth and oeauty of this Capital
of ours and my thanks to you Mr. Chairman for the opportunity to be
ith you to say thank you and enjoy your company.
T 



OIL, GAS AM~ NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
This paper is an abridged version of the speech
by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt,
to a conference of the Australian Petroleum
Exploration Association in Sydney on Monday,
13th March, 1967.
The speech sets the Government's record and policy
in the sea-rch', for oil and gas in the context of its
broad policies for the promotion of national
development, and deals with recent criticism of
certain aspects of its oil search policy.
The speech is supported by two documents to which
reference was matde by the Prime Minister:-
Appendix A
A statement by the Commonwealth Treasurer,
the Rt. Hon. W. McMahon, on the
Government " take" ( royalties plus income tax)
in off-shore oil and gas activities.
Appendix B
Surmmary of a speech at the same A. P. E. A.
Conference by Sir Ian McLennan, Ma~ naging
Director of B. H. P. Co. Ltd. a partner with
ESSO in the successful discovery of off-shore
gas in Bass Strait, Victoria. 
OIL, GAS AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
TO THE AUSTRALIAN PETROLEUM EXPLORATION ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE
13TH ACH, 196
Let me first say that I am fully conecious of the
tremendous importance to Australia of an efficient, well-conducted
and successful petroleum exploration and development industry.
The petroleum industry provides an increasingly significant part
of our total energy needs. It employs directly and indirectly an
important percentage of our-population. Without petroleum, life
as we know it today would be, if not impossible, then certainly
very different. Fortunately, there is not much risk of a world shortage
of petrol. Why then, it is often asked, should we spend so much
effort in Australia in looking for more?
First, demand is rising at the rate of about 10% o a year
in Australia and 9% a year world-wide. Unless new reserves are
being found, over-supply could turn to shortage. Second, there is
always a risk that our supplies could be interrupted by events over
which we have no control. It is prudent to have our own resources.
Third, local supplies would help our balance of payments very much.
Petroleum is our third largest import, following machinery and
chemicals. In 1$ 65-66 we imported 4,854 million gallons valued
f. o. b. at about $ 250 million. There are very great national rewards
if wie can replace much of these imports with local petroleum.
Although the quest for petroleum began in 1892 in the
Coorong area of South Australia, it only commenced seriously in
the years following World War II. Senior officers of the
Commonwealth Bureau of Mineral Resources were among the few who
maintained, despite general disbelief, that a major search was
warranted. The Bureau began basic geological and geophysical
mapping of the Australian sedimentary basin and we, as a
Government, felt that here was a national speculation that was
justified in the national interest.
When Rough Range failed to show significant resources
after the find in 1953, the search had reached a. low ebb by 1958.
The Government, concerned at this decline in interest, introduced
a Petroleum Search Subsidy Act to stimulate company enterprise and
to make generally available the knowledge so gained of the geology
of the basins. We also felt that the Act would demonstrate a
favourable political attitude to petroleum soarch-that would
encourage experienced overseas companies to join in. The Act
has been extended from time to time and is currently effective
until June this year.
In the ten years of its life the subsidy scheme has
stimulated exploration and led to the discovery of oil and gas
in a number of areas in and around Australia.
Active exploration geological, geophysical and drillinghas
been undertaken in the 25 major basins of likely petroleumbearing
sediments. These cover some 1.7 of tho 3.2 million square
miles of land surface of Australia and Papua New Guinea and, about
0.6 of the 1 million square miles of the continental shelf. Total
expenditure by companies and by the Commonwealth and State
Governments to the end of 1966 was about 420 million, but
established reserves total only about 200 million barrels of oil.
We consumed in one year, 1965-66, a total ol 139 million barrels.
Thus our known reserves arc still less than two year's importation.
So you see we still have a lonSg, long way to go on the road to
self-sufficiency, / 2o 
2-
While the discoveries of natural gas will result in
cheaper domestic and industrial heating in some areas natural
gas is ready to pay handsome dividends in some localities in
Australia some of the markets are at a considerable distance
from the supply. It is therefore desirable that the search
should continue in an attempt to locate other fields in closer
proximity to the markets. Incidentally, the current cost of
finding oil in Au tralia of $ 2 a barrel compares very favourably,
I understand, with American and Canadian costs.
Apart from the Subsidy Act, the Commonwealth Government
has provided various inducements and basic technical services in
order to create a favourable climate in which private enterprise
* will provide the greater part of the expenditure required and be
responsible for detailed exploration, development and exploitation.
We clearly recognise the need to maintain continuing incontives.
in this field, and I can safely assure you that the general
attitude of my own Government is to recognise the difficulties
the industry faces because of the long term character of its
investment and the freaks of development wnich are a feature
of the oil industry.
The principle measures taken by the Commonwealth
Government, with which you are all familiar, include taxation
concessions, subsidies to exploration companies, basic surveys and
investigations in the field and laboratory by the Bureau of
Mineral Resources, other forms of assistance such as relief
from duty for essential equipment, accelerated map production
by the Department of National Development and the assistance
of highly qualified consultants.
Despite all this there has recently been a definite
pause in the rate of exploration due to an absence of significant
discoveries of new areas on-shore and delays in obtaining rigs
to drill structural areas off-shore. This latter problem w. ill
be largely overcome late in 1967 when five and possibly six rigs
will be drilling on our continental shelf. As Sir Ian McLenian
has said, the production activity of these rigs, and other
by-products of the mineral oil exploration programme, affect
the economy over a wide range of activities.
I was appreciative of what Sir Ian McLerman had to say
about the co-operative and helpful attitude he had found in the
Governments concerned in his negotiations this, of course, is as
it should be. There have been extensive Comi_. onwealth/ State
discussions on the proposed off-shore legislation, and the
Governments concerned have given their careful consideration to
the views expressed by the companies engaged in off-shore operations.
The object of the Governments has been to reach agreement on a
legislative scheme that would give certainty of title to operators
in off-shore areas who undertake to bear very high expenditures,
and at the same time to avoid wasteful and costly litigation of
a kind which has beset the United States for many years and is
now starting to show up in Canada. We confidently expect that
our legislation will be brought before the Parliament during the
course of this year.
Much interest in the continental shelf has been generated
by the discovery of large supplies of natural gas. Although
natural gas provides only one-hundredth part of one per cent of
Australia's primary energy market, this share could increase to
as much as 10% within a few years. The change from one energy
source to another is an expensive step, but where it can be shown
that it is in the interest of the Australian people to make a
change, my Government will view constructively and in a helpful
spirit any scheme suggested. I am happy to say that through the
Australian Loan Council we have been able to arrange for the
necessary funds to cover the $ 40 million cost of piping gas to
Adelaide. / 3. 
-3
As a background to the changes which your own industry
is bringing to Australia's groviin6 economy, let me mention that
there are now 60,000 factories in Australia double the number
at he beginning of World War II. Employment in these factories
represents an increase of 125% since 1939. Manufacturing now
absorbs 28% of our viaork force and contributes 13%; of the value
of our total exports and that peroentage is tending to increase.
We are now exporting to countries some products which we formerly
imported, including steel to the United States and the United
Kingdom. Our manufacturing nowadays includes some highly
sophisticated products like radio-tele phone eqjuipment,
transistorised airways beacons, the pilotless jet aircraft
Jindivik, the anti-submarine ge-uided missile Ikara and the
anti-tank guided weapon Malkara. These have all found markets
abroad. Another aspect of the changing economic patternreflecting
largely the impact of petroleum and mineral
developments is -the emergence of new towns. Though small
in size, the contribution to national development, and in
particular to development of the north of such towns as Weipa,
Dampier, Mount Tom Price, Gove and Barrow Island, will become
increasingly important as time goes by. This is decentralisation
in a practical way stemming from private industry developments.
We recognise that there is a role for Governments in all this,
but Australia has benefited, and will benefit increasingly in
the years ahead, from the practical decentralisation of activity
and industry occurring through these private industrial
developments, and others like them.
Vast quantities of capital are required for these
projects and in the main this is being found by the firms
themselves. Nevertheless, Government action has contributed
much to the mineral development of the north. Direct financial
contributions totalling 44 million have been made by the
Government towards the Townsville-Mount Isa Railway, the
Gladstone coal loader, the Weipa wharf and township, the Darwin
wharf and railway facilities in the Northern Territory. The
Commonwealth Government has also arranged that, in addition to
the mining activity in the Gove bauxite deposits, processing
to alumina will take place in the Northern Territory. The
Burezu. of Mineral Resources has, in fact, spent 80% of its
annual budget of nearly $ 5.4 million on securing basic data
on mineral resources in Northern Australia.
In all these ways, the Government is helping to shape
the new pattern of economic activity. Vie can also help by
providing a favourable climate for decentralisation, and this
applies in particular to your own industry through the economic
and general policies we pursue. An illustration that comes
quickly to mind oli practical help to areas remote from the cities
is the legislation that brought the price of petrol for people
outside the city areas to a level close to city prices. Other
measures include the amounts to be expended on rural roads under
the Commonwealth Aid Road legislation, the activities ol' my
colleague, the Postmaster-General in ensuring that television
services stretch out as widely as possible, the decentralisation
of air services and the provision of other amenities.
From what I have already said, you will appreciate that
mining and oil development are but a part of the overall story.
May I mention particularly the recent publication brought out
under the aegis of my colleague, the Minister for National
Development. It costs only $ 2 and shows the major development
work under construction in Australia at the end of June last
year to have a value on completion~ of $ 2,327 million. By any
standard this is a huge investment programme with a nation of
less than 12. million people and the to-tal does not include *. 04 
-4
such things as expenditure on housing, hospitals and education
facilities or the Commonwealth's $ 600 million expenditure on
the Snowy Scheme. The publication shows that we now have in
hand investment and developments amounting to some $ 20G0 a head
of our population. New arrangements and facilities for the provision of
capital will need to be devised to help finance this and new
developments, and we have been working actively and earnestly
on the problem for some time. We are confident that we will
find a practical means to achieve this objective.
Nobody living in this country so subject to the haeards
of the seasons and risk of drought, flood or fire, can expect
that the course ahead is ever likely to be easy. But we believe
our plans are soundly laid and that the political and economic
stability we are maintaining is one of the strongest incentive-a
for investment in Australia and provides a favourable environment
for development and growth.
Before I conclude, perhaps I should deal a little more
specifically wftth some of the matters that weore raised by your
Chairman, Mr. Earl Abbott in his thoughtful and extremely
interesting speech. The most serious point I want to take up
with you is the question of the availability of Governments for
consultation. I have no hesitation in stating that there is no
agreement whatsoever among the Governments conccrned that they
will not consult w--ith the industry. Indeed, there have been
several consultations, and I have taken part in two of them
myself. To mention only the more recent occasions, there were
three meetings with the industry last year in Febru~ ary, June
and August, as well as a number of written exchanges.
At the meeting in Febru~ ary there were lengthy discussions
between senior Commonwealth and State officers and representatives
of eleven off-shore companies, many of whom are prominent members
of APEA. At a meeting of Commonwealth Ministers in June, the
. APEA request for permission to send a deputation was granted and
in August five senior Commonwyealth Ministers received a further
deputation which presented a written case and took several hours
in explaining its point of view and discussing it. I therefore
think it is fair to say that the Government has given the APEA
wide opportunity to present its views: it has certainly taken
these into account in determining its policies, and will continue
to do so. Far from our adopting policies which would discourage
the industry or kill the goose that we hope will lay us many
golden eggs, it is our object to assist it in its tasks and to
encourage it to go ahead with its investment, exploration and
development. I did have it in mind to go in some detail into the
percentage of " take" by Governments in Australio. and how this
compares with the percentages in other countries. For lack of
time, I now just want to make it clear th-it we do not accept
and this has been the matter of a quite thorough study the
table of percentages which have been publicly presented as a
basis of comparison for the Australian " 1take" l and that of
countries overseas. Rather than weary you with going over the
ground again, may I direct your attention to the press statement
of 27th January which went out from my colleague, thIe Treasurer.
It is admittedly difficult to find a realistic basis for comparison
between the tax st-ructures of the different countries, but we
have to recognise that the responsible Commionwealth and State
Governments have an entitlement to a proportion oZ the return
from the exploitation of our natural resources, just as have
those who hazard their capital and skill in the effort. These
things are all in our consciousness and I would hope that the
experience of the industry generally can be that we will always
be seeking good co-operation between Government and industry in
the exciting task of the development of our couintry and its resources. 
APPENDIIX A
OFF-SHOIL OIL AIT GAS:
ROYALTIES AND TAX
by
The Rt. Hon. William McMahon, Mi. P.
Treasurer of the Cormmonwealth
of Australia
The petroleum industry has claimed th. t the Government
" take" ( royalty plus income tax) in Australia in the proposed
joint off-shore petroleum legislation by the Cormmonwealth and
the States will be higher than in five of the six other countries
with recent off-shore legislation. The comparative figures that
have been quoted are:-Govt. " take" as percentage
Country of " divisTble profit ( a)
United Kingdom 50.4 per cent
Denmar 45.8
Germany 50.6
Norway 55.2
France 47.72
United States 46.8
Australia 52.8
on a " present-day value" basis.
These figures do not give a true picture the .' orth of
the figures depends heavily on:-
a) the basis on which the calculations of " present-day
values" of " divisible profits" have been made.
( These calculations involve the estimating of gross
sales proceeds and capital and operating production
costs over a given future long-term period, and the
reduction of the resulting figures to a present-day
alue basis by the application of a miscount interest
rate); and
b) the assumptions used in the measurement of the incidence
of income taxation in the respective countries.
The information that has been provided on how the
figures are compiled is very meagre. The starting point is an
a-sumption that, on a present-day value basis, gross sales
procee-s will be double capital and operating production costs
in the case of all the countries mentioned.
This is obviously a very generalised assumption; it
certainly cannot be accepted without question so far as Australia
is concerned. The period and discount interest rate used in
the calculation of the present-'. ay value figures have not been
indicated and the use of different periods and different interest
rates can produce vastly diiferent results in terms of comparative
present-day values.
It is not suificient only to look at tax rates; the
comparisons must have regrd to the taxation laws as a whole of
/ 2. 
2-
those countries. These laws differ considerably in relation to
deductions allowable and the time when those deductions may be
claimed. The tax figures include'. in th.. calc.. lasion of the
quoted percelnt. es for the other countries y be significantly
understated in some cases while the tax fiui. es included in thcalculation
of the ciuote, Australian percentage, o_ the other
hand, seem to be substantially overstated. This is because the
figures take no account of the special deductions allowable under
our income tax lawswhich are designed to free the proceeds from
the sale of petroleum and its products f. om income tax until all
allowable capital expenditure has been f'-lly recouped.
If in tihe present-day value calculations allowance
were made for thic feature of Australian incoime tax law, the
tax figures included in the Australian calculation would be
considerably reduced perhaps even to the point where the figure
for the Australian government " take" would fall below the
percentage figures quoted for other countries.
The only comparison that can be made of any ral
meaning is between rates of royalty and these represent only
o.. e area of government involvement. For instance, the Commonwealth
Government has given special stimulus and assistance to oil
search, at times when the risks are highest by the petroleum
search subsidy scheme, under which the Commonwealth has already
paid out or committed a total of $ 59.6 million; by making
capital subscribed to an oil exploration company by Australian
resident shareholders fully tax deductible, and by fixing a
special incentive price for five years from 1965 for crude oil
produced in Australia.
The standard royalty rate of IO' 1 in th.. proposed joint
off-shore legislation is relatively on international standards.
It compares with rates of 16-2/ 3o and 12-1% generally applicable in
off-shore a;. eas in the Unitea States and the United Kingdom
respectively. IFurt. iermore the industry has been treated more generously
in this country with the proposed legislation on the sizes of
exploration and production areas. Canberra
27th January, 1967 
APPEMIX B
AN USTALIN LOKSAT PETROLEUM EXLORATION
by
Sir Ian McLennan
Managing Director of B. H. P. Co. Ltd.
Petroleum exploration activities in Australia represent
a unique combination of local and foreign private enterprise,
activities combined with effective and practical Government
support in tangible form.
Expenditure on petroleum exploration in Australia had
reached a total of some $ 370 million by December 1965 o * f which
$ 234 million had been spent in thce last 10 years. The current
rate of expenditure is of the order of $ 60 $ 70 million per
annum. These figures are substantial, even alongside the
Snowy Mountains scheme where approximately $ 600 million has
been spent at the rato of $ 40 $ 50 million a year, and the
steel industry where 4794 million has been spent in the last
years. The $ 370 million spent to December, 1965 -was made
up this way:-
Funds provided by Private Enterprise $ 294 million
Dircct Government Subsidies 42
Other direct Commonwealth and
State Expenditure S 34
This is enlightening and shows that while Governments
do play a significant role iLi the matter of subsidies, direct
expenditure and by other incentives, it is still for private
enterprise, to the greatest extent, to provide the necessary
stimulus, funds anC. 1 know how.
The. re is, of course, a further groat stimulus provided
by the Commonwealth Government in the form of relief from taxation,
but I know of no way of putting a precise figure to this.
A ba: cakdown of the $ 70.8 million spent on petroleum
exploration activities during 1965 shows that the major investment
was by overseas organisations which accounted for $ 34.3 million,
followed by Australian private enterprise inves-umont and re-investment
amounting to $ 21.6 million, Goverimrent subsidy of $ 10.4 million
and Direct Government expenditure of approximately $ 4.5 million.
One oi. the intangibles which has not been listed in
the expenditures, but which is very real, is the value which should
be placed on the experience represented by the pkersonnel engaged
in such activities, anc.-the influence that they can exert to see
that Ghe money is spent wisely.
In the field of off-shore legislation in particular
therc. have been many international and constitutional problems
to overcome and many points of view to consider.
This is not just a simple government/ industry relations
problem. Both govern,.ñ ent and ind ustry are working together in
an uncharted field and the degree ol' progress and mutual understanding
is heartening. o 
2-
There is intense world wide competition for capital
for petroleum exploration and the development of petroleum
production capacity. Other countries may offer certcin incentives
in the competition for such capital but in the overall analysis
Australia has a great deal to offer.
The development of the large super tanker and of
pipeline transportation have done much to ease our joint problems
of isolation and small local markets.
In the local scene, Australia is rapidly becoming
industrialised, and its population mobile, with a high standard
of living and increasing demands for energy. Our energy resourees
in black and brown coal are quite significant, but the growth
factor is in the field of readily transportable energy. The
sources of primary energy, for the statistical year 1965-66,
expressed in tons of black coal equivalent, arc:-
Coal 48.7%
Petroleum 44.2%
Firewood 1. 4%
Hydro electric power 5.7%
This clearly shows the importance of potroloum'in the energy
market. Therj are areas whore competition exists between these
sources of primary energy, particularly in power generation and
perhaps in some types of industrial market, and the natural forces
of competition will give each source its place in the market.
However, ther are major sections of the energy market
where the alternative types oi fuel are not interchangeable and
one result is the rapidly increasing demand for energy in the
form of petroleum. The petroleum industry is well aware of the continual
expansion of the demands for its products. In the United States,
for example, the 61% share of the total energy requirements of
the United States helu by oil and natural gas in 1950 rose to
76% by 1965. In Western Europe, the share rose from 15% in
1950 to 52% in 1965 with an expected increase to 72% in 1975.
Is there any doubt that Australia's energy requirements
will follow similar trends?
In Australia we offer stability of Government and have
Governiments fully alive to the advantages which can accrue from
the development of a local petroleum industry. I woul. emphasise
the intangible incentives that stable Government offers, notwithstanding
the va, r ious shades of Government opinion.
The lack of restrictions placed on foreign investment
in Australia, compared with restrictions, both written and
unwritten, which the petroleum exploration and production
industry has encountered elsewhere, reflects an enlightened
Australian attituLe offering considerable encouragement.
In matters such as taxation, remittance abroad of
earnings and repatriation of capital, the attitude of the Commonwealth
Government and the various authorities concerned can only be
cla. sified as highly co-operative. 
-3-
From time to time there may be some criticism levelled
at remittance abroad of earnings and repatriation of capital in
the case of foreign controlled organisations, but usually such
criticism is saved up for those organisations which are succes-ful.
However, there isno doubt, on the ether side of such criticism,
a whole-hearted respect for such organisations and a realisation
of their value to a country like ours.
One very important aspect of Government policies, is no
discrimination between national and foreign ownership in the
application of laws and regulations. Another incentive to the
petroleum exploration industry for continual and expanded
exploration in Australia is tE potential that exists.
Our own experience in petroleum exploration has shown
that a painstaking and detailed step by step programme under
expert and experienced guidance with adequate resources in
capital and know-ho a, can result in discoveries and also maintain
a high proportion of local equity.
I would not venture to predict the anticipated ratio. of
success in both continental and off. shore exploration in Australia,
but I imagine you will all agree that the potential for further
discoveries in the Australian area is good.
I am not sure if we ar doing all we can in Australia
to take full advantage of this petroleum age and our educational
activities will need to be developed further so that our y-ung
people can play their full part in just the same way as they
have in the development of our other industries. We need
geologists, chemicel engineers, construction engineers, physicists,
chemists, and so on, all oriented in their training toward. s the
petroleum industry.
The coming of the petroleum exploration industry and
its prospect of success has brought other developments to Australia
which would not have been contemplated even a few years ago.
Who would have thought that the State Dockyard at
Newcastle would have played a major part in reconstructing an
off-shore drilling rig and who would have thought that at Whyalla
we would be constructing a semi-submersible rig of the most
highly sophisticated nature using very largely Australian raw
materials and Australian people?
The imported content of this rig will be confined to
specialised machinery not made in this country. Further, it is
hoped that soon we will be building platforms for erection in
Bass Strait ; and already there has gone into operation at Port
Kembla a new tube mill capable of producing the very high grade
pipes necessary for gas and oil distribution. These are just some
of the things that have happened and others of course may well
occur and are in fact already under way.
So far very little incone h-. s bjcn derived inAustralia
from petroleum activities. It is all with an eye to the future
and it is most heartening indeed that there arc so many people
prepared to " chance their arm" in an ondeavour to bring the great
benefits of oil and natural gas production to this country.
Surely they deserve their just rewards if success comes
their way. It is essential that these rewards be there to provide
incentive for further exploration because up to the present we
have only scratched the surface. 13th March, 1967. 



W E R'S 0^
S2 9 MAR 1967
4-1 AR
OFENINJ OF HONEYSUCKLE CR SA'CAE TRACKIN ST TT. RA
A. C. T.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINIISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT 17th March, 1967.
Senator Henty, Mrs. Henty Dr. Seamans and Mrs. Seamans,
Mr. Buckley, any other distinguished guests here today and
ladies and gentlemen and all associated with this great project:
It is a personal pleasure for me for a variety of reasons
to be here at this time if for no other reason than oecause, like
you I am enjoying this bracing Canberra air and this beautiful
Australian seting. At least, Dr. Seamans you will be able
to report th-t Australia does live up to its' travel brochures
as to its sunshine and the jeauty of its quite urique fauna and
geography as you see it around us.
It is not a very frequent occasion, of course for a
Prime Minister to oe addressing himself to a matter of this kind.
I have done so very rarely. Prime Ministers, if they are to
succeed, are not so much concerned with outer space as keeping
their feet firmly on the ground. Sometimes their onponents accuse
them of oeing up in the air, even their most fervent admirers
are not unkno,. n to say they are out of this world. So I come
before you as one who addresses you with all the valour of
ignorance on this rather esoteric are, of human activity which
is exemplified for us in this rather awesome piece of equipment
under which some of us at least are sheltering this morning.
But it is a notale occasion in a chain of events which have
had consideraole si nificance for Australia and which we hope are
enabling Australia To play a useful and helpful part, not only
in the space ' rogr-mme of the United States itself but in what
has become one o? the happier ventures of mankind in which
politics tend to be submerged and the aspirations of mankind
the achievements of science, can be largely shared throughout
the world. This particular tracking station, so auspiciously
situated and so happily named I think Honeysuckle Tracking
St-ition is a delightful name for an institution such as this.
Attractive in rel-tion to almost any activity. If you were to
come here Dr. Seamans, and say you were tracking square at
Honeysuckle Creek there might be a different interpretation
placed on your activities by Australians who would be familiar
with that vernacular.
iut here we have a new tracking station which is to
play its own useful part in a great human -adventure. This
venture into space is something which an older generation such
as my ow-, n can scarcely comprehend. It's the stuff of science
fiction, of space fiction of earlier times made reality in our
own day and generation. And as , w reflect on these things it
is fitting that w. e should give due tribute and regard to those
pioneers in science down through the centuries, w o have made
possible by their earlier adventures in the human mind and body,
b the achievements of these pioneers of genius. They by their
efforts have givn us the kind of instruments and the scientific
method of experiment which makes this sort of achievement possible.
I mentioned at the outset that it is a happy circumstance
that t lose great powers who have interested themselves in this
Particular area of human achievement, have aproached their
tasks with the objective of oettering mankin s knowledge of its
environment, and of contributing to peaceful purposes and to
an improvement of man's standards of living. This vital
aspiration is shared uy two great po'wers the United States
of America and the Soviet Union, and with amazing technical / 2 
-2-
achievements to be put at the disposal of man's efforts to. shape
his world for meeting his material needs and opening new doors
to his understanding himself and the universe in which he lives,
we owe much to these two great countries.
The United States Aeronautics and Space Act became law
on the 29th of July 1958, less than ten years ao. It was then
stated, officially, as United States policy in That legislation,
that activities in space should be devoted to peaceful purposes
for the benefit of mankind. In a modest way Australia had commenced
to co-operate actively in the International Jeophysical Year in
1957, by operating a tracking system known as Minitrack at Woomera,
and now we have from that oeginning added Carnavon in iestern
Australia Coby Creek in Queensland Voomera in South Australia,
Tidbinbilla, Orroral Valley and now Honeysuckle Creek ( all of these
last three in the The United States has financed the
cost of construction, and by the end of the year the Space Authority
will have spent more than 0100 million in Australia. You are used
to juggling figures in billions, Dr. Seamans, but for Australia this
is a considerable sum to ue spent inside the borders of our
continent for these scientific purposes. The cost of operating
the six Australian stations, apparently, is aoout 8-million dollars
a year. There is an appropriateness, I think that Australia should
be in the picture in this particular field, because Captain Cook's
own voyage of exploration which led to the settlement of Australia,
was made on oehalf of the Royal Society to ouserve a transit of
Venus across the sun almost two hundred years ago. So we feel
that we are appropriately placed to be playing a part now in
another great exploration, that of space.
We have been associated with the United States programme
since its early days as the illustration I gave earlier would
su gest. For nearly ten years now we have joined in facilitating
American space activities. . e have helped to select sites and
construct stations in Australia and their manning includes scientists
and technologists from the Department of Supply and Australian
industry atogether some seven hundred persons from these sources.
The Australian government purchased and made available to the
Space Authority nine hundred acres of freehold land for this
present station. A practicable contribution to the space programme
itself. This station is directly concerned with Project Apollo
which will launch into space three manned capsules as a part of
an experiment which will culminate in a voyage of some three
days duration to the moon, 250,000 miles away. The Australian
group of stations represent the largest complex of Space Authority
stations outside the United States. I think I am correct in saying,
Dr. Seamans, that in the Apollo Pro ect there will be three
tracking stations which will oe following the course of the moon
vehicle oeyond the 10,000 mile limit. One in the United States,
one in Spain and this one here in Australia. And I think we can
feel gratified and take some pride, indeed satisfaction, that in
what proves to be one of the great historic events of man's
exploration of his universe we shall be one of the three countries
right in the picture, literally, so far as the concluding phases
of the flight are concerned.
Some people wonder whether all this vast expenditure that
goes into the space programmes can oe justified. The answers are
not difficult to find. Already we hive peen deriving Yreat oenefits
from the programme of space adventure. If you take meleorology
alone, and there is not a human oeing on earth who isn't daily
concerned with the state of the weather. It is our most familiar
personal greeting when we see each other in the course of the day. 
-3-
-eather can now be viewed on a global scale several times a day.
This can be done regularly in regions of the earth which have
previously defied around-the-clock meteorolofical o* servation.
The poles, the oceans, the sparse areas of the Southern Hemisphere
have now ueen brought into the range of . eather forecasting.
and this also has an aspect which could commend itself to all
of us in enabling us to avoid the worst effects of the havoc of
hurricanes, cyclones and typhoons.
For exa: iple, in 1961 quite early in the programme people
were evapuated from the path of Hurricane Carla as a result of
warnin? data received from the Tvros Satellite. In navigation
satellites can play a helpful role. In international communication
we have already received the first telecast between Britain and
Australia. , e are but at the beginnings of this improvement in
communication, and before we are all very much older the world can
be in television contact as a normal and everyday event.
There has been a notaole contribution to the knowled e of
eography the study of geology. Our understanding is assisted
by the information we receive from the special satellites designed
and equipped for these purposes.
Man's superior ability to explore and record details will
provide valuable information as to measurements, direct photoraphs,
soil and rock samples, a vast array, in short of scientific data.
The initial landing on the moon proposed by 1970, may lead to
longer journeys and wider exploration and culminate in the
establishment of a permanent moon oase. A project which a few, yearj
ago ; ould have been thought quite fanciful even if it were to appear
in the realm of fiction.
There have been other oenefits, already directly attributable
to the space exploration efforts. 4reat advarces in materials such
as ceramics, metals and plastics. Metal alloys specially developed
have led to improvements. For example, they have been found ideal
for the manufacture of artificial parts for the human oody, such
necessary assistance to hip and elbow joints. Special knowledge
of foods developed for astronauts may help the world in its search
for the solution of food problems.
For Australia we have a growin:-numuer of men and women
technically trained to handle complicated concepts and the
complicated equipment associated with space technology. Australia
has found already many benefits to its own technological
development. It may interest you to know that last month Qantas,
with the co-operation of the tracking station at Cooby Creek
experimented in air-to-ground voice communication ob satellite
with encouraging results.
foankind needs the incentive of space exploration in order
to develop to full potential some of these great possibilities.
This vast spurt of human imagination and technological progress
is opening ne'; doors to experience and achievement. It carries
with it at first its own hazards. Fortunately disasters have been
few but we should all rememoer here today the sacrifice made by
Jrissom, White and Chaffey as they were playing their part in this
scientific evolution.
ye welcomed here, and some of us in this gathering will
no doubt recall with -reat pleasure the visit of a-. lter Schiirar
and Frank 3orman and their wives. We nay tribute to the courae,
skill and determination of these brave pioneers of tomorrow, who
make it possible for us to realise the aspirations of this great
verture. Finally, ladies mnd gentlemen, may I refer to this as / 4
L 
-4-
another welcome illustration of the friendly and mutually helpful
teamwork which over the years, and more particularly over recent
years, has been demonstrated oetween the United States of America,
our great ally, and our own country of Australia. This stands as
a symbol for that firendship and for that teamwork and an alliance
which, we hope, will endure for as long as our two countries remain
national entities.
So, as I open formally this tracking station and have with
you a vision of what it can contribute to this protramme in the
future, may I adopt the words of Tennyson as a fitling conclusion:
" Forward, forward,
Let us range
Let the great world spin forever
Down the ringing grooves of change."
I declare this station formally open. 



AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF' DIRECTOES? LUNCHEON,
IM LBOURHE
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Halt.
Mr. President and Gentlemen:
I regard that as a somewhat qualified introduction but
I have already been told that you will have to leave at two otclock,
so I shall not be speaking to you either at the length the
Treasurer finds necessary at Budget time, or as Prime Minister
on a leisurely evening occasion such as I felt able to indulge
my audience and myself in just on 12 months ago.
It wias for me a priviledge to be chosen as the guest
of honour at the first annual dinner of the first annual conference
of the Australian Institute of Directors and I look back to that
occasion with a great deal of pleasure. Your reference to having
acquired a proprietary interest over me Mr. President, which in
some other context might not have worked out so favourably, does
not appear to have done me very much harm in the meantime in the
eyes of the Australian electorate. If there was any blur on my
national image as a result of hobnobbing with so many directors
at one time on that occasion, at least the twelve months seem to
have given me time to live it down.
There is in Australia, I'm glad to say, a growing
maturity, a growing sopilhistication, not registered always in
all quarters at one and the same time, but broadly this is a
generalisation I think vie can claim. Where at one time a
prophet was not only without honour in his own country but a
profit spelt rather differently was almost a matter of guilt,
people these days realise that . ic are producing a few Australian
prophets who are listened to at times abroad and can with equal
advantage be heard at home, and that a profit in the well
conducted industrial enterprise is a national dividend capable
of being distributed through the medium of the tax mechanism
through all sections of the Australian community.
In one sense I am here with you as a fellow director,
indeed I think I could claim to be a Chairman of Directors of
the National Corporation. You mentioned my previous incumbency
of the Treasury, Mr. President, that, of course, made me probably
the biggest shareholder in most of the companies represented here
today, so that I feel I have come not only amongst friends I
hope they are still friends but I h ive coma amongst people
whose language I understand and whose problems also I have had
to cope with in various Ministerial capacities.
Now you have enjoined me, Mr. President, that these
busy, alert, brisk, intelligent executives must be springing
from their seats and getting into action on behalf of the
national economy by two o'clock and I'll do my best to distill
such wisdom as occurs to me oil this occasion in the time which
remains available to me.
In the twelve months since I last met the national body
much has happened. This is a continent and a nation in which
much continues to happen. It is-undoubtedly the most stimulating
and exciting period in our national history, and in the course of
the year amongst other things I, a-s a good national chairman of
the board of the National Corporation, found it necessary to give
some account of my stewardship to my shareholders, to several
millions of them who record a vote ( I hope not much more
frequently than every three years) and to give them some account
00/ 2. 
-2
of what we had in store for them over the period ahead.
I think it's a good Chairman of the Board who, while giving
a faithful account of what has occuired, and gives the facts
about what is planned for the future, doesn't try to promiso
too much. Better the people should be agreeably surprised
that you have done rather more than you undertook to do,
than that they should build false expectations on rosy and
glowing promises which are incapable in the result of
fulfilment, and that was the approach I chose to make at
the time of the last national assessment.
Wie set about a programme for the electorate which
we felt was manageable, which would not unduly disturb the
national economy and yet which continued our forward advance
on a number of fronts and I am glad to be able to say that
the Government having come officially and formally back into
office vwe have set briskly about giving affect to those
undertakings. I won't, because of the lim-itation of time,
try to take you through in any detail just what we have already
done and where we stand at present in relation to these mattersthat
will emerge from statements made by my colleagues and
certainly by the end of the current Parliamentary Session,
I hope to be able to give some account of how rapidly we have
advanced in all the directions which we undertook to attend to.
In the fields of education, social services, housing,
water conservation, beef roads, the wool -industry, tourism,
which I specifically mentioned in the Policy Speech, I can
tell you that action has already been put in hand, some are
completed, much of it to be completed by the end of this
Parliamentary Session.
My colleagues and I and vie are in a sense the
Directors of this National Corporation can look with pleasure
and a certain measure of pride at the general state of affairs.
The past year has not beon an easy one, only those of us
and this includes many of you in this room who have had to
grapple with quite abnormal circumstances developing in the year,
realise this because for the most part the public was relatively
unaffected by the problems with which we had to grapple.
Internally we experienced a major drought and the effects of
this are only now beginning to ease. Perhaps I could just pause
there for a moment because I don't think there has been a full
realisation of just what this drought meant to Australia.
If you -look at it merely in terms of farm incomes,
in 1964/ 65 the farm income amounted in total to $ 1,255 million.
In the following, year and normally we would have expected
some reasonable progression in our earnings from farm income
it dropped to $ 902 million. In other words a drop of 37% in
farm income, and if you carry forward as one might reasonably
have been expected to do if you were planninG a business,
what you would have earned h~ ad you retained the stock of cattle
and sheep we possessed at that time, then we could have
anticipated a drop amounting to 40% o below what we had received
in the previous year and certainly much lower even than that
we might have expected in the year which was to follow.
Translating it into rather different terms, if you
take the fall in our sheep population. In Queensland, there
was a fall of 32%, in New South Wales a drop of 15%. Altogether
we lost 18.6 million sheep in that period in thlose two droughtaffected
States. The total of sheep population didn't fall as
much because in other States there was somae Gain, but with
nor= s. l conditions there would have been a gain, of course, in
New South Wales and Queensland too, but in those States alone
there was a loss of 18.6 million sheep. There was . a loss of
just on a million head of cattle. . Here I think we can claim
some credit that the loss was held as low as the statistics now 
-3
confirm, because wie had, as you will be aware, been giving
effect to a programme of beef road construction and this
enabled the rapid movement of drought effected stock from one
area to more favourable areas and so we were holding down that
particular drought effect in relation to a very valuable stock
of beef cattle. You get some indication of the ma.-nitude of this
programme when I tell you that our commitment up to the end
of June this year of beef roads will be of the order of
$ 57 million and we have made offers to the States of a further
million to be spont on the beef road programme over the five
or six years which lie ahead of us. As this programme takes
full effect not only will we open up areas of great potential
value for beef production in a world which is increasing its
requirements of beef, but vie shall also be helping to safegruard
against the effects of drought as it no doubt will occur from
time to time in this country in the future.
But those of you who have to conduct your owin
businesses, if you found a drop in income in a major area
of your resources, from $ 12.5 million to $ 9 million would
know that pretty serious adjustments would. have to be made
and when this occurred at a time whsLn we wveie in the process
of doubling our expenditure on defence and diverting national
resources for this purpose, wheni in the same period we had to
contend, particuliarly in more recent months with the effects
of flood and bushfire, you will I think, be the more impressed
by the relatively even way in which the economy has moved
throughout this period, and on present indications the prospect
is an even brighter one ahead.
We might have been pardoned if wie had regarded the
nation's performance as falling far below what actually occurred,
but in the result we moved steadily forward. In the December
quarter of this year, the post-Budget critics and analysts were
saying that not enough stimulus had been given but there was
actually in that quarter an increase in gross national product
of the order of 8% as compared with thu December quarter of
the previous year, and even then that is reduced in real terms
making full allowance for price changes and matters of that sort,
you get a ye rysignificant increase in gross national product
upwards of The December quarter also saw~ a revival in retail
sales of goods. The value of retail sales was up 5.6% above
the level of sales in -the December quarter of the previous year
and, more importantly, during the September quarter there was
a most notable improvement in the percentage increase in the
sales of the clothing and consumer durables group, an increase
which at very least promises improved conditions for
manufacturers of these particular goods.
Also i~ portant in the December quarter of course
was the rise in the level of motor vehicle registrations.
However it's not always easy to please everybody and some
people have suggested that the most recent figures for
February reflect a falling off in the motor vehicle market.
In fact the February sales suggest an annual rate of sale
of a minimum of just under 400,000 and the industry appeared
to be in an excellent position to move along over that
400,000 annual mark as the year progresses.
Housing. This was an area of expenditure about which
some doubt was expressed at times last year, but at the close
of the year, housing approvals wiere running at an annual rate of
124,000 and commencements at an annual rate of 117,000 which are
very close, both of them, to record levels and present indications
are that a higher level of activity will be maintained in 1967.
/ 4s, 
4-
The other encouraging picture is in relation to exports
in recent months and these have reached record level. In the
first seven months of 1966/ 67 exports have been 107o greater than
in -the same period of -the previous year and as a result, in these
seven months the balance of overseas trade was 157 million dollars
more favourable than it was at the same stage of 1965/ 66. The
strength of our export sales is, of course, largely due to the
improvement of conditions in the rural industries, which I have
already mentioned, and of course to an increasingly important
extent to our exporting capacity of minerals.
Exports of iron ore, oxide and their derivatives are
fast developing into a major item in our overseas trade. You
might be interested just to have a quick glance at the way in
which these export figures have moved, because they have risen
over the last six or seven years from $ 1,851 million value in
1960/ 61 wie reached the highest point in the following year in
our history to $ 2,128 million. There was a sharp jump again
in 1963/ 64 to $ 2,732 million and this year the estimate is
$ 2,900 millions, and taking an informed guess for 1967/ 68
I would say that we could expect $ 3,100 million or $ 3,200 million
in 1967/ 68. No--v going back to 1960/ 61, or if you thin'-that was a
bad year, but it wiasn't a bad year actually for exports. I'll
take you back then to 1961/ 62, which was the previous record
year for export income, $ 2,128 million. If by 1967/ 68 we hit
$ 3,100 $ 3,200 million, which is roughly a 50% increase on the
earlier record figure, you will see that the national policies
have been fruitful in stimulating that most valuable of our
goals, a rising export income enabling us to maintain a good
level of imports and at the same time build up the internal
standards of the country and the living standards of our people.
There is just one cautionary word I'd offer about this
whole picture, because, as you know restraints have been imposed
in the United States and the United Kingdom, on the investment
of capital from those countries, and vwhereas wie had a
phenomenally large increase in the previous year, some of it
is due to abnormal factors of a temporary character. We are
now finding a fall away from those levels, anyhow, to what we
would regard as more normal levels of investment, particularly
from the United Kingdom and the United States. I hope that in
respect of both these countries, this is only a passing phase.
I am convinced that it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction
of thoughtful planners and heads ol" government in those countries,
that it's in their own economic interests, to see Australia
develop. Most of our reserves are held in sterling for a start,
to the extent that wie better our position, wie better the position
of sterling and it is demonstrable that in the case of the United
States, our export earnings, and in particular the investment
of capital from the United States and this country, has been
accompanied by increased export earnings and increased purchases
from the United States of America, far outweighing any investment
total which may come to us from that particular country. And so
we hope thlat we'll have some success in persuading the governments
of those countries that they are taking a short view of the
economic picture if they in any way inhibit the development of
Australian resources.
But quite apart from th _ At aspect we have to play our
owin part internally, and wie knowi that over a period of at least
a couple of years vie are going to face a fall in our overseas
reserves. We are fortunately strongly placed there, and to have
a certain degree of room for manoeuvre, but it behoves us at the
same time to take our own situation quite responsibly and I say
that because our rise in the wiage level last year wias, I think
of an order which it's going to take industry some time to digest. 
If my recollection is correct the total rise was of
the order of and I speak subject to correction but that's
my recollection of it, and anyhow it was of a dimension which
will take industry some time to digest. Faced with problems
for our export industries, many of w~ hom are facing difficult
competitive positions overseas, and faced with a need to digest
an increase of this sort, and to keep the economy in good flexible
supple condition to meet whatever problems we havu to face with
decline in overseas reserves, vie can hope in 1967 that we will
have a year of comparative wage stability. That anyhow is the
view which the Government takes of that matter.
Now I did say something about investment, I'd like
to elaborate on that a little. To reach this stage of our
development, and to carry on our programmes development in
various parts of the Commonwealth, vast amounts of capital
have been and will be required. My colleague the Minister
for National Development has provided a number of detailed
facts about Australia's development programme in a publication
which I recommend your officers secure, which showis that at
the end of June last, major development work under construction
in Australia had an estimated total value of completion of
$ 2,327 million. These works, chiefly those of Commonwealth
and State Governments and their instrumentalities, dont
include such things as expenditure on housing, hospital and
educational facilities, which would of course have swollen
the total very much more, and the figures do not include
expenditure of nearly $ 600 million by the Commonwealth
Government on the Snowy Mountains Scheme. The figures
I have quoted are really on the small side because to keep
the publication to a reasonable size water projects costing
less than a million dollars and railway and road works costing
less than half a million dollars are not counted. Now by any
standards this total is a huge investment programme for a
nation of under 12 million people. We have now in hand
investments in development equivalent to some two hundred
dollars a head of our population.
I spoke of myself as Chairman of the National Corporation
but we don't see that in competition, with the other corporations
and companies repressnted here, ours is a national partnership
with you and it's our responsibility to work in aid of the
development by free . enterprise of the potentialities which emerge
from time to time, whether it's building, railways, improving
loading facilities at ports, establishing wharves and townships
as we are doing now, particularly in the north and over in
Western Australia various facilities in the Northern Territory
and other developmental areas, these are to be carried out to
assist the amazing developments which are occurring in these parts
of Australia. The Government's approach to the developments is
by no means dominated by the view that the project must be big
to be important or worthwhile, and indeed in a multiplicity of
relatively small projects there may be even greater national
advantage than in one or more of the major or more spectacular
developments. Where a n--ed exists and is seen and where it is
clear the Government can make a real contribution then given all
the demands on our limited finances wie wish to co-operate.
I want to say a word about the supply of capital in
order to assist the Australian entrepreneur to take a bigger
hand in the development of our own national resources. This
has been much canvassed and I can assure you a great deal of
work has been done on this matter at our own Cabinet level.
I am hoping that within a matter of days my colleague the
Treasurer will be able to make an announcement on one aspect,
and an important aspect, of this problem vie have been looking
at in Cabinet, not just one proposal nor is one proposal
necessarily exclusive of another or of others, but we do knowi
that our own banking system is here to be helpful in this matter
by some combination of resources and of facilities; wie do know
that there is a willingness on behalf of the trading banks to .6. 
-6
join together for these purposes, and wie have had some fruitful
discussions with them.
The objective will be to assist the Australian
entrepreneur who wants to secure a larger or even the
total Australian equity for this country in these
developments of our national resources, not to be frustrated
by a lack of locally available capital. It may be that in
each case it won't be possible to furnish all. It may be that
there are very good reasons why this should be less than a full
Australian equity participation, but at least we are mobilising
ourselves to do far more in this direction than, vie have found
it practicable to do in the past, and the story doesn't end there.
We are looking at other proposals which could have the effect
of enabling an Australian equity participation to occur in
conjunction with overseas debenture capital brought in by other
interested parties. I can only tell you this in the broad at
this time but you can be sure that as finality-. is reached in
negotiations on these matters statements will be made by the
Ministers most directly conce~ rned.
Sir, my final word is really in the nature of
an appeal to calm judgement and good sense in relation to a
matter which doesn't directly concern you in your conduct of
your businesses, but which does concern us all in the conduct
of the nation. Just as you have to overhaul the machinery of
your business organisation from time to time and make
readjustments in staffing or additions to staff where great
expansion has occurred, so it becomes necessary -although
at very much less frequent intervals in practice -for us to
make some study of the machinery of government, and you will
be aware that wie are bringing forward a referendum which is
designed to break what is known as the nexus between the
House of Representatives and the Senate, regarding the
membership of Parliament.
Nowi we can expect between now and the date of the
poll that there will be a great deal of misrepresentation on
this issue, attempts made to mislead the people as to what is
really involved. Although the leaders of the three principal
parties, the Liberal Party, the Country Party and the Labour
Party have all joined together unanimously, and the vote was
unanimous in the House of Representatives in supporting this
particular proposal, there are opponents and there are critics
including some sections ofthe Press and the Press are able to
present this matter in a way which doesn't either tell the story
fully or give a completely clear account of what is intended.
I say that deliberately because already I've run into situations
where even that august institution the A. B. C. and this has been
repeated in some of the newspapers have presented this referendum
as a referendum to increase the size of the House of Representatives.
This was the way in which the A. B. C. recently led in a new~ w comment
after Itd fixed the date for the referendum.
The referendum to increase the size of the House of
Representatives will be held on May 27th. Well if we just want
to increase the size of the House of Representatives, we don't
need a referendum. We have got full power to do that at this
time. Those people who say we don't want more Members of
Parliament, might very well reflect on our objective, which is
designed to enable from time to time modest increases without
at the same time being compelled to increase the size of the
Senate, which most people regard as being large enough anyhow
for Australia's present and prospective needs. It will have
been twenty years since the last increase occurred by the time
we reach the next Parliament the next election. a 
7-
We do~ put out of range the possibility of
increasing the size of the Senate at some future time,
but we say it's absurd if we want to increase the House
of Representatives by say twelve or thirteen, but on the
present system of voting, we have to increase the total
number of Members of Parliament by seventytwo. That
wouldn't strike you as being good business and it doesntt
strike us as being good sense, and yet without an alteration
of the Constitution, if we wanted to provide a Member of
Parliament for every 85,000 persons ( and that's above the
figure we had back in 1949 when the last increase occurred)
then if we stuck to the pr esent system of voting we would
need to increase the Senate by twonitgfour aud tho ' House of
Representatives by fortyeight. I won't spell out the detail
of it for you now, Just take my word for tiat, they will do
it so well before the campaign comes along. There have been
suggestions that we could alter by having our twelve in the
House of Representatives and only appoint one additional
person to each State in the Senate. Well that would mean
you would have six people elected in one three year period,
five elected in another. The possibility of deadlock would
be about double the present level, and heaven knows we have
enough trouble now with an evenly-divided Senate.
Quite apart from the rather odd circumstance that
on the system of proportional representation those who are lucky
enough to have been chosen in the period when six went out would
virtually have a life tenure of their occupancy of the Senate
without any serious prospect of challenge, but a. o have it in
mind that if we want to make some sort of increase, a modest
increase, not year by year thc, last one was just on twenty
years ago but from time to time then what better time than at
the beginning of a new Parliament, when no one can seriously
argue that in the light of our current majority we are doing
this in order to take some particular advantage of our Opposition.
The Opposition joins us in supporting this, so does the Leader
of the Country Party and his colleagues in the Parliament. The
vote, I repeat, was unanimous in the House of Representatives,
and if you are running a business and knew that when we last
increased to our. ipresent numbers the population of Australia was
just on eight millions, and . when we next meet the electors it will
be just on twelve millions, you'd say it's not unreasonable that
we should have a handful more people to assist in doing the
increasingly complex task that a Government and Parliament have
to carry out.
Well gentlemen more, no doubt, will have to be said
on these matters as we get closer to the event. Some people
have vested interest, one party in particular which can't win
a seat in the House of Representatives, and makes its gains in
the Senate, wants to see a larger Senate, of course, because then
its quota for return in the Senate drops accordingly and becomes
easier, and you'll find it quite vocal. Other people who become
critics have talked about use doing ill by the smaller States.
Well that's not the view of the State organisations represented
on our own political party bodies and I think that 9Qn be shown
to be a very feeble fear. You do get thcase misrepresentations,
some are quite accidental. I read in my paper this morning one of
my colleagues saying that the Commonwealth Government had no
contact with the State Government. When I asked him about this
he said the word was conflict, not contact, and there's quite
a difference in meaning. Then he said he was reported as saying
that the Federal Government is always in a state of flux. What
he said was the Federal Constitution is alwiays in a state of flux.
And again there can be this failure of communications, and our
problem in getting tho story over is to have it clearly and
reasonably understood by our people.
Well Sir, by my clock I am five minutes late.
Sorry to have detained you so long, thank you very much for
your attentive hearing. 



ASIAT TOUR 1967. C' 1 TBODIA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mir. Harold Holt at
Gala Dinner at Phnom Penh 29th March, 1967.
Over recent years there has oeen a growing awareness
in Australia of our increasing involvement in developments
occurring in South East Asia and the Pacific. While some of
these developments have related to matters of national integrity
and security, there have emerged also positive and mutually
beneficial developments in the fields of trade and commerce.
This is, perhaps most strikingly demonstrated in the
transformation which has occurred in Australia's relations with
Japan. We fought as enemies in the Second 7orld 1' ar but after
the peace we quickly found a basis for friendship and a rapidly
growing trade between our countries began to develop. This has
moved so quickly that today Japan has oecome the largest
importer in the world in value of Australian exports while we
have become the second or third largest importer of exports
from Japan. This, I believe, is illustrative of the improved
relations and mutual benefits which can flow from the establishment
of conditions of security and stability associated with peaceful
economic progress. " Oherever we look in this general area today we find
that in those countries aule to enjoy the blessings of peace,
rapid progress is being achieved. . e find these countries
absorued in xreat tasks of nation buildin, and growth, and South
Last Asia, which has shaken off its colonial past, is able to
employ to an expanding degree the benefits of modern science
and technology. ie in Australia have done our Dest to assist by
providing materials equipment and techniques. In Cambodia's
case, for example, I understand that the irrigation pumps which
we have been aole to provide have been a considerable success,
and more will oe coming to you. Jie have done this gladly
feeling a genuine sense of cooperation with friendly countries
in the region. We strongly uphold the concepts of sovereignty
national self-determination and national independence. Our own
history as a free democratically governed country leads us to do
so. Sixty-six years ago Australia uecame one nation with a
vast continent to develop, and a population of only three million
people. Today, as our population approaches twelve millions, we
take pride in our national growth and the individual Australian
identity we have established. Ours is a friendly country and
Australians will, I think, be acknowledged as friendly people.
We bring warmth and understanding to the national aspirations
of our neighbours we respond readily to warmth and understanding
from them. ' 7e welcome the fact that national -oals today are
centred on the strengthening of domestic institutions, widening
opportunities for our peoples, the development of national resources,
and a more widely shared prosperity spread by programmes of social
justice. There is, we believe, in South East Asia, a common / 2 
-2-
acceptance of the need for a more stable environment in the region
within which members can live in peace and amity and work together
in harmony. Australia will participate whole-heartedly in efforts
to reconcile national differences and in the fostering of
cooperative relations. see, for example much value in such
instrumentalities of mutual benefit as the Colombo Plan and the
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, and we believe
that Cambodia does also. We see great future promise in the Asian
Development Bank and, as one of ils largest contributors, we hope
to play a full part in its activities. This is Asia's o: n Bank
and w'e believe it will be for the nations of Asia to join together
in making it fully effective.
The harmonious community of developing nations to which
Australia looks forward in the South East Asian region must be
one that is based on general acceptance and respect for differing
national identities, cultures and social and political systems.
For our part Australia has chosen to be a member of
various security treaties relating to the Asian and Pacific areas.
These treaties are defensive in nature, and are designed to
safeguard security and bring stability to the region.
In the pursuit of your naitional interest and the
preservation of your independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, Cambodia has adapted policies of neutrality. Astralian
adherence to the principle of respect for national independence
involves recognition of the territorial integrity of the countries
concerned, acceptance of the particular polilical and social
systems prevailing within their domestic jurisdiction, and complete
respect for the national policies of neutrality, and non-alignment,
which countries like Cambodia have adopted. Australians believe
that differences of culture social systems and national policies
can be reconciled by attitudes of mutual understanding, and active
policies of friendship and cooperation.
The present relationship oetween Camoodia and Australia
is a prime example of the success of such policies. Australia
hopes that, through their application on a broader scale diversity
can become a source not of weakness, but of strength not of
discord, but of mutual advantage throughout the South-East Asian
area. It is in this spirit Your Excellencies, Ladies and
Gentlemen, that I ask you to join me in the toast to the health
of the Head of State of Cambodia, His Royal Highness Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and to Madame Sihanouk, to the government and people of
Cambodia, to the continued progress and future prosperity of
Cambodia, and to an ever-closer friendship oetween our two
countries. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 CAMBODIA ARo,
TOAST PROPOSED BY PRINCE NORODOM SIHANOUJK
AT GALA DINNER FOR THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT, AT PHNOM PENH. 29th March, 1967.
It is with great pleasure that I welcome this evening the
eminent Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia, the Right
Honourable Mr. Harold Holt and those distinguished personages who
accompany him. May I assure them of the warmth of the welcome that
awaits them, and express the hope that they, for their part, will enjoy
their brief stay amongst us.
I likewise assure you personally Mr. Prime Minister,
of the great significance we Cambodians attach to this, the first occasion
on which the Head of an Australian Government has paid us an offical
visit, and of our appreciation of the opportunity thus afforded us of personal
and friendly contacts between the members of our respective governments.
I would likewise stress that your presence here this evening
constitutes proof that different political options and social conceptions
do not represent an insuperable barrier to the establishment of cordial
relations between governments and peoples, nor do they preclude the
possibility of co-operation to mutual advantage on mtters of common
interest. Indeed, I would even make so bold as to claim that Khmer/
Australian relations provide a world distracted by imperialist ambitions,
and driven by national and economic rivalries with a shining example,
not merely of peaceful but of fruitful and cordial co-existence. Moreover,
the formula we have hit upon to produce such a state of affairs is a simple
one, that of conforming in scrupulous fashion to the principle that all
nations are equal, to that of give-and-take, coupled with a refusal to
intervene in each other's internal affairs.
Another factor which has contributed to the establishment
of these cordial relations has been the provision of aid in various forms,
and of a most practical sort provided unconditionally by your government
including consignments of motorpumps for irrigation purposes, material
for our railways, and equipment for our capital, and for the recently
founded sea port which bears my name.
We may be flattering ourselves unduly in regard to the
assistance Australia has generously sent us in the light of a reward
to the Khmer people for the untiring efforts they have been making
ever since National Independence was recovered, to remedy Cambodia's
formerly backward state and to equip it socially, economically and
industrially with all the appurtenances of a modern nation.
There are good m~ asons for assuming, however, that the
rapid progress Cambodia has been making in every field has not
attracted the attention it merits, and that the belief is still prevalent
in the outside world that our country is a stagnant backwater where
as one Australian newspaper expressed it " last year no industrial
development of any sort has taken place". We have been devoting
much time and energy to dissipating this mistake by providing foreign
peoples with an opportunity to come to th~ eir own condusions in regard / 2. 
-2
zo the-progrmss-azhieved under the '" Sangkum" regime. in the course
of the past-eleven years.
One of the methods we adcpted was the creation cf a
mobile exhibition of Cambodian achievements during the period in
question, and of sending it abroad with a view to dissipating this
mistken impression of our couitry. Visitors to this-exhibition
in the m an y countries where it has opened its doors almost invariably
exclaim " We had no idea Cambodia was so progressive, why it even
boasts national industries and factories. This aspect of the progress
Cambodia has made, Mr. Prime Minister, you will have an opportunity
to verify in person.
It is our sole ambition, however, as it is our passionate
desire to be allowed to complete the task to which we have set our
hand, free of threats to our national independence. For, were the
Khmer people to be robbed of their national independence, they would
be deprived of their present incentive to pursue their efforts, and would
relapse into that state of apathy which prevailed at the time of the French
protectorate, a moral condition which gave rise to the legend that the
Khmers were an idle and obtuse race, lacking the mental capacity to
acquire scientific or technical knowledge of any srt or description.
If the erroneous nature of such an assumption has been
demonstrated today, this should be ascribed to the impetus given by
the recovery of national independence. But national independence
perforce implies the absence of threats to territorial integrity. But
certain great powers are presuming to call in question today the
intangible nature of our present frontiers, obli vious of the fact that
the " shoe is in fact on the other foot", as Cambodia possesses historic
claims to territories at present being administered by neighbouring
governments, We are however, a sensible, pragmatic people, who
have no desire to stir up the embers oi pas-, quarrels or forgotten wars.
All we ask is to be allowed to live in peace within our present frontiers.
National independence likewise places us under an obligation
to resist attempts from an y quarter to reduce the status of our country to
that of a satellite. This obligation, reinforced by our firm conviction that
it must be respected, disproved the " thesis" propunded by those who seek
to disparage our motives to the effect that our neutral policy is biassed
in favour of the" socialist camp" and implen-e nted in suchy fashion as to
cause the maximum of embarrassment to the " free" world.
But such an assumption is demolished by the very close and
cordial nature of our relations with countries like Australia and France,
the governments of which harbour no designs on the territories of their
neighbours and cop~' 1uct their foreign policy in conformity with those
principles of reciprocal respect and some best calculated not only to
safeguard national interests, but to ensure the prosperity and happiness
of the peoples confided to their charge.
And it is with this assurance, and in this belief that I ask
you, your E~ cellencies, ladies and gentlemen, to join me in this toast
to the health of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth Second, to the health
of His Excellency Mr. Harold Holt, Madame Holt, and those Australian
friends of curs present here this evening, to the prosperity of Australia,
and to the happiness of its people ( di) to the friendship to bind our two
countries and peoples together. 



I U AMl1' 9 67
LIRAPi
ADDRESS BY THE ACTING PRII, MINISTER AND ,5INISTER FOR
TRADE AND IITDTJSTRY 17R. JOHN McEWEN, AT THE
AUSTRALIAL'N CEREMOINY FOR THE OPENING OF THE
SOUTH-EAST ASIA COTIUVIONWEALTH CABLE
( SEACOHI), SYDINEY, M,, ARCH,
1967
IndexPa ge
Begun in 1958
Close to Asia
Aid to Others
World Co-operation
New Experience 
ADDRESS BY THE ACTITG PRIE MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR
TRADE AND INDUSTRY MR. JOHN McEVIEN, AT THE
AUSTRALIAN CEREI: ONT FOR THE OPENING
OF THE SOUTH-EAST ASIA COIO7VEALTH
CABLE ( SEACOM) SYDNEY, MARCH,
1967
Thank you, Mr. Hulme. It is an honour to be here
today at the making of telecommunications history.
I offer my sincere congratulations, and I am sure
I can add the congratulations of the Australian people, to all
who have made this possible.
We have today the culmination of a great co-operative
ent erpris e. Here is the end res; Jlt of a tremendous amount of
energy and enthusiasm, foresight and vision, scientific and
technical expertise, and organisational skills.
It is a wonderful thing to know that Australia has
been a major partner in this, under the expert guidance of my
colleague, Mr. Hulme.
I know that Australian enterprise has joined with the
Government and made a very big contribution to this great project.
I am told that Australia has supplied more than half
the materials used for the SEACOM cable as well as an appreciable
amount of equipment for the cable stations.
Our manufacturing industries have supplied a
substantial amount of the telecomiunications equipment.
In these days it is easy to take for granted the
miracles of modern technology.
I know from my own work in the Trade field the
tremendous importance of good communications. 
As Acting Prime Minister, and as the responsible
Minister for Australia's international trade I suppose I am as
big a customer as anyone for overseas communication services.
Communication services are an essential tool of
my office. It makes all the difference to have a service which
is speedy, safe, reliable, and efficient!
BEGUN IN_ 1953 There is an interesting connection between today's
ceremony and a conference which I attended at Montreal in 1958.
This was a Commonwealth Trade and Economic Conference,
attended by M. inisterial delegations from all Commonwealth countries.
I was there as leader of the Australian delegation.
The Conference was reviewing the part the Commonwealth
had played in fostering economic prosperity, both for Commonwealth
members, and the world as a whole.
Against this background we were looking to see what more
could be done towards these goals.
One of the more concrete proposals the Conference had
before it was a recommendation of the Commo-nwealth Telecommunications
Board that an around-the-world coaxial telephone cable
might eventually link all Commonwealth countries.
It had only recently become technically possible to
provide such a cable.
There were still at that time many details to be
worked out. Both, technical problems, and financial questions, had
to be resolved. 
* 3.
Irecall with mnuch satisfaction that this Conference
of Commonwealth 1iinisters, in consultation with their Governments,
decided there and then, that Commonwealth countries would join,
to proceed with this visionary plan.
A way would be found to bring the concept to a reality.
One of the rewards of high Government office is to
have a hand in great new plans, and see them come to fruition.
It is immensely satisfying to be here today at the
opening of the Asian link of the Commonwealth Cable a tanigble
result of a decision taken at that Conference where I spoke for
Australia almost 9 years ago.
From that point my former colleague, Sir Charles
Davidson, took up the running.
CLOSE TO ASIA In the intervening years Australia has grown towards
a closer and closer association in the Asian region.
Our traditional ties with Britain and Europe are
strong. They have withstood the strain of geographic isolation
for nearly 2 centuries.
Just as the shrinking of distances in the modern
world is rapidly reducing our isolation from Europe, so it is
bringing our near neighbours nearer.
Geography has put us close to Asia. The course of
events both in Europe and Asia has sharpened our awareness of
the fact. Our trade and commerce with Asia have been growing
steadily. 
.4.
Today, a third of Australia's total exports go to
Asian markets. In 1958, when vie first discussed the possibility
of this cable, the figure was less than a quarter.
Trade and Conmerce will be helped greatly by the faster
and more effective communications which the SEACOI cable will
provide. We have long had close ties with our Conmonwealth
partners in Asia and the Pacific.
The Prime 1, iinister has emphasi7. ed the importance
that the Government attaches to Asian affairs in his statements
and by his personal visits to Asian countries.
As you know, the Prime Mtinister is at present on a
round of official visits, to some of the Asian countries which
have special significance to Australia, and with which he has not
previously had personal contact as Prime 1 Jinister.
AID TO OTHERS In world affairs generally, Australia is playing a
bi[--er role. We recognise the gigantic problems faced by the
developing countries. We have shown ourselves willing to carry a growing
responsibility internationally helping the advancement of the
less-developed countries of the world, and participating
especially in the economic development of the Asian region.
For example, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development is seeking ways of iiiproving the trade
earnings, and hence the income, of the less-developed countries. 
In 1966, Australia led the world by granting
concessions in the Australian tariff to products of these developing
countries. Australia has become a member of the Development
Assistance Committee, a world " club" of major donor countries in
international aid.
Our performance in official economic aid is recognized
as high by any standard.
And it is constantly improving in contrast to the
performance of many other donor countries.
Currently we stand about 4th among all the nations of
the world, in terms of the proportion of our national income which
we devote to international aid.
Ely colleague, Tir. Hasluck, is at present overseas to
attend a meeting of the United Nations' Economic Commission, for
Asia and the Far East.
Australia's full and active membership of this
organisation gives formal recognition of our place in Asian development.
Wie are participating fully in new Asian economic
organisations such as the Asian Industrial Development Council,
and the Asian Development Bank.
Wie know the important role that industrialization can
and must play as it has in our own country in creating jobs,
diversifying exports, and raising living standards.
We will shortly be exploring with Australian industry
the ways and means by which Australia can help the Asian Industrial
Development Council in its objective of fostering joint industrial
undertakings in Asia. 
.6.
WORLD CO-OPERATION There are many forces at work in the world today
many facilities and organisations bringing together the peoples
of the world in closer co-operation.
In them, we play our due part, and even beyond.
It is oftenn'aid that the greatest successes of the
United Nations, have been achieved by its commnunity activities in
such fields as technical, scientific, and educational co-operation.
Some of the broader international efforts break down
through the sheer weight of complexity and conflicting interests.
However, a lot can be achieved by more limited, but
practical measures, towards specific objectives.
Technical training, training in trade promotion techniques
technical assistance with agriculture and industry, education and
medical facilities. These are some of the scores of fields in which there
have been concrete and effective advances in international co-operation
and assistance. The International Telecommunications Union had its
origins a little more than a century ago.
From its very beginnings, telecommunications broke
new ground in international co-operation.
Certainly, nothing contributes more to mutual.
understanding and help between nations than the breaking down of
physical barriers by modern advances in transport and communicationo. 
.7.
NEW~ EPERIENCE Today we stand at the threshold of a new experience
in communication. One result will be that the lives of millions of people
in Asia will becox.-e involved with our lives as never before.
We set our' course to the future to dedicate this new,
technical, achievement to the goal of the betterment of all the
people who live along its path.
For Australia this new development in communications
comes at a time which is crucial for the future of our own country
and our relationship with Asia.
I have mentioned various unfolding decisions of government
directed towards our association with the countries of Asia, but
in addition we have been adjusting to the political evolution of
our neighbours in Asia.
We will press on with our policies, so that Australia
may further a continuing vigorous and independent relationship
with Asia. We are, as it were, a bridge between 2 ancient cultures
and ways of life European and Asian.
From our shoreso will flow modern concepts of science
and technology, To us will come the enrichment of Asia's cultural
and social aspirations. We have our great achievement of today this new
telecommunications era.
Let us also direct ourselves today, and in all our
tomorrows, in this region of A" sia and the Pacific, to peace,
friendship and plenty. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 CAMBODIA
DINNER IN HONOUR OF PRINCE SIHANOUK GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT, AT PHNOM PENH 31ST miC i_ 1967
FOLLOWING AR. THE MAIN POINTS FROM A SPEECH
MADE BY THE PRIIME MINISTER, 151. HAROLD HOLT:
We near the end of our visit to Cambodia. It is a
visit from which w-have learned much, a visit we have greatly
enjoyed. We are all better inlormed about Cambodia, its
country and its poople&gt; its aspiration and its problems. I
hope we are all wiser also in our understanding of its policies.
A visit of only three days but thoughtfully planned
from Head oL State and his administration to good team work with
our own distinguished Ambassador and his staff which has enabled
us to absorb a widely rcpr, sentative s-ries of features of your
national life. Some conclusions stand out in the mind. I had an
awareness previously that substantial national progrcss was being
made under the leadership of Head of State. What I had not fully
appreciated was the centuries old Khmer culture and tradition so
graphically demonstrated at Angkor and reflected with remarkable
fidelity back to early centuries in the classical royal ballet.
This deep sense of national pride, fierce spirit of
independence associated with the tradition of early civilizations
have clearly influenced your national policy of neutrality and
non alignment. It has also been reflected in features of your
life which have a special Cambodian flavour, your capacity to
marry happily the practical with the aesthetic the ability to
maintain a zestful way of life whilst applying your energy to
the development of a modern economically advo ncing state.
This has been a highly educational visit because
education builds knowledge, builds understanding and understanding
builds friendship. Our relations were warm and friendly before
my visit but I feel that they will be even w-armer and deeper
as a consequence of it.
Your ministers and officials have made it possible
for me to see some of the striking and imaginatively conceived
architectural features of your capital city, to s-e something of
your proud cultural heritage both past and present.
Mrs. Holt and I gr-atly appreciated our audience with
Her Majesty the Queen Mother and I found our own long talk together
both informative and most valuable as well for the understanding
of the Cambodian situation as for a bettor understanding of the
problems of this region.
We have noted the encouragement given to such cultural
activities as your Royal Ballet, your choral and instrumental
music by the Queen Mother and your Head of State. We have seen
convincing evidence of Cambodiat purposeful efforts to achieve
under your leadership the full stature of a modern state.
Industrial developments here ii Phnom Penh, harbour development
at Sihanoukville and the many examples graphically presented at
the State Exhibition wher; His Excellency Mr. Son Sann conducted
us. This was also seen and enjoyed by a great many of my fellow
countrymen. / 2 
I 2-
There is a firm basis to our friendship. It is
founded on mutual respect, a recognition of national identity
and integrity, a mutually helpful and trustful relationship.
We like you wish to be left undisturbed to develop our nation.
We ar-both small nations in terms of population. Aus: tralia
has a vast territory and is rich in resources but tLcse are
not easily gained. We have to contend to an extent unknown to
you with drought, flood and bushfire. We have l. gc t-' acts
of arid desert. We are neither a belligeront nor stic
people but we have contributed where we have thought called
for to goals of security and economic advancement for others.
Since becoming Head of Australian Government it has
been my purpose to become familiar with Australian neighbours
countries in Asia, to meet and talk with their leaders and to
learn at first hand something of their way of life, th,: ir
peoples accomplishments, ideas and problems. This process
has been richly rewarded in Cambodia, I hope the value I have
found in such a visit will encourage your Head of State to
make a visit when he can to Australia. He has the warm
invitation of my Government to do so. We both believe our
countries have a contribution to make to a peaceful and more
prosperous world. May our friendship contribute usefully
to this. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 LAOS
SPEECH GIVEN BY TIE PRIME, MINISTER,-MR._ HAROLD HOLT
AT THE STATE DINNER IN VIENTIANE 1APIL, 197
Your Highnesses, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
First, Mr. Prime Minister, may I thank you very
warmly for the welcome you have given to me and Mrs. Holt
and all those who have accompanied us here to Laos. We
found the warmth of welcome extended to us on our arrival
today confirmed by all the experience which has since come
to us during a memorable day in this capital city of your
count ry. It is something of an occasion for my own country
when for the first time in our history its Prime Minister
makes a visit to this historic country and its notable
capital of Vientiane, and we have appreciated greatly the
ma~ nner in which you have welcomed us here.
We welcome, Prime Minister, your assumption of
the leadership of your country. We were confident that
under that leadership your country would grow in strength
and would attract support and confidence. We ourselves
were confident in that belief and we congratulate you that
this confidence has been so strongly evidenced in the
elections which brought you added strength when they were
last held. This visit I am making reflects the interest of
Australia in an area of the world which previously did not
exercise our attention very much. It is only in comparatively
recent years wie have come to realize how deeply involved our
own future and wiellbeing are in the future and wellbeing of
the countries to our north, our nei.-hbours ol' the countries
of South East Asia in particular and of the Asian and Pacific
regions generally. It is particularly gratifying to me that you should
have admitted me, as I understand th 3 first visiting foreign
Prime Minister, to be allowed to enter your Cabinet and have
talks there in confidence with you and with your colleagues.
We have greatly valued this discussion. We feel that this
has led to a better understanding of the problems of your
country. kWe believe that it will be of assistance to us in
the decisions which wie shall be making in future as to how
we can best bring assistance and encouragement to you.
Vie respect the neutrality which is the officioal policy
of your country and which has been assured to you if others
observe that assurance under the Geneva agreement. We know
that, like ourselves, you have an urgent desire for a stable
and continuing peace, that in a condition of peace you hope
to be able to develop a country which has knowun so ma,, ny rzivages,
both fromi nature and from man in years that have gone by. We
know that, because of the security probleLm you face, there is
only a fraction of your budget that you can devote -to
constructive purposes, cons-1r'uctive works th:. tU will help to
build a better life for your people. a s 
-2
Australia is well aw,-are of the inroads which defence
expenditure makes upon the national resources of finance and of
manpower and we have found it necessary in our contribution to
our own security and that of others in the area in which we live
to double our expenditure on defence over a period of four years,
and this Irs meant that less money is available for our own
development, less money than we would wvish to see applied is
available for the assistance of others. But despite these
demands we have done what we could to bring assistance to others,
and I was delighted to find the ready recognition on your own
part of the value which this assistance has meant to your own
country. It is fashionable for some who do not wish you well and
do not wii-sh us well, to describe this process of assistance as a
new type of colonialism, the neo-colonialist of the propaganda
which you and I read about so often. So far as Australia is
concerned, we emphatically reject any such interpretation of the
help we have been trying to give. For our pa-. rt this is genuine
help, help designed to assist others to a better way of life.
Of course every country which gives assistance has a
motive of self-interest, one sort or acnothler, but thu self-interest
which I believe is uppermost in the minds of those giving
assistance around the world at this time is a sincere desire to
build a better world, to enable countries less fortunate, less
able to make provision for themselves because of military threat
or because of poverty of resources, to ca-rry on the work of
progress in their country as a consequence of the aid which more
fortunate countries can bring to them.
a basis oAf nylo aanid, wn, o* th ichi t'Auuh st) r. nayl icao nidsit iaobnl, e ntoo t giwviet h iasn yg iovebnl ignoatti oonn
on the part of the aid receiver. It is gladly given in the hope
thalt this will help to make a better life for the people of that
country. We recognise the problems and the difficulties which
face your owin country. We have admired the courage of your
Prime Minister in leading the country with such distinction and
in uniting the Laotian people in the face of tremendous
difficulties. We have also admired the progress that your
Prime Minister has brought about and the stability he has achieved.
I am very pleased that under his leadership the bonds of friendship
have grown to such an extent between the, two countries. This kind
of friendship, I hope, will continue in the future. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 LAOS
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HAROLD HOLT,
AT DINNER GIVEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN Ai1ASSADOR
AT VIENTIANE 2ND APRIL, 1967
Altesses, Excellences, Mesdames, Messieurs and that will be
the end of my French for tonight! I am not obliged to continue
in French, as the Australian Ambassador seems to have performed
this function for me already.
First, let me say how happy my wife and I are to be
among such a distinguished gathering tonight. Before I put
the toast to you, may I say that it is with much regret my wife
and I and our party come close to the end of this memorable
first visit to Laos.
We have not only greatly enjoyed our visit, we feel
we have learned something which will be helpful to us and we
hope will be helpful to you. We've been greatly impressed by
the number of people we've met, Laotians and others from other
countries here, who all seem to manifest a spirit of dedication
and enthusiasm for what they are able to accomplish in this
country. It is an inspiring experience which we shall take
away with us. It is in the spirit of the warmest friends hip, of
admiration for your distinguished leadership in His Majesty
The King and the Prime Minister and his colleagues of the Cabinet,
supported as they are so strongly by the people of Laos, that
I ask you to join with me and assist an Australian Embassy and
an Australian Prime Minister to honour the toast of His Majesty
The King and the Prime Minister and the people of Laos. May
our friendship ever deepen and increase. 



7 ER'S 1
I J APR 1967
ASIAN TOUR 1967* LAOS I1R8 10 ' A
FAREWELL SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
AT VIENTIANiE AIRPORT 3RD APRIL, 1967
Prime Minister, Your Highnesses, You~ r Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
There is always a sadness when one parts from good
friends, and that is how Mrs. Holt and I and, I am sure, others
of my party are feeling this morning.
We came to Laos as a good friend of your country
but in the short time that we've been here wie have found it
sufficiently lone. to bave built some personal friendships
which we sincerely hope will endure.
We came to learn something of the problems of your
country and to meet your people and see them in their own
native land, and this to us has been a richly rewarding
experience iii knowledge and in a deeper understanding.
We fully appreciate, Prime M~ inister, the importance
to you and, indeed, to your friends around the world, of a
neutrality which will be faithfully observed by other countries.
We hope that countries of good will, whatever their
general political character may be, will join in the efforts
to which Australia will gladly subscribe in promoting the
security, the peace, the progress and the prosperity of the
people of Laos. I look foraiard to welcoming you and Her Highness
to Australia, I hope perhaps even later this year, when you
can find it convenient to come and visit us. It will give
my countrymen great pleasure to join in the expression I now
give you of good will from the Australian people. May Laos
long endure in peace, w--ith progress and prosperity and security
for its people. 



VEPt
AS 19R197OA1P R 1967 4
ASIAN TOUR 1967 L iB R
TAIWAN
ARRIVAL STATE1ffENT BY THE PRIMfE MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT AT TAIPEI 4TH APRIL, 1967
It. gives me great pleasure to make my first visit to the
Republic of China, and to be the first Prime viinister of Australia
to have made such a visit in that capacity.
I greatly look forvard to meeting the distinguished
President of the Republic, and to having the opportunity of
discussing with him the many matters in which we have a common
interest. These include importantly the menace of communist
expansion in the Asian and Pacific region, a threat of which
the Republic oi China has a long and intimate knowledge.
Relations between the Republic of China and Australia
have long been warm and friendly. Australia has consistently
supported the position of the Republic of Chi. na in the United
Nations and its agencies. The Chinese Embassy is one of the
oldest diplomatic missions in Canberra, and Australia has recently
re-established its own embassy with the Republic of China. Trade
between our two countries has increased substantially over recent
years. In addition to establishing personal contact with the
President, his Ministers and other leading personalities, I hope
during my visit to see something of Taiwan's impressive economic
progress, about which we have had enthusiastic reports. I am
particularly looking forward to visiting some of your modern
industrial plants and port installations.
We in Australia share goals of peace, stability and
prosperity so widely held in Asia. We believe the Republic of
China, with its growing economic strength and the resourcefulness
of its people, can play a highly significant part in the combined
e forts of all like-minded countries to satisfy these longings.
We recognise that the Republic of China is Alre ady making a
considerable contribution in thc form of its economic and technical
aid to other countries. We likewise have been increasing the
volume and variety of our economic aid.
We are glad, also, to find ourselves fellovi-members with
China of two new Asian organisations, the Asian and Pacific Council
and the Asian Development Bank. Vie confidently anticipate further
profitable co-operation between our two countries in both of them.
i* 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 TA IWIAN
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, IOR. HAROLD HOLT, AT STATE DINNER
GIVEN BY VICE PRESIDENT AND MRS. YEN IN TAIPEI ARIL, 197
Mr. Vice President, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
First I must apologise because my speech will be rather
longer, or at least I am afraid it will seem longer, than that
of His Excellency, -the Vice President, not only because the text
is longer, but it is longer because I really have much more to
thank him about than he has to thank mie about, and I have seen
so much and done so much in this short time here, about which
I wish to make some references.
And so, Mr. Vice Pmsident, I must first of all express
the grateful thanks of myself of Mirs. Holt and all members of my
party, for the very warm and cordial welcome we have rcceived
wherever we have moved on our visit here. VWe have felt that we
have been particularly privileged and honoured to have been received
and entertained with such gracious hospitality by His Excellency
your distinguished President Chiang Kni-Shek and Madam Chiang.
I have valued the opportunity which came to me last night for my
first discussion with your President and I look forward 8 eatly to
talking with him again as wie have arranged before I leave tomorrow
morning. I must also thank you, Mr. Vice President and Mrs. Yen,
for many things. Virstly, for the warmth of your welcome the
intimate and frank discussions we were abl.--to hold together both
in your Cabinet Room and as wie have moved about together. The way
in which you have sacrificed your own time and convenience to
accompany mie as I have moved about your industries this morning
and finally, but by no means least, for according us this magnificent
dinner this evening in such a memorable and glorious setting, and in
the company of such a large anE distinguished gathering. It gives
mie particular pleasure, as I am sure it does to all of my company
to be feted in this splendid hall, dedicated to the memory of
Dr. Sun Yat Sen, the father of modern China. I feel I can take a
certain pride in being the first Prime Minie'ter from Australia to
visit the Republic of China and I interpret quite confidontly the
reception that you have given me as a true reflection of the
tradition of friendship between our two countries.
Our Australian Embassy shared with you the hardships and
rigours of war-time days in Chungking and I am pleased that my own
government was recently responsible for re-establishing our mission
here in your present capital. Your own embassy in Canberra is one
of the oldest diplomatic missions in our capital city.
In the yea-rs since we first became associated our
countries have both been through crises and je still live in
turbulent times, but we both pursue courses of action designed
to promote the things we believe in peace, social justice,
individual liberty, the advancement of human wellbeing and the
right of all peoples to determine their own future and to defend
their sovereign independence. Vie in Australia, espousing as we
do all these causes in the United Nations and elsewhere, have given
you our constant support to the Republic of China in the Security
Council, the General Assembly, and all organs of the United Nations.
0 0 2 
-2
Mrs. Holt and I and mly party will leave Taipei tomorrow
morning with very happy recollections of our brief stay with you,
but, although this visit has been short, thanks to the care,
Mr. Vice President, that you have taken in arranging our programmie,
we have learned much from what vie have been told by you and your
Ministers and officials, and froL all that vie have been shown,
and what we have been able to see as wie have moved around, vie have
been particularly impressed by wvhat have seen of the rapid
economic grovith, the prosperity, the wellbeing of thij province and
the evident happiness of your people.
Your achievements in agriculture were apparent as wie flew
into your city, since then we have seen your large petroleum
and alumainium. plants, your iriagincative export development complex
at Kaohsiung with its new industries, somie of them highly
sophisticated, and we have noted the emphasis you give to encouragement
of private initiative and to investment from abroad. The enthusiasm
and efficiency which you are making and displaying are an obvious mark
of this project and thcese things provide a striking illustration of
what can be achieved in a free country where effective planning
goes hand in hand with the provision of suitable incentives to
private nitiative. As for the growing trade between us, we hope and confidently
expect that thio will steadily expand. We've watched with interest
and admiration what the Republic of China is doing to assist less
developed countries, particularly in Africa, and particularly in
the field of technical skill. Your api. roach to the provision of
training in agriculture is obviously sound as is shown by your
achievement in raising productivity by as much as ten times per
hectare in some cases in the countries you've assisted. We fully
endorse your conviction tha-, t the only sure-way of instilling efficient
and modern techniques is by sending out experts who are practical men
and women and who are willin, to prove the effectiveness of these
techniques by their own physical efforts, whether knee deep in mud
in a rice field, or covered in grease underneath a bus. We have
ourselves, found that our best successes in the field of technical
aid have been gained by expe rts who were able to teach by their own
example instead of merely by oral or written explanation.
Finally, I have had the pleasure this afternoon, as has
Mrs. Holt and others of our party, of examining some of China's most
ancient and precious treasures, and this has been a fascinating
experience, even though necessarily a short one. There are many of
my fellow countrymen who would give a great deal to be able to share
this experience Mr. Vice President. I know there would be practical
problems, but is there the possibility of mounting at some time an
exhibition of some of these magnificent pieces in some of our
Australian cities? It would be assured of very great interest and
applause from my countrym.-en.
This tour I have been making, Mr. Vice President, has been
in the nature of an educational process for mie. I believe that
education broadens knmowledge that knowledge in turn encouragee
understanding, and that understanding builds friendship, and I am
sure that this particular visit not only has added by wany of
eaucation to my knowledge and hias increased Liy understanding of your
people and your problems, I am sure -i* c has also given new warmth,
or added warmth, and greater depth to the friendship between our two
countries and between those of us who have the responsibility of
leading -these two countries.
And because I value so grelatly this process and the
contribution that you and your colleagues hc: ive made to it, and in
that spirit that I do ask you to rise and join with me first in
honouring the toast of your great President Chiang Xai-Shek and
Madame Chiang, anJ then the toast to the Vice President and
Mrs. Yen, and all your colleagues of the government, and finally,
the people of Taiwan Liay they go on in security, prosperity and
hapliness and may the friendship of the Australian people contribute
to those felicious purposes. I give you the toast. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 TA IVIAN
TEXT OF REMARKS MADE BY VICE PRESIDENT C. K. YEN
AT A DINIMR IN T AIPEI APRIL,_ 9
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Holt, Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
On behalf of the Government and the people of the
Republic of China, I wish to extend to Prime Minister and
Mrs. Holt a warm and sincere welcome.
Prime Minister Holt is not only an outstanding political
leader in his own country, he has also won wide acclaim as a
world statesman. Since his assumption of office as Prime Minister
he has contributed in a significant way to the taintenance of world
peace and justice and to the economic and other developments in
his own country. On several previous occasions I have had the
pleasure of meeting Prime Minister Holt at International Conferences
while he was serving as Treasurer for his government. It is,
therefore, a great pleasure to renew his acquaintance here in Taipei.
Mrs. Holt, as we all know, is an accomplished lady in her
own right. Her dedication to the welfare of her country and the
valuable assistance she has rendered the Prime Minister is truly
worthy of admiration. We are very pleased to have her visit us
and I wish to extend her a special welcome.
Since the end of World War II, Australia has been taking
an increasingly active part in international affairs. She is an
active partictant in programs of economic and technical co-operation
with the Asian countries. A member of the South-East Asia Treaty
Organization, she is also an active member of the Asian and Pacific
Council. Today, Australia is actively helping the Republic of
Vietnam in resisting communist aggression. All these activities
are eloquent testimonials to the wisdom and far-sightedness of the
Australian Government and its political leaders.
The Republic o. China and the Cornnonaealth of Australia
have lon5 enjoyed friendly relations and close co-oparation in
international affairs. Our two peoples are similarly dedicated
to the noble ideals of freedom, justice and peace. With the
re-opening of the Australian Embassy in the Republic of China,
I am certain that the friendly relations betwe. n our two countries
will be furthur strengthened.
I appreciate very much the fact that, despite their heavy
schedule, Prime Minister and Mrs. Holt have oome to visit us. I
am particularly pleased to have the opportunity to have an exchange
of views wiith Prime Minister Holt on the world situation and on
matters of common interest to our two countries. His visit, I am
sure, will be a new milestone in the history of Sino-Australian
relations. Ladies and Gentlemen, I now request that you join me in
a toast to Her Majesty the Queen.
Ladies and Gentlemen, may I ask you again to join me in
a toast to Prime iinister and Mrs. Ilt and the prosperity of the
Commonwealth of Australia. * X x * X 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 KOREA
ARRIVAL STTEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
6TH APRIL, 1967.
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Chung, Distinguished Guests:
I thank you for the warm welcome you have given me
Mrs. Holt and my party on this our first visit to Korea It is
indeed the first visit ever made to your country by an Australian
Prime Minister. I hope this fact alone will be some assurance to
you of the interest my country has in Korea and its people, and
will ue accepted by you as an expression of our oodwill towards
you. We look forward to learning over the next few days more
aoout your country and your people.
Australia has folloed your fortunes closely since
1950 when, without pr , vocation or warning you were invaded from
your Vorth. I was a member of the Australian Caoinet then, it
decided nromptly to send Australian forces to assist you in
repelling that ag ression. I oelieve we were the first country
after the United States puolicly to declare our intention of
giving military assistance to Korea. Later we were ' lad to join
in helping you to reconstruct your ravaged country.
have taken pSlaicnec. e tYheosu e nodwa rhka vdea ysa tghrreiavti ncgh anegcoenso mfyo r wtihthe ab ehttigehr
rate of growth. You have a Constitutional Democracy. You are
highly respected throughout the free countries of the ' orld.
cdYaeopmuaroos nlysist r aletoednd e anwodfh awtth ietc ha ns uecfbfec iecsdisoe nnes tt obyrai deamsn ineoinfs etorragutrei toitncim,, esoe. nd cuec Yattoheud e hapveeoole
distruoing influences of communist subversion and aggression
have been brought under control.
The ood example you provide has given you increasing
influence amongst free na ions of Asia and the Pacific. Australia
applauded your initiative in calling the successful conference of
ASPAC last year. Your own experience undoubtedly affected you in your
decision to give substantial military help to Vietnam in its
efforts to resist communist aggression. are proud to have
Australians fighting alongside your own troops in Vietnam, as
they did in Korea in those earlier years.
I was glad to collaborate with your distinuished
President and other national leaders at the Su. imit Conference
in FManila last year.
I am greatly looking forward to our meetin together
again, and to the useful discussions we shall oe aole to have.
Mr. Prime M inister, thank you for this most friendly
reception. Thank you also for affording to me and my party this
welcome opportunity to develop better knowledge and understanding
of the Korea of today. 



-ASIAN TOUR 1967 KOREA
. ELCOMIN ST. aTEMENT 3Y PRIE MIFISTER OF SOUTH KORT
AT K" IPO AIRPORT, SEOUL 6TH APRIL, 1967
Your Excellency Prime Minister Holt, Mrs. Holt,
distinguished members of the entourage and dear fellow citizens.
On behalf of the Government and neonle of Korea I
wish to extend my warmest welcome to Prime : inister and Mrs.
Holt, who have come a long way from Australia, one of our closest
allies. The Korean people vividly recall how the Australian
people came to our aid in our time of dire need. Je are also
fully aware of the great contrioutions Australia is making in the
cause of peace and progress in the Asian and Pacific re. ion. When
our independence and future were at stake on accoint of the
unprovoked communist invasion in 1950, Australia was among the
first free nations to dispatch combat troops of ' round, naval
and air forces to this country to help us defend our Republic
from external aggression.
Indeed, we feel forever indeated to those memoers of
the Australian armed forces who, despite enormous hardships,
valiantly fought in an alien land in the cause of freedom and
justice, marking brilliant records in the annals of the Korean
ar through their noble sacrifices. At the time when the comiunist
forces launched a full-scale offensive in the spring of 1951, the
all'ant Australian soldiers in the now famous battle of Kapyong,
though greatly outnumoered and under adverse conditions, held t
their positions to the last, helping the allied forces secure
their vital positions and finally frustrate the enemy's offensive.
Their gallantry and heroism are still fresh in our memory.
Through various United iations relief programmes the
Colombo Plan and the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia
and the Far East, Australia has helped us in the rehabilitation
of the war-torn country and the achievement of social and cultural
pro ress. As a memuer of the United nations Commission for
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea Aust-ralia has also been
working strenuously toward our goal of bringing about a unified,
democratic and independent Korea.
Our hearts are overwhelmed today with deep sentiments
in welcoming Prime Minister Holt, the great leader of the Australian
people who have done so much for us.
Mr. Prime Minister, the Australian people have overcome
many an obstacle including adverse natural conditions to brin about
abundance and wealth, prosperity and welfare for themselves. Now
they are sparing no effort in helping other free Asian nations
overcome their adversities. Australia has also taken active part
in SEATO, ANZUS, ASPAC, the Manila Summit Conference and the
Asian Development 3ank, thereby contriouting greatly to the
progress and prosperity in the Asian and Pacific region and to
the collective security of the free nations in this part of the
world. the Korean people, have great admiration for your
people's courage, resourcefulness and the spirit of co-operation.
In Korea, we have been able to attain remarkable / 2 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 KOREA
SPEECH GIVEN SY THE PRIME MINISTER, MA. HAROLD HOLT,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE CONFERMENT OF HONORARY DOCTORATE OF LAWS,
SEOUL UNIVERSITY
vr i * i 7TH APRIL, 1967.
Mr. President Choe, Mr. Dean, Mr. Prime Minister, distinguished
members of the Faculty of Seoul National University, students
of the National University and ladies and gentlemen.
This is a very proud moment in my life. The privilege
which you have accorded me is a great honour. I regard it as a
great honour because I know that in this National University of
Seoul Honorary Doctorates are not accorded lightly. It is a
tribute which I accept not merely for myself but for my country
and in the spirit of frierdship which inspires it. It is more
than 36 years ago that I gained my own degree, quite a modest
degree of Bachelor of Laws, in the University of Melbourne. I
have had to wait those 36 years to receive this very much higher
distinction which I like to feel, although it may not have been
gained in the academic sphere, has been accorded for service in
the University of Life. ' e live toether regardless of the
country from which we come in one of the most interesting and
exciting phases in human history, and nowhere is the process of
turbulence and change a challenge more evident than in the region
of Asia which yve inhauit together.
It is an exciting era because although it is a period
of restlessness and change, although it is full of challenge, it is
also an era full of opportunity and hope to the better world for
which we all aspire.
Mankind has learned through the processes of science
through education, through his relations one with the other, that
the age-old enemies of man, illiteracy, disease, poverty, insecurity,
economic instability, these enemies can b-conquered.
There are some fortunate countries in the world in which
they have been largely conquered and in other countries there is the
expectation that these things can be accomplished.
When the leaders of the nations meeting at Manila last
year were holding their discussions together, their thoughts were
not merely on military matters even though they were, to a very
significant degree, involved in military operations in relation
to issues of far reaching consequences. Issues which went as
deep as the challenge to the security and freedom of your own
people and your own country back in those dark days of the 1950' s.
But while we turned our thoughts to the problems of
how security could be brought to this area we also had a version
of the better world to which we could ill contribute.
This is a world in which these enemies are defeated
and in which people could live in freedom, in social security with
justice liberty and freedom for individuals and for democratic
institutions. Now in this era, we strive for these things.
This is an era in which man with his enterprise and
irrepressible spirit is prooin the mysteries of the universe, of
the shores of outer space and Zhe depths of the sea, and is seeing
new developments in industry, agriculture, science and in education. / 2 
-2-
The young people, those who ar'e coming throuh their process
of education, have a tremendous contribution to make. There is
evidence throughout the world, a phenomenon not restricted to any
one country, that there is a sense of urgency on the part of young
people to learn more about the world in which they live, to make
a greater contribution to the betterment of their fellow men.
We who have the responsioility for Jovernment must
recognise these things, they create great responsibilities for
jovernment and great problems. They create immediate and difficult
complex problems for Ministers of Education and, indeed speaking
as a Minister of Finance for seven years, reat difficulties for
Ministers of Finance. But they are problems which we are meeting
and which -ve must continue to meet to give a better world to the
rising generation and those who aspire to freedom and a better
world, in whatever country they are to oe found.
The opportunities for making the most of these talents
and resources; perhaps older men like myself can dream of a world
in which these things have been at some point of time achieved.
Perhaps it will oe the good fortune of those young peoole I see
in this audience today, to find them realised within their own
lifetime.
you are exprTeshsaitn gw iflrlo mje a mgy refoant d inhospteit uatrido, n byo f thleisa rncienregm, onay trtoibduayt, e
to those who have the responsibility of making the laws which can
fashion a oetter order for the world of the future.
I do prize the distinction which you have conferred upon
me and, in so far as it lies within my power, I shall do , wthat I can
gfrooaml s mwy e exhapveer iesnecte , o umrsy elevneesr, g ieasn d mtoy awborikl ittioe st het o efvuorltuhtieorn thoofs ea gwroeraltd
at peace that is progressing, tlit is prosperous and is secure the
liberty and the sense of security of all people who are of gooA will
throughout the world.
I thank you Mr. President and your colleagues. I thank
you, Mr. Prime Minister, for the generous things you have found
yourself able to say to me. It is to me a pleasing thing that the
researchers of the University have delved into some of my earlier
performances. I hope that my performances of the future will be
worthy of the honour they have bestowed upon me. 



ASIAN TOUR 1967 18APRI-L
KOILE v
SPEECH 3Y THE PRIME VINI3STER, MRi. iiROLD HOLT
AT DIIFER PARTY IN SEOUL 8TH APRIL, 19 7
Prime Minister Chung, Mrs. Chung, Your Excellencies, Ladies and
Jentlemen: I am delighted to have this opportunity on oehalf of the
Australian Jovernment Iand the Australian Embassy, my colleagues
from Australia of the official party and of the press who are here
with me toni ht to be able to repay in the least fractional
measure the kindness and hospitality, Mr. Prime Minister, that we
have received from your Jovernment and your people. I am afraid
this is only fractional in more senses than one. I am not able to
offer you for example the delightful after-dinner entertainment
with which you regaled us last ni; ht. Even if you were to come to
Australia I question whether we could entertain you as delightfully
as w: e were last evening. It will be a memory we will carry with
us and treasure for many years to come.
He are now near the end not only of our visit to your own
country but of the journey on which we set out some twelve days
ago to visit four o the countries of this area, neighbouring
countries, friendly countries and it has beun for all of us,
I am sure a most enthralling experience. I spoke Last niiht
on what already had occurred to inform and interest us in the
course of our visit to you, and this has been built on today by
our visit to the South of your country.
The weather in a sense was not timed, but I come from a
very arid continent, and I have learned to welcome rain whenever
it comes because rain means good fortune for somebody. At least
I think you are assured of good crops as a result of the rain
which we have encountered here today. I am only sad, and I pass
my s mpathy and that of my colleagues to you that perhaps it
was he result of the difficult conditions which we ourselves
experienced in our own flying that you have suffered this tragic
disaster from the air, which has caused the loss of. so many lives.
Please accept, Prime Minister, our sympathy in this tragic event.
Our first visit to the United Nations Cemetery at Pusan
was a poignant reminder to us of our friendship. I h-id said
yesterday that I understood there was a cemetery here, where one
in every ten of the graves was an Australian grave, and I went
there today. The Officer in charge of the Cemetery for the United
Nations said it was one in six of the graves which .; ts Australian,
and that is a reminder to us of our comradeship in more difficult
times but a comradeship which laid the firm foundations of a
friendship on which we have been aole to ouild ever since that time.
Then, coming from a country which itself has enjoyed great
industrial development over recent years, it was a stimulating
thing to go to Ulsan and see there the tremendous industriil growth
which, thanks to the imaginative vision and drive of your great
President and of your own leadership and -overnment you have
created in a matter of a few years. You now have tre oeginnings of an
industrial complex which will fortify the economic strength of your
country. Already you have, as I understand it perhaps the largest
urea fertiliser plant in the world, a great refinery, and other
/ 2 
-2-
industries with more to follow. As we drove there, despite the rain,
we found friendly people wherever we went. We found the beautiful
countryside which is a part of your great heritage in this
wonderful country.
So all this adds together to ouild a memorable experience
for us. As we come to the end of this journey in Korea my
over-riding impression is first of the friendliness of your people,
the warmth of which his greeted us wherever we have moved. My
other impression is of the strength of your people their
determination to preserve their Korean identity, tAeir determination
to preserve the way of life they treasure. They have shown that
they can and will resist those who would submerge that way of life
in an oppressive communist dictatorship, and they have a determination
not merely to maintain this country as a secure country and a free
country, out to develop it and make it a better country for its
citizens to live as a growing and strong member of the unity of
free nations. May I just add by way of a concluding comment it may be
of some interest to you because I think it is a happy augury for
our future in this region of the world that my journeys have
taken me to four different countries as well as officia encounters
in Hong Kong and Singapore, and at no point have we found a hostile
banner, a hostile voice, a hostile look.
I, as a representative of a country which has European
tradition and origin but -shich is happy to find itself part of the
geographical unity which is Asia have seen warmth and friendliness
wherever I have gone. Nowhere, Prime Minister, have we been
received with more warmtn and more friendline. s than in this country
of Korea, hitherto unexplored by an Australian Prime Minister. I
thank you and your people Mr. Prime Minister for the hospitality which
you have extended to us. I express the confident hope that these
sound foundations of friendship will be built upon in the years
ahead, and make for our two countries a continuing bond which will
be built with strength for the area as a whole.
In that spirit I invite you all to join with me in honouring
a toast to the President of your friendly country of Korea and
Mrs. Chung, their colleagues in the Jovernment, and the people of
Korea whom we honour and with whom , we live in peace. I give you that
toast. 



ASI. UN TOUIR 1967 KORE1
SPEECH BY THE PRIME IJNI3TER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
ON DEPr. RTURE FRO. 1 SEOUL 9TH PRIL, 1967
As I make my departure from Korea, I would like to sum
up in these few Iinal words, some of the impressions that Mrs.
Holt and I and the other memoers of my party will take away with
us at the end of this most memorable visit.
First of all, Mr. Prime Minister I heartily endorse
your description of this visit as an important milestone in the
history o the relationship betv een our two countries. It has
prov. ied us with a clear indiclation of the pro'' ress we have made
in cemniting that comradeship that we establis ed in the days of
your greatest peril seventeen years ago.
One indelible impression that we shall take away is that
of the tremendous warmth of your welcome to us and of the great
kindness that you and all your people have extended to us since
our arrival here. We have always understood thtt the Koreans were
a .! arm-hearted people !, ho did not hesitAate to display openly their
liking and respect for friends, : nd it has been a stirriny experience
to us to have his understanding so strikingly confirmed.
We have also been deeply impressed b all the evidence we
haanvde msoedeenr noifs attihoen spolf endoiudr pcyro~ oug nrres s ypoaur tihcauv e mrla e ini ntt ihtnehe e ppirssettc ottnows ot ryyueecatarirsso. n
This w s raphically aeronstrate to me yestraay at Ulsan, where
I ' vas Invited to inspect some of your flourishing new. industries.
I am quite suIre amtqhueiree is ean sT entuhian e tahn d a justified ride in these
-~ hav3cretesridein these
achievements and I can sense that they hava creqtd a new feeling
of self-confidence and self-reliance throughout your country.
I have also had an opportunity to admire the disciplined
efficiency and toughness of your :-armed forces. It is not difficult to
see how they have earned their considerable reputation as fighting
; miehno: areI nkonwow setrhvaitn gt hweyi the njtohye m thine rtheesp erecst isotaf nocuer Aouf stcormalmiuanni stforces,
terrorism and agression in Vietnam.
Finally, Mr. Prime Minister let me say I have drawn reat
encourayement from the several frank Aiscussions th4t I have ha in
these three days with your President and with you and your Ministers.
I shall go awa reassured by the close similarity of our views on
the issues that oear upon the future peace and prosperity of the
KAosriaena aanndd APaucsitfriacl iare, giaorne, waonrdk inbgy tthowea . tcrodsn vtihcet iosna met haetn dsb. oth of us,
I could ask you to convey to His Excellency, President Park,
the good wishes of all ustralians and my compliments for all that
has been achieved in Korea under his inspired leadership.
once again Ttoh ey oug, r atMerf. u lP ritmhea nkMs inoifs tMerr, s . anHdo ltt o anMdr s. m yCsheulnf g, an dI meyx ppreasrsty for
all your many kindnesses to us. This has been a wonderful experience.
Toodbye to you all, and may our friendship continue to prosper. 



OPENING OF A. SSCCIATED CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE
BUILDING, BARTON, CANBERR. A
Speech by the Frime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt APRIL, 19 67
Mr. President May, Mr. President of the Senate, Your Exfcellencies,
D-stinguished Guests, Ladi. es and Gentlemen
Thank you, Mr. May, for the kind things you have said about
the basis of co-operation which has at all times exlisted between the
Commonwealth Government and this Chamber or Associated Chambers of
-Commerce of Australia. 1 would just like to make it clear that close though that
associaton, and warm though that co-operation has been, no ulterior
significance is to be drawn from the fact that you have established your
building in close prox'. mity to the headquarters of the Liberal Party.
You mentioned that there have been occasions I am glad to
hear you say they were rate occasions when you found It necessary to
disagree publicly with us, but of course there have been occasions when you
found 4. t necessary to disagree publicly with I won't say'thet rival party"
but that other very important Chamber the Assoz: iated % Chamberso f
Manufactures. And yet these days such is the :: e--rvas've and diversified
influence to be found in the Australian economy, many members, I know,
of this Chamber are also members of the other Chamber, ald similarly : n
a sense, while from time to time you look upon us if not as tiatural enemies
at least as a pi-evailing force to be contended with, so no dodbt you entertain
the same views to the other organisation.
But happily for Australia and ' t is a feature of the
Australian democracy there is through all levels of the social and economic
structure a degree of friendly co-operation which I think it would be difficult
to match in any other country of the world. Undoubtedly our national strength,
our national progress and our prosperity owe a great deal to that co-operation
which we have been able to establish at all these levels. W~ e, like you, have
found value in the talks we hold from time to time and for my part, I can
assure you that these will be a continuing feature of our Administration.
Certainly the talks have important influence upon the final economic judgments
that we come to. I congratulate you on the establishment here in Canberra of
this fine building. It is, of itself of course, a tangible sign of the progress of
Canberra, the recognition of Canberra as a firmly established national
capital, and a sign also of your own confidence -n the strength of your
Associated Chambers and of the part you will play in the future of the nation.
The Chamber serves the nation well in a variety of ways. I
pay public tribute to it, and as wie see our own burgeoning economy and our
own advancing nation progress, so we will anticipate the need in the future
to perhaps an even greater eXtent than in the past of a body equipped as yours
is, to service its members with information, to make public and private
representations for them in official quarters from time to time, and to give
articulate expression to the particular purposes for which the Chamber stands. 
Wte can see in the years perhaps not so distantly ahead
new problems) new opportunities arisiing for Australia. Traditionally
over the past years, much of our trade has been with the United Kingdom.
Through no desire of ours, but through the progress of economic events,
that has been at least in percentage a declining factor in our trade and
perhaps if Great Britain enters the European Common Market, there will
be less emphasis in the future upon the trade here than i'n the past. I
hope not, because it is our wish to maintain a continuing expansion of our
trade with the United Kingdom and, indeed, with the other countries of
Europe generally. Vlhatever may be the result in that direction at least we
can feel reasonably confident that if we turn our eyes northwards, there
will be growing opportunities for Australia in the countries of Asia, and
there will be new problems for men of commerce to face in their dealings
with the economies and gove:: nments of these countries. W~ e have only to
consider the amazing development that has occurred in Australia's two-way
trade with Japan over recent years to see an illustration of this. From a
position shortly after the war when there was virtually no trade between us,
Japan has now become, as you know, the largest purchaser in value of
Australian exports. We are currently the third largest purchaser in value
of Japanese goods. What is occurring and has already occurred in Japan
may not be repeated on the same scale in the other countries of Asia, but
certainly from my own recent journeys to that area over the last twelve
months, I am convinced that we do face growing opportunities there.
On this most recent visit, for example, both in Taiwan, a
country of thirteen million people, and Korea, a country of just on thirty
million people, where they both possess annual growth rates ranking
amongst the highest in the world, there are, I am sure, potentialities for
development of Australian trade which have yet scarcely been scratched.
In Korea I saw the largest fertil ser factory, as they claimed it, in Asia,
and a petrol refining establishment. They told me they have already a
consortium established for the creation of an iron and steel industry and
would be looking for Australian i~ ron ore in order to service the steel
industry of that country. They were looking to us, they said, for plywood,
since sources of plywood previously available to them were drying up.
And these are only illustrations.
In Taiwan, there was a similar indication to us of a very
substantial growth of their purchases of Australian raw materials and goods
over the years ahead. Now these are growing economies, but the problems
there may not necessarily be the same as those with which you have to
contend in Europe. There are the undeveloped countries of the world which,
while their progress at the moment may seem slow, yet as more
enlightened policies apply and more generous aid can be provided from the
growing economies of more favoured countries, again there should be an
expansion of demand which commerce will be able to put to its own
advantage. And so I think we can take a bright prospect of the future
and, if only peace can be restored in this area of the world, that process
w~ ll be greatly accelerated. / 3 
There are other developments which will occur to you.
Australia, as one of the great trading nations of the world, relies very
heavily upon transport by sea and to a growing extent by air, for the
carriage of goods. We have been watching and do'ng what we have been
able to encourage the new developments in the f. eld of containerization of
goods and the modernization of ports and greater efficiency in the handling
of goods at the waterfront, and in these and other ways trying to assist you
in the task of marketing your products abroad, or else importing the goods
for sale here in Australia. So from these few illustrations we can see not only-good
prospects ahead, but a continuing need for the kind of co-operation which
we have already established. And I say in appreciation of what you
have already been able to do w4th us that we look for that continued goodwill
and teamwork in the years ahead, and in that spirit and with best wishes
the continuing growth and success of the Associated Chambers of Commerce
/ A. ustralia, I now officially declare this building open and shall have pleasure
in unveiling a plaque. Well, gentlemnen, with best wishes from my Government
to you all and may this bu'lding long continue to serve efficiently the
purposes for which you have combined together. 



THIRD INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON HUMAN Z 3 U 16
RELATIONS
Southern Gross Hotel, Melbourne
Opening Address by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt-
8TH MAY, 1967
The association of human relations and technology is vitally
important. It is a supreme challenge for us, because all the wonders of
science and technology cannot enable us to live by computers alone. A
mechanical heart may keep some of us going in future years, but the
creative ideas, the emotions and the impulses of man cannot be duplicated.
Man remains the master, and it is with his task to see that the application
of technology to the business of living is so ordered that the change Jt
brings makes for peace, for prosperity, for happiness and for security.
The title of my address is Technology in the SerV4 ce of the
Nation, and I want to say something of what we are doing as a government,
and what Australia is doing as a nation. I will select some samples, rather
than attempt to open up the whole emporium of our national effort. The
range of technology In the service of the nation Is wide Indeed, and we have
achieved much by ourselves alone, through universities, and by partnerships
with industry. We live here in Australia in a free society, and my government
believes firmly, as a philosophy, in free enterprise. It is opposed to the
confining and inhibiting limitations of a socialist bureaucracy. The forces
of change operate in many directions and at various levels. Vie are not so
bound by doctrine that we cannot see virtue in government 4nstitutions, in
government activities, but basically ours is a free enterprise philosophy.
And these forces of change must be able to play freely.
VU ith these principles 4n mind, we have been conscious as a
government that, nevertheless, there are heavy responsibilities on us to
ensure that the impact of technological change is made in the right places
with benefit to all, and as far as that is humanly practicable, with hurt to
none. We cannot discipline the fact of these changes in an absolute way,
but we can give some direction to the course they take, and wie can help to
co-crd mnate some of the national responses which have to follow.
The government has done much; it cannot and should not be
expected to do everything. There is a matching responsibility on industry
to make this technological revolution peaceful and productive. The govern ment
can take limited initiatives in education, in research, in the promotion of
essential partnerships with others, in the exchange of knowledge, and in the
marshalling of capital. Beyond that it is essential for industry to play a
full part, and this is one that must enlarge rapidly in the year ahead.
Australia has a small population as great countries go, and we
do not claim yet to be a great country, although in some directions we not
only aspire to greatness, but we feel that we have achieved greatness. We
have a vast continent with this small population, a continent approximately
the size of the United States, if the Alaskans will excuse me once again for
leaving them out of the picture. And Australia should, if we are to take the
long-sighted view, broad and statesmanlike view, we should welcome / 2 
2-
automation with open a rns, because it is through technological ipoeet
through automation, that we can enable this small population to achieve things
which otherwise would only be possible in a country with many times the numbers
that we possess. And we have not waited for others to do this job for us.
We are not a spendthrift nation, we devote nearly 30 per cent
of our gross national product to capital investment. In a guest of honour
broadcast during his visit to Australia, Admiral McDonald, the United States
Chief of Naval Operations, A ustralia, pointed out that our capital investment,
as a proportion of our gross national product, is more than one and a half
times the rate of investment in the United States of A merica, or of Great
Britain. Vle ra. L, I believe, second only to Japan.
We have something of a dilemma here, because wie are at the
same time proceeding with a programme of large scale immigration, and
if immigration is to be successful, then you must have job opportunities quickly
and plentifully available for those whom you attract to the country, But I
think it says something for the skill with which these matters have been
handled and I am not speaking now merely of governments, but of the
community as a whole that thinughout this quite lengthy period, running now
to just on twenty years of large-scale immigration Australia has been able
to maintain a level of sustained high employment which is not surpassed, I
believe, by any other country In the viorld.
. e have achieved this to a degree as a result of the contact and
co-operation which Australian governments have been able to maintain with
industry. We do conduct regular consultations on a basis of consultation
early in the year, and then just before the Budget session, with representative
spokesmen of industry. But these are quite apart from the multitude of ad hoc
consultations that go on through the year. We have regular discussions, in
particular through the Department of Labour and National Service, with the
organised trade union movement.
And I think that assisting all of this is the Australian temperament
and character. ' Vie, as visitors to Australia will find, a friendly people. Vhle
like to get on well with others, we like to get on well with each other. And in
particular, we like to do what we can for those who are finding the going tough,
or who have their problems, in our community This has contributed
enormously to the success of the immigration programme.
Wle have each year a Citizenship Convention to which we invite
representatives from all sections of the community life; not merely trade and
industry, and the trade union movement, but social orginisations, religious
bodies, the whole gamut virtually, of the Australian community existence.
And through the year, quite apart from these regular gatherings, which occur
annually, there is the work of the Good Neighbour movement in each community,
helping us to assimilate the new settlers who come to live with us.
PAIRTNERSHIPS
So far as government is concerned, we try to maintain a threeway
partnership, with management and with those whom they employ. The
relationships I believe are good, and are steadily improving. For particular
problems which arise, we do have certain ad hoc groups, wihich are able to
take charge of the si tuation in respect of some innovation, some technological
innovation, which could otherwise be disruptive, both of good relations and the
employment situation. / 3 
-3
have been able to go through these processes of change
with remarkably little dislocation. In my own time as Minister for Labour,
the considerable mechanisation that went on in t. he coal-mining industry
pnxluced a displacement of labour, but the problems were minimised by
consultation with owners and miners, and the industry has had a better
industrial record since those days, than it had before.
V~ e have other examples which perhaps I could mention; the
extensive use of computers, in particular in the insurance industry,, The
displacement of clerical labour which this has produced in some areas has
gone by with again remarkably little dislocation. Automatic control
mechanisms in important industries, such as the steel Industries, the
petroleum industry; the growing degree of mechanisation and automation in
the automotive industries; the significant part these modern processes are
playing in the development of our oil resources and will be, with our natural
gas; the problem with which we are grappling at the present time of
container is ation on the waterfront; the introduction of mechanical cane cutting,
and in particular of bulk sugar loading in Queensland, which I recall vividly
from my own days as Minister, and which confronted us with problems of the
re-absorption of labour displaced on the waterfront.
All these are examples of technological change, and the way in
which we, with our small population, are trying to make the most in terms
of production of the resources we have.
VWe have shown our concern for human relations in industry in
a considerable variety of ways. W e played a proni not part, for example, in
the establishment of the Duke of Edinburgh Study Conference on industrial
relations, and the next conference s to be held in Australia in 1.968. VWhen
it came to the establishment of Churchill Scholarships, Australia proved to
be the highest contributor per capita of any country invited to join in that
particular scheme. There has always been much emphasis given to industrial
relations In Australia. It has had a political content, of course, because
both sides of politics have given a great deal of their attention to industrial
relations issues, but quite apart from that there has been this feeling that
the worker in his job is entitled from the egalitarian approach that Australians
bring to their community life, a fair deal, a fair go, and he enjoys one of the
highest standards of living in the world as a result.
Our arbitration system involved us in a good deal of pioneering
in this field. It had its critics those who preferred collective bargaining;
those who felt that management could be best left to work out its problems with
its own employees, and while we do not ignore the important place which
management must still play in direct personal industrial relations with those
whom it engages, the Australian arbitration system has brought confidence to
the wage-earner that his conditions would be reasonable, and that there would
be a fair remuneration for the contribution he makes to the industry in which
he is involved. ' Lie have been gratified to find that, increasi ngly over recent
years, there have been studies made from the United Kingdom and the United
States of the way in which we handle these matters. I could speak also of the
concern we have exhibited to ensure that those who have special problems,
the disabled, the returned servicemen, the children of servicemen who are
given such generous and thoughtful treatment by Legacy and the Returned / 4 
1%
Soliers' League all these are illustrations of the emphasis which we place
in Australia upon good human relations, and then in turn relate those to the
problems of our technology.
It has been said that we are missing the bus in the technological
sense, that we are depending too much on imported knowledge. This simply
is not true. My government has cast a very wide net indeed here and in all1
the significant centres of technological activity abroad, to ensure that we are
up to date in our knowledge. It is right to say, of course, that we have
imported know-how from other countries. But i s this wrong? Does it not make
good sense, while going on as best we can within the limits of our own
resources with research and development activity, that we should turn to the
very much more extensive research of which countries with very much larger
populations, the United States, with 193 millions, the United Kingdom, with
more than 510 millions, Japan getting up to the 90 million mark, or thereabouts,
that they are able to make in their own industries?
Australia has benefited from this activity, which others have
carried out. It makes sense for us to learn all we can from others, and to
use the superior skills that are thus produced, where they can be made available
for us. Wle are acquiring new skills all the time, and building up a formidable
sum of experience. The benefit of this experience can be rated in terms of the
per capita production measured by our gross national product. For example,
India, with ' 2times our population, can point to only twice the size of our
gross national product; Indonesia, with nine times our population, has only
a third of Australia's gross national product, and this, of course, is one of
the principal factors why Australia counts as a trad ing nation, and a factor in
the world, despite the comparative smallness of our population.
We have tariffs to protect Australian industry, but we do not
propose to impose tariffs on ideas. L. nation which is wrapped up in itself
makes a very small parcel indeed. That is why, as I said earlier, we welcome
the results, fruits of research and better techniques which come to us from
other countries. Vie are, in relation to our population and resources, doing
well, and man for man, project for project, we believe we are measuring
up in skills and knowledge to the efforts of other countries of greater size and
greater wealth. This does not mean that we cannot do more, and I do not wish to
introduce any note of complacency. -% We must do more; the pace quickens, and
the demands on us as one of the affluent societies must inc~~ ase as we live
more intimately with our Asian and our Pacific environment.
THE NATIONAL RECORD
Lot us look briefly at what we are doing. Take education.
The roots of our technological activity are, of course, in our educational
system. The States are primarily responsible for education, but the Commonwealth
Government is taking an incteasing interest and giving greater financial
help in areas which are complementary to their systems.
VWe have recognised the significance of education in the
technological age, by appointing a Minister for Education and Science. He is
a member of the Cabinet, and he directs a newly-created department but,
of course, our efforts began long before that. 
We have, over a period of years, encouraged and aided the
States to build new universities, some like Monash in this city with a bias
towards technology. If I could give you just a few examples. Eleven colleges
of advanced education received interim capital grants up to December 31st,
1966. In the 196T-6 triennium, 3.0 colleges of advanced education are to.
receive capital and recurrent grants, and in addition, 12 are to receive
recurrent grants only. Altogether 163 technical colleges have received grants
under the Federal Government scheme.
Practically every State secondary school in Australia in which
science is taught has received some science teaching apparatus under the
Federal Government scheme. At 28.5 State schools throughout Australia science
laboratories are either completed or under construction. So far, 400 independent
schools have benefited from the scheme, the degree of benefit varying from the
building of multi laboratory science blocks, to the provision of apparatus for one
laboratory. We have made possible the introduction of a new area of
tertiary education, complementary to our universities, and are helping the
States to develop this system so that there is a general extension of standards
and greater opportunities for young people to have higher education. W~ e have
given Federal aid to science blocks in denominational schools, and inct'eased
the number of scholarships for secondary students, with special provision for
technological students. Vil'e have increased taxation concessions in the education
field. These have a significant bearing on the end product of technological
development, and are vital to the further research which has to be undertaken.
In the field of research, through the Ministry of Supply, the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation and other
agencies are active in many fields, and getting sound results. 1 do not think
the average Australian realises how much we have done. In recent months, we
have taken a fresh look at the needs of industry, to see where we could help, and
the government recently announced an incentive scheme for financial help in
research by companies in the manufacturing and mining industries. This, we
felt, is the best way to give top management the encouragement to test new
ideas, and to give full rein to the enquiring minds of our young technologists
in industry. Recently I opened a new tracking station at Honeysuckle
Creek, not far from Canberra. This station is one of the latest examples of
the application of our technological skills, in the assembly of a highly complicated
apparatus needed for tracking satellites Mn outer space. It was specially
established for the United States, and in co-operation with them, as part of
the facilities required to service the planned attempt to land men on the moon
in the 1970' s. It may interest you to know that on the Apollo project, there
are three stations which will be assisting in this tracking; one in the United
States, one in Spain and the third here in Australia. Al1together this is the
sixth tracking station here in Australia, and It is just ten years since we
established the first of them, during the 1957 international geophysical year.
They are all operating now. They are to be found at
Garnarvon, in Western Australia, Cooby Creek in Queensland, Y! oomera in
South Australia, and at Tidbinbilla, Ororral Valley, and Honeysucle Greek
in the Australian Capital Territory. These stations make up the largest
complex outside the United States to be directly involved 4n that country's space
programme. / 6 
6-
And quite apart from the practical function they perform in
space flights, they represent a place for us in modern technology in an
advanced form. Weget a rub-off, as so many of you around this room will
know, in specialist technical fields. They reflect our capacity to hold our
own in skills and knowledge with nations greater in wealth and size.
More and more men and women are being trained Australia
to handle complicated equipment associated with space technology, and their
experience is spreading through the services of the Government, as w'ell
as through industry. W, e have already had, for example, the first telecast between
Britain and Australia by way of satellites in outer space, and by the same
process, will see the events of Australia's special day at Canada's Centenary
Celebrations in Montreal next month. In Australia today, 95 per cent of the
nation's population is within reach of telecasting.
W. ke have our scientists and explorers in the Antarctic and they
have kept us well in the van of research and development in that area. We
have established a place in the front rank of world astronomy, and we are
adding to the facilities we already have at Mount Stromlo and at the Radio
Telescope Centre at Parkes by deciding in partnership with Britain to set up
a new 15C inch optical telescope at Siding Springs in New South '!' ales. This
w Ml be the largest in the southern hemisphere and the second largest in the
world. WThen I run through lists of these achievements and these are
just a few examples one can talk of what we are doing at 1' oomera with the
development of the special weapons there, like Ikara and Malkara and others
of that sort I do not find myself counting any years that the locust has eaten.
But there is more to be done.
If we leave space for a moment, and the other examples I have
given, and go to the other extine, that is to the wealth of our natural
resources in the hard earth of this ancient continent, we find that here too the
technologists have blazed new trails in the past decade. This -is where we
have had some of our most spectacular successas in national development,
and inevitably the demand for skilled manpower has increased heavily.
You all know of the discoveries that have been made in the iron
ore country in the west and north west of the continent, and of the millions
of tons which lie there to be exploited to enrich the nation, and of the bauxite
and manganese that is now being taken from the gulf country. In these
remote areas, all the skills of the scientists and technologists are required,
because the areas are thirsty lands, uninhabited for the most part, and
lacking ports and sources of fuel and power.
Yet the challenge has been taken up, settlements are developing,
and now ports are being established on barren coasts. The petroleum search
in this country vmhich began in earnest twenty years ago, i5s havi~ ng its
first successes. VWe now have commercial oilfields in Queensland and
Western Australia, and while they provide only a fraction of our needs, they
may well be seen as signposts to further discoveries.
In recent years too, there have been some important inland
gas strikes in C%; ueensland, South Australia, Wlestern Australia and Northern
Territory. Last year we had the drambitic discovery of substantial gas / 7 
-7
flows from the three offshore wells on the Gippsland shelf in Victoria.
This has opened up a new phase in petroleum exploration, and has provided
a new challenge to the technologists to handle the complicated task of
extracting gas from below the seas and bringing it to your home and mine,
and to the industries of this country.
The more I look at these events, and over the wi'de sweep of
national development, the more I realise that the needs for the future are
not only in skilled manpower and in sane co-operative huiman industrial
relations, but capital requirements, in new techniques and at all levels
of management, if we are to secure maximum results.
The extent to which overseas capital is being applied to our
affairs is a subject of regular and continuing controversy. It is only fair
to say, though, that the initial impetus to the development of some of our
new -found mineral resources would not have come, had A ustralian industry
not had access to substantial quantities of overseas capital. just on
per cent, certainly 85 to 90 per cent of our investment in Australia, comes
from our own sources, and that extra 1C to 15 per cent has had a great
value for us. Ike have got off to a good start, but it is important to spell out
once again some principles which the government regards Is of first
importance. I could summarise them best this way.
W7-e will continue to need overseas capital, and we will need to
have it in a regular and substant-al way. just on 90 per cent of it has come
to us from the United Kingdom and the United States, and both tbose countries
at the present time have found it necessary to impose some restraints on
their capital inflow. We have seen this reflected in a good trading year in
the drop in our overseas reserves, because the capital inflow has fallen
sharply below that of the year before.
We have an obligation as a government, and you have an
obligation as leaders in industry, to ensure that where practicable an
Australian equity is established. And I am glad to say that this attitude of
ours is becoming increasingly appreciated by those who bring their capital,
their skills, and accept ti-e hazards of investment here in Australia.
In the last few weeks the government has announced a plan,
drawn up in association with the private banks, to help industry finance
major capital works. Most of the capital will be generated within Australia.
Overseas capital will also have its own useful place. Thi s is one of the
measures which the government has been considering for a long time, to
ensure that we have sufficient funds to develop our resources and to have an
Australian participation in their ownership.
The government certainly does not want to discourage overseas
capital, but it is deeply conscious of the anxieties that hate been expressed
in the past, and my Government will do what needs to be done to ensure that
there is no wastage of an Australian entitlement to our vast natural resources.
THREE POINTS TO NOTE
There are some points I would like to make by wvay of
conclusion, which I feel are important, as you discuss the application of
technological changes to our society. 
-8
The first is the need to know. By this I mean that a government's
readiness to help in the technological fedand to assist in the translation of
new methods into our society, can be effective only if governments and
industry are clear about what they want to do and where they are going.
It is, for instance, no good giving lip service to our drive for
new markets, unless exporters are ready to try their products in these
markets, instead of waiting . unil the other fellow has opened the door. The
same applies in the technological field.
The second point is readiness to venture It is not in anybody's
interest to hold back until a government umbreba7 is spread over a new
enterprise to protect it from all risk. By the same token, I think that the
Australian entrepreneur can take some stimulus and encouragement from the
way in which others with capital to invest from oversea-s have taken on
difficult projects, even with hazardous or dubious prospects, and shown that
there are opportunities here and Jif we show the enterprise to take advantage
of them. I do not say that the Government never opens an umbrella over
industry. It has very special respons Jbili11ties. For example, in the
preservation of an effective tariff system. It also has responsibilities for
subsidies in specific areas, and for wide-ranging incentives, not only by
direct grants, but by taxation concessions and other methods. But there
remains always a large area of self help, and this is not only an industry
responsibility, but an individual responsibility.
The third point is the level and competence of top management
and this goes for governments, mine included, as well as frindustry. There
are unexploited opportunities here and I am glad that this is implied in your
selection of subjects for discussion. There is a growing sophistication in
our industry; this is amply demonstrated in so many ways and Jit is important
that top management should have the appropriate qualifications to deal with
it. I feel our universities and our industrialists can, together, do a
great deal to secure this objective. It would be fatal to all we seek to do if
there were a " brain drain" from this country at a time when we need the skills
of the technologists and the competence of management most. Fortunately,
at the present time Australia is attracting more scientists than she is losing.
There is one final word. I have recently been int.,. sia for the
third time as Frime Minister. This is our region of special interest and for
more than a quarter of a century we have been giving technical aid both in
manpower and materials to the underdeveloped countries. Under the Golombo
Plan we have given, in technical assistance ( as distinct from economic
assistance), something like $ 0million to African and Asian countries.
Through SEATO we have given over $ 14 million, mainly in the technical
field, and through a number of other agencies, bilateral and multilateral, we
have contributed sevec-al more millions.
This may not be large when matched against the total need but
this direct help is continuing and J ncteasing and stands as a constant reminder
that our technological assets are suff iciently high for us to be able to export
them to needy countries. Is there any better bridge between humanity and
technology, than this? Is there any better service to the nation? 



OPENING OF E. R. SQUIBB SONS' PLAT ' 1
NOBLE PARK, VICTORIA l l
Speech by the Frime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt 8TH MAY, 1967
Mr. Gardiner.... and may I take this opportunity of welcoming
home to Australia the Ambassador for the United States, Mr. Edward Clark.
He has two homes, one in Texas and one here in Australia and we permit him
temporarily to serve as Ambassador from the United States to this country.
I feel we ought to be paying him the money. If every overseas ambassador
gave us as good service both inside Australia and when he goes abroad on his
various occasions, then our foreign influence would be very much greater than
it is. But we welcome him back. He is sporting his daily-renewed Texas rose.
I think he must have had an injection of some Squibb hormone or something to
keep it going or else they have shown him how to preserve these things
indefinitely. However, Ed, good friend, welcome back to Australia.
And welcome, also, Mr. Chairman of the Board, Mr. John McCloy.
There are various reasons, most of which will emerge as I
speak to you, why I find it a personal pleasure to be here this afternoon, but
I would be putting right at the top of the list the renewal of my acquaintance
and my friendship with the very distinguished man not just a distinguished
American but a distinguished world citizen in the person of the Chairman of
your Board. If any of you have found the opportunity and those of you who
haven't I hope will take it of studying the curriculum vitae of this remarkable
man, you will wonder how much could have been crammed with such distinction
Into the period of one lifetime. He tells us he Is getting on but even In the
time he spent getting on, it amazes me that so many notable posts could have
been discharged with such ability and with such general acclaim as have been
occupied by the Chairman of the Board.
And when he talks about getting on, again he is a very good
advertisement for Squibb products if that Is the way he puts It regarding
himself. He looks a very fit and vigorous specimen after having journeyed
across the Pacific and come to join us here today. Mr. McCloy, on this your
first visit to Australia, I am delighted as its Prime Minister to welcome you
here. I hope it will be the first of several occasions, and we applaud all that
you have been doing for the satisfaction not just of one President of the United
States from one side of politics but for all the Presidents who have occupied
that post during your maturity and from all sides of politics. What you have
had to say, while I am warmed by your generous references to myself doesn't
prompt the things which I feel in me to say regarding your own contribution to a
better world. You mentioned that you had been talking to my former leader,
Sir Robert Menzies, and that he couldn't find very much that was quotable to
say about me. I served with him, of course, in the Parliament for, I think,
it was thirty years, or just on thi rtyone years, and for thirty of those years
he kept referring to me at " young Harold". Eventually he got accustomed to
the idea that it was bout time that I took over and that I wasn't quite as young
as he might be presenting me in that particular form. / 2 
-2
I accept what you say about the reference I made to the United
States. I can't claim to have coined the phrase, but in the circumstances of
the Viet Nam involvement, I was very glad to adopt this for Australia. I am
entirely unrepentant about it and so far as the Viet Nam Issue is concerned,
we are there together to see this thing through. Now, when you suggest that
through Bob Menzies, I might say " all the way with Squibb", well I haven't made
a bad beginning but I am very conscious of the fact that not very far from here
are some very close friends of mine, the Nicholas family, and one has to be
diplomatic about these things.
Another very good reason for my being with you is the subject of
health. I suppose there is no topic a tout which human beings converse more
frequently or in which they are more interested individually, and this is to be
noted in the ordinary salutations with which we greet each other or the way
in which we indulge together on convivial occasions. You raise a glass and
you say " Good Health.!" Or perhaps that Is not quite so fashionable as it was
because thanks to companies like your own, most of us enjoy far better health
than earlier generations and people tend to say rather than " Good Health!
these days, " Good Luck! or If you happen to live in a country regarded as,
heidlthy and lucky, you are just as likely to get " Bottoms Up!" Then,
occasionally, we fluctuate in these matters and someone says to you, " Well,
how are you" or " How do you do". There have been mornings when I have
replied, " Well, don't ask me or I will tell you".
But what a remarkable change has come over the business, the
pleasure of living as a result of the work of men such as the founder of this
great organisation whose material evidence of success is to be found as an
example In this fine building here today.
Edward Squibbs' own story Is a romance In itself. He established
his first production laboratory as so many people living in a free enterprise
society find it necessary to do, on borrowed money, shortly after he had
left the Navy. He did this In 1858, and shortly afterwards, the laboratory
was completely destroyed by fire and he was, I understand, permanently
disfigured as a consequence of it. But such was his courage, such was his
enterprise, such was his determination that he was quickly back in operation
and by the end of 1859, he was there In business again.
And it is a very long history for a pharmaceutical organisation to
spread over more than a century of active and successful development. But
It was not just that he was successful in producing things that were of value
to people, to help them and make them feel better. He had a keen sense of
public service, of devotion to the health of the people, and somehow he felt
responsible for the ethics of the industry.
The high standard of ethics which the pharmaceutical industry
feels it desirable to employ dates back really, I think it could be fairly
claimed, to this man. Certainly he was one of the great moulders of a fine
tradition. He was dedicated to the health of mankind. He launched a new era
in pharmacy, and I don't think it is stretching it too much to say, when you
speak in terms of human well-being and happiness, he launched a new era in
human fulfilment and enjoyment. He gave his personal attention to his products.
In the early stages, he used to personally sign the bottles or containers that
carried his products, and his signature was synonymous with the quality of
his products. And without wishing to give an advertising spiel to those now
produced by the Squibb organisation, again it can be fairly said that these
high standards have been maintained. / 3 
-3
In doing a little research about him, I came across the official
opinion expressed of him by the Committee of Revision of the United States
Pharmacopoeia and I think this was some time after his death, but that is
immaterial. I quote this passage ' Dr. Squibb had the unique distinction
of possessing a sound knowledge of medicine, an innate fondness for chemical
research, an extraordinary grasp of pharmacy and of the scientists' ideal
love of truth. He could always be found opposing any course which tended to
weaken the cause of righteousness or ethics. And that is a fine tradition for
this company to have inherited. It Is a fine thing that it should be maintained.
It is difficult for a modern user of drugs to understand the
significance of Dr. Squibbs' crusade because national laws protect the life
and health of the people against adulterated drugs, there are now legal standards
for pharmaceutical production, false and extravagant claims are outlawed,
reputable drug manufacturers police their own production facilities and impoe
their own high standards. And what a contrast this is from the dark ages of
patent medicines, old wives' remedies, adulterated compounds and mysterious
potions. The presence of my colleague, the Minister for Immigration reminds
me, Mr. McCloy, that he was the Minister, then Attorney-General, who
introduced the restrictive practices legislation which also, no doubt, serves
as some sort of protectiort In this field.
Now, when I say it is difficult for us to realise what these things
mean to us because we tend to take them for granted as available for whatever
ailment or malady, temporary or otherwise, afflicts us, my mind goes back to
just a few personal experiences. I lost my own mother when I was a boy from
a bout of pneumonia. A few years later some M B tablets would probably have
saved her life and perhaps prolonged it to this time. Later, Winston Churchill,
you will recall, was stricken more than once with pneumonia, and we remember
how he used to talk about the way the M B tablets saved his life. And I
remember a distinguished Australian statesman, the late Sir Earle Page, who
also from time to time had bouts of pneumonia, and thanks to these modern
specifics, was able to remain in health and survive until a very ripe old age.
Well, these days I am told even M B I hope no disservice to
the firm has been superseded or at least there are others which are turned
to rather more readily, penicillin being regarded as a very effective remedy
for this purpose. And you have only to think about again I turn to
another personal experience. As a boarder at a preparatory school here,
Wesley, when thanks to some tainted milk, we got, several of us, a bout of
typhoid. In those days, the cure for typhoid, as far as I can recall it, was a
course of starvation. You could only take very soft foods or fluids. I was
in bed, I remember, for six weeks and I had a very mild dose well, mild
compared with others. A friend of mine, also a boarder with me at the
preparatory school, now Senator Turnbull I say " a friend of mine"
although he votes against me far more often than he votes for me he had
a bout which lasted three months. Now today you get one of what they call
the broad spectrum antibiotics, and in a matter of a comparatively short time,
you are able to control the symptoms and able to have a very much shorter
period of convalescence. And if you turn to a scourge such as tuberculosis, you see what
a dramatic change has come over the scene in that respect. All of us who
travel at one time or another know the needle treatment which is mildly
uncomfortable at the time but which protects us against what used to be the
scourges of earlier generations of mankind. And these are just a few
illustrations which one might mention of the way in which we have all been
assisted and benefited by these great developments. / 4 
-4
Now, I gather that included in these fields are such items as
tranquillisers and the relief of hypertension. These have a special appeal,
of course, for the politician who frequently needs a course of one or the
other. But these are only a few of the ways in which our life has been made
the pleas anter and the happier as the result of the work of men like Edward
Squibb and those who have followed on him.
This has become a major area of Government activity as well,
and you may be interested to have a f ew facts so far as the Commonwealth
is concerned. We are concerned with the efficacy and quality, of course, of
pharmaceutical products but our principal interest in the industry stems from
our provision of pharmaceutical benefits. Wle are concerned with the safety,
quality and the cost of drugs, and as the number of prescriptions increases,
so do the dangers in herent in the toxic nature of many drugs. I am glad
to report that in this coxy there is, so I am advised by our Department of
Health, excellent co -operation with Squibb and other pharmaceutical
manufacturers and much valuable work is being done through the Australian
Drug Evaluation Committee, with which the Department of Health collaborates.
The Commonwealth's activity in the field of drug safety through
its Therapeutic Substances Branch, through the National Biological Standards
Laboratory, represents practical recognition of its concern for the safety
of drugs being administered to the community. So many new drugs have been
introduced that governments throughout the world have found it appropriate
to establish in the form of legal standards, minimum requirements for drugs
and tiopgical products. We co-operate fully with other governments in
maintaining desirable standards of safety and quality, our main agency for
this being the National Biological Standards Laboratory. All new products
are tested at the laboratory for purity and potency, and unless they conform,
they are not listed in the drugs available under the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme. The Laboratory also carries out continuous sampling of drugs.
Now this is costing us at the present time about $ A92 million
for payments made during 1965/ 66 to chemists for dispensing pharmaceutical
benefits, thus making the pharmaceutical benefits the third largest
expenditure of the Commonwealth Government on social services. Of the
$ 92 million paid by the Commonwealth Government to chemists, approximately
$ 57 million represented the cost of the drugs to the chemist, that is, their
value at wholesale prices.
Now, another consideration which has attracted me here today
is the way in which this enterprise represents, I believe, a shining example
of the benefit of overseas investment and of enlightened approaches on the
part of the management to the problem of overseas investment. The staff,
I am informed, including the management of the firm, is an all-Australian
staff. That does not mean that in this country there is any veto on the
presence or the management or inclusion in substantial numbers in the staff
of the nationals f rom whence the investment comes, but it is a reflection,
I believe, of the faith that the management of Squibbs have in the Australian
people, of their capacity that in this enterprise, expanding as it is, they
h ave included an all-Australian staff.
The plant and again this is a bull point so far as I am concerned
will produce not only for the Australian market but for export. The firm is
engaging in basic research and no doubt is able to draw on the research of
the parent company which in turn is a part of an enormous American
organisation, Olin Mathieson. I notice, looking through the annual report
of Olin Mathieson that they also manufacture WVinchester rifles and perhaps,
Mr. McCloy, it was a wise decision to have a separate chemical company 
altogether, otherwise you might have had thrust on you the slogan " Kill
them or cure them
We applaud this research because it is through this that
productivity and efficiency develop and I have spoken earlier of the confidence
which this Investment demonstrates in the future of Australia by a well
known and reputable firm from overseas, conscious not only of the
opportunities in this country but seeing, I think, with a far-sightedness
tshoamt et hpea prtrso douf ctths iso fr eAguiosntr aliina winh itchhe wfuet ufirned moauyrs pelrvoevse trheaand itehro soef fernotmry ointh, er
countries, including the United States Itself.
Some of you have heard me talk abott the fact that we occu py a
very special place and I am prompted to say this because Mr, McCloy's
remarks took a broad range over the world scene we occupy a special
place In relationi to Cambodia, which I have visited quite recently. You are
aware, Mr, McCloy, as, the Ambassador is, that the United States not having
diplomatic relations with this country, Cambodia, Australia represents
Americati interests in Cambodia, as indeed we represent Cambodian
interests in South Viet Nam. I think I can claim that there are very few
Heads of Government and this is not something T claim for myself; it
is reflective of the country who could have visited the four countries I
visited so recently. Some could get to two, some would have been acceptable
in three; very few people would have been acceptable in the four. And I
make that point because I think that it is wise for any vast organisation with
an International distribution to include Australia as one of its distributing
points. Ours is a friendly country, we are on friendly terms with our
northern neighbours and from this point, export can be readily arranged.
Now we have tried to set a climate in this country encouraging
to investment, prod ucing for ourselves prosperity and full employment,
rising standards of living and good prospects of expansion. We believe that
responsible overseas investment in Australia is not only desirable but
essential to supplement our own efforts to invest, and thereby maintain our
rate of growth. Australia invests a high proportion of its gross national
product. We are not waiting for other people to come and do the job for us.
The Chaiman of the Board may be interested to know that of the
total capital investment in this country between 85 per cent and 90 per cent.
comes from Australian sources themselves, but we do value the extra
per cent to 15 per cent, that comes to us from overseas, with the know-how
it brings, with the research that frequently accompanies it, with the skilled
executive management that also frequently comes in the wake of the investment.
And Australia invests a higher proportion of its gross national product than
I think any other country in the world with the exception of Japan, more
than one and a half times the proportion invested in the United States or in
the United Kingdom. So you will gather, Mr. McCloy, and I am saying this because
he has got a very good entree to the President of the United States, and the
sting is in the tall because 90 per cent, of investment in Australia has come
from two sources the United Kingdom and the United States of America.
Both of those countries for economic reasons of their own and financial
reasons of their own, have found it necessary to place some restraint on the
movement of capital here. But I am sure, as you look at Australia and see
its relationship, geographically and otherwise to the United States, to those
countries of this region In which the United States has a profound interest, / 6 
4 -6
it will strike you, as a man with your international experience, experience
in international affairs, and in financial and legal affairs, that it should be
a prime United States' interest to help to make this country strong, and we
don't say that in any spirit of seeking some charity from others. VWe have
never sought nor accepted a dollar of aid from the United States of America,
but w'e do believe it to be a continuing United States' interest to see that
Australia grows and that that growth is assisted by a steady flow of
investment capital from the United States of America.
Now, over the last twelve months, largely as the result of
the reasons I have mentioned, there has been some fall away not falling
away of interest as I am sure the Ambassador will confirm. His life is
made hectic rather than busy, contending and coping with those who come
from overseas seeking out opportunities in Australia or wondering what
can be done here. And I hope that this appreciation of what Australia can
mean to this region in which the United States is showing such a commendable
interest the South-East Asian and Pacific region and indeed of Asia
generally, the whole area East of Suez in which are to be found three-fifths
of mankind, that in this picture there will be seen quite clearly a place for
a growing, strengthening Australia as a contributing factor to stability, to
progress, to leadership in this area of the world.
Now that has got a little outside my charter. I was tempted
to introduce it because you, Mr. McCloy, were kind enough to give us
your own picture of Australia in a world setting. And I am looking forward
greatly to seeing the President again in the first week of June, and I know
that he has a deep affection for this country and he has a recognition of
its importance in the directions that I have mentioned. I know that it is
a product of his resolution, as it was of two American Presidents who
preceded him, that America sees the necessity of building a better world
order in the area of the world in which we find ourselves, and that is why
we so wholeheartedly have aligned ourselves with you and why we are so
determined to see these issues through with you. Our countries together,
I think, can make a great contribution to strength, to stability, to progress
and security in this area of the world, and this establishment, which shortly
I will formally declare open, is itself tangible evidence of the way in which
the best that ewines from America can be married to what is good in
Australia. We encourage immigration of people and we find that we
have been able to assimilate them readily, happily for ourselves and
happily for them. L Unbrenlightened leadership by overseas investors
there can be the same happy marriage between capital from overseas,
techniques, know-how and executive skills from overseas with the
opportunities available here in Australia.
May Squibb play a significant and growing part in that
co-operation and I wish you every success for your future. 



AUSTRALIAN WiOMEN'S LIBERAL CLUB, MELBOURNE V " ARY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR., HARCLD HOLT 24TH MAY, 1967
Lady Coles, Sir Henry, Parliamentary colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen:
First, may I thank you on behalf of Mrs. Holt and myself very warmly
for that gracious welcome you gave to us and for all the friendly support that
this received from those around the room. Secondly, may I join with you in
the congratulations you have expressed to our good friend Henry. It was a great
joy to me, I can assure you, not only to see him back again, but for the proof
it brought that Liberal support was as strong in this State as it has ever been.
And for him to achieve that after twelve years of office and some difficult
decisions, as I said to him at the time, or said publicly at the time, was a
personal triumph and a notable political achievement. And this State can count
itself fortunate that we have his sane, balanced, progressive leadership for the
years that lie ahead I would think as mar y years as he cares to choose on
the form that is so far disclosed.
And may I also congratulate Mrs. Goble on having been elected and I
say this in an Australian GVomen's Liberal Club. Vie are becoming more
enlightened I think as we go on, we Liberals. WVe managed to elect a very able
lady to the House of Representatives, the first time we've had one there for
many years. In the Senate where we can organise these things rather better,
of course, we are well represented by several lady Senators and I am glad to
see Senator Breen here with us today and our joint friend Ivy ' iedgwood who
chairs the Government Members' education Committee is also a very significant
and valuable figure in the work of our Party. So that Henry and I have good
cause to say thank you for what you are doing in giving us your support and
from time to time sending from your membership people who can be good and
worthy representatives in the Parliament.
It sometimes makes me feel a little uncomfortable to realise that more
than half my life has been spent in the national Parliament and in my early days,
the only effective organisation we had in this State was the AWomen's organisation
the Australian Viomen's National League as it was in those days. And I recall
with great appreciation and gratitude the strength of support which they gave to
us at that time.
Sir Henry may be interested to know that at one stage when my electorate
had become rather enlarged and I represented 80, 000 voters, 48, 000 of them
were women voters, 32, 000 men voters. That gave a substantial majority of
three lady voters to two men voters. I don't draw any significance from that
because things have balanced out since that time and we've managed to maintain
much the same sort of majority. But it gave me good reason to dwell on the
value of the women voters in a particular electorate and on the support which
came to us at the time from the women's organisation. And you've gone on
giving us that loyal support down through the years.
Now, after seventeen years of Liberal leadership I think we can all take
some pride and a modest satisfaction in the state of our own Australia and those
of us who have supported Liberal policies and Liberal leadership through ' hat
period, either in the Federal or the State sphere, can justly claim that this has
made a notable and significant contribution to the Australia of today. And
whatever test you care to apply, I think we can fairly claim that this leadership,
these liberal policies, have been good for Australia. 2/ 
In the material tests we've more than doubled the gross national product
of the country, we've developed the highest percentage of home ownership to
be found in the more conspicuous evidence of an affluent society. We are a
fortunaite people. And I would only hope and wish that sometimes those who are
so critical of what they find in Australia would pause and count the blessings
they enjoy in this country. It is I think unfortunately a weakness in our national
life at the present time that we are always looking for trouble and the things
that can be criticised rather than taking stock of how well we stand as a country
and as a people and in comparison wi-th others around the world.
However, having got that comment off my chest, let me turn to a couple
of matters which are of topical significance politically for us. One of course
is the political event immediately ahead, the referendum. I hope you won't
mind me saying a few words about this because we haven't had the kind of
opportunities we would normally enjoy in an election campaign of getting our
message across as widely as we would wish. No political party has had the
financial resources to conduct a large campaign on this matter and yet it does
have an importance for good government in Australia and for Australia's standing
in the eyes of the rest of the world.
And when I say that I refer to two proposals I will take them in their
inverse order, having stated them as I have, because I do believe that what we
decide about the aborigine proposal will affect Australia's standing in the eyes
of the rest of the world. I have every confidence that there will be an overwhelming
YES vote. It is unthinkable that it could be otherwise. The purpose of the
proposal is to remove from the Constitution references which in the one case
produce an outmoded and outdated situation that is the item which talks
about aborigines not being counted in relation to a census. Well, this was
inserted in the Constitution at a time when aborigine people couldn't effectively
be counted they were living either a tribal life or a nomadic life, and there
weren't the facilities for checking that there are today. And it has no continuing
place in a modern Australian Constitution.
The other one which we suggest to be excluded is the only other reference
which appears in the Constitution to aborigines, and although properly understood,
it doesn't discriminate unfavourably against aborigine people it is regarc~ d
widely both inside this country and outside this country as having that effect.
And because we can still deal satisfactorily by the combined efforts of the
Commonwealth and State Governments with the problems of people of aboriginal
race without these specific references in the Constitution, and because there
is lingering around the world a belief that somehow through this provision we
discriminate against people of aboriginal race, we thought it should be out of
the written text of the Constitution.
But the other proposal is the one which causes more complexity for people.
In the first place, it has associated with it the word " nexus". Some people have
doubts as to just what " nexus" means, what its political or Constitutional
significance may be. But it is really quite a simple business. In the early
stages % lien the Constitution was being drafted, there was a feeling that more
States would be created. So that there should not be an enlargement of the
Senate relative to the House of Representatives which would diminish the stature
of the House of Representatives, the planners of those days thought there ought
to be a provision ensuring that the number of members of the House of
Representatives was always at least twice that of the members of .~ ae
' Well, as time has gone on, although there has been a lot of talk abou States,
it hasn't come as yet to anything and there is no increase in the number of
States in sight. But there lingers on in the Constitution this provision which
throws on the House of Representatives the neceEsity, if at any time it wants to
increase its numbers, of increasing the Senate to the extent of half of any
increase in the size of the House of Representatives. o 3/ 
Now,, I don't think there is much doubt around the community that a Senate
of 60, and it was enlarged to 60 from 36 back in 1948, is large enough for
Australia's needs at this time. -1he are not proposing that the Senate can never
be increased. Vie are saying that we don't want to have to increase it every
time growth in population and other f'actors would appear to make desirable some
increase in the size of the House of Representatives. And so we want to gret rid
of this formal obligation that we must increase the Senate any time we increase
the House of Representatives. Very understandably, there are people who might
think, "' Well, in those circumstances, won't there be a danger that the Senate
will be reduced to too small a size, seeing that the Constitution at the moment
only provides for a minimum of 36 Senators, whereas you have 60 in practice,
and won't it leave it open to the House of Representatives to just increase its
numbers at will to any size it chooses?" In order to meet that kind of concern,
we have inserted two new safeguardsi or propose to insert them if the people
will only give the affirmative vote we need. One safeguard is that the
minimum number of Senators prescribed by the Constitution will henceforth
be 60 as is the present number in the Senate, not 36 as the present Constitutional
provision requires. And the sece-nd thing, is that we say you can't increase the
size of the House of Representatives beyond a point taiat would leave a mk. I'mum
of 85, 000 persons on average to e;-ch electorate. Now that is a very effective
brake on the size of the House of Representatives.
The authors of the NO case have made a quite misleading, and I would say,
dishonest reference in the case that if the " nexus" is removed the one braking
device in the Constitution groes with-it. iWell, I've already pointed out that
there is this other very effective braking device, that you can't just go on
increasing the size of the House of Representa-tives inordinately. It must relate
to a minimum of 85, 000 persons. Now, how does that compare with other
countries? In 1948, when the size of the House was increased, the increased House
produced an average of 66, 000 persons. At the present time, there is an
average of 94, 000 and if the Parliament runs its full course, it will get up to
97, 003, and of course as other years go on, unless some change is made, the
number to be represented by any one member will go on increasing.
Well, you may ask why do we need more members, and in any event, why
should we do this now? As to whether we need more, that's a practical question
which I think could be sensibly argued. You need effective representation.
When you get the member trying to represent too many people,. the individual
elector doesn't get the same service that he or she is entitled to expect. And
already the Australian National Parliamentarian is representing more people
than a member of the House of Commons.
Now, in the United States Parliament, they represent many more people
but, in order to meet that situatiop, they had to build up big staffs around the
member and instead of being able to get to your member to discuss your problems
with him, you are liable to be with a second, or first, second, third or fourth
secretary dealing with your particular situation. Now that's not in the British
tradit-on and practice and we don't think Australians, accustomed to getting a
persor. al response from their own member, would welcome the intrusion of some
official betwveen uhenm ad the man or woman they have elected. And so we have
picked on what seemrs tc, to be a reasonable minircum. You don't have to
have a member C75, 000. It can go higher thalt. But you can't
make more mrembers than a mpinimum of 85, 000 would stipulate. So there is
this safeguard in the Constitution. 9 4/ 
And there can be no argument e&amp; y one of us who has been in the
Parliament for many years would be Able to affirm quite definitely that the
complexity, the number, the scope of Commonwealth activities, these things,
have grown enormously. As Henry and his colleagues here will know, in many
fields which were originally exclusive to the States, not from choice on the part
of the States but simply because of the demands of the electorate and financial
and other limitations the Commonwealth has been brought into such fields as
education, housing, into health and a variety of other matters. And then, of
course, immigation. That programme has brought with it a whole range of new
problems, and at the same time added many people who are not on the rolls
as voters but whose needs have to be taken care of. With Australia's involvement
in military operations and other commitments around the world, again you have
repatriation problems, personnel problems of men and women in the Services,
-which all have to be dealt with.
But this, I repeat, is a matter of judgment. Whether we do it now, whether
we do it five years, whether we do it ten years, fifteen years hence, is something
for the Parliament to decide. The fact of the matter is that until you remove the
nexus ( tape damaged) at the same time as you increase the size of the
House of Representatives. And don't imagine that this is something that is going
to happen very often. It's only happened once up till now in the history of our
whole Federation. It took 47 years, from 1901, before the sizeof the Parliament
was increased. If we go on to the next election, the House running its normal
course, it woWd be 20 years since there was any increase, and the most that
is proposed would be an increase of the order of 12, 13 or 14 members in the
House without any addition to the Senate.
WNell, you may say, why should we be bothering about this now? First,
I would say, and on the evidence that we do this so rarely, it is very difficult
to get a time when the three principal parties are all agreed that a change of
this sort should be made and that this is the opportune time to do it. If this
opportunity slips by I don't know when it* will occur again.
The second thing is that we must have a redistribution, of the electorates,
not to gain any political advantage for one party or another, but simply because
over the years, and with the enormous growth around Australian cities in
particular, they have become quite unbalanced. Mr. Calwell and I both
represent, I think, electorates with less than 40, 000 voters, but Billy Snedden
out in Bruce represents now well over 100, .000 by the time we get to the next
election it will be nearer 120, COO. And this is not an isolated instance. Wherever
the new growth has occurred around the capital cities, you find these abnormally
enlarged electorates. In the heart of the cities, as people become more
prosperous, they've tended to move out, and so the inner electorates have
become smaller. Common decency and justice demand of us that we have a
redistribution of electorates to help to balance out the representation. If we
are going to do that, and if we have at any time over the next several years
in contemplation some modest addition to the number of members of the
Parliament, then surely it is appropriate we decide on that first and then have
a redistribution on the basis of the numbers with which we agree should be
brought into our account. And this is why, a very rare event for the Australian
Parliament, you find the three leaders of the three principal Parties, the Liberal
Party, the Labor Party and the Country Party, all coming to you urging at the
one time that you give a Y21S vote on both of these proposals.
Now the opponents are to be found in the ranks of the Democratic Labor
Party, the two Senators in Canberra, and in a few Liberal and Country Party
Senators who haven't gone along with the majority. In the House of Representatives
and this I think is an impressive fact the voting in favour was unanimous, 9 0 
from all parties from all around Australia. In the Senate, although there is
this handful of Senators who are taking the opposite line, the voting was 45 in
favour to 7 against. And I think most people who have any doubts on this matter
might have sufficient faith in the judgment of their representative and the
democratic system to feel that when you get such an overwhelming support in
favour of proposals as is evidenced in those voting figures, you can go along
-Safely with what is recommended to you.
I don't want to spend a great deal of time on the NO case, but there are
just two or thlree aspects which I would like you to carry in your mind in case
you encounter some waverers yourself. The NO case, the official NO case as
printed, is I believe, a deplorable piece of argumentative presentation. I would
have hoped that having a case prepared by members from Parliament, in this
case from the Senate, we would have had a calm, logical analysis of the case,
the arguments for, the arguments against, and we have tried to do that in the
YZES case perhaps it has made it a rather more tedious and duller document
for people to read but at least anybody who takes the trouble to go through it
will find that this is the way in which the case has been presented. But the NO
case sets out to conjure up all the fears, all the bogies, the whole string of the
cliches you'd expect to find in some of the less responsible areas of the press
about politicians too many politicians and howmuch they cost us, what damage
we'Ire going to do to the Senate, and the damage-we're going to do to country
interests. Well, let me take a few of those arguments in reverse order. The country
interests -there are representatives from country electorates in the House of
Representatives in each of the three Parties. The Country Party itself, of course.
I n the Liberal Party we have as many representatives from country electorates,
and the Labor Party has members from country electorates. And yet every one
of those representatives from a country electorate ( tape damaged) a unanimous
vote. The Senate is traditionally regarded as the custodian of the interests of the
States, and yet, here again I repeat, 45 out of 52 voted in support of this. So
you don't get much comfort out of that argument if you are a NO voter. Well,
then, without going through all the rest of them, let me just say a word about the
cost of all this. A great bogey is conjured up: " We've got enough Parliamentarians,
we don't want more. It's going to cost us more in taxes. Well, I gave a figure
in the House of Representatives the other night that the cost of the House of
Representatives and of the Senate taken together worked out at less than 40 cents
a year per head of the population as I put it just a little more than the price of
a packet of cigarettes. And the cost of an individual senator or member of the
House of Representatives and this includes his travelling expenses and matters
of that sort worked out at about J of one cent.
Now if we were going to increase members by about 12 or 14, the cost of
those extra members of the House of Representatives would be somewhere between
3 and 4 cents per head of population. I don't think that's going to represent too
much of a financial burden on anybody. A par in the " Melbourne Herald" on
Saturday night questioned my figure of 40 cents and said the figure was nearer
79 cents. Well, my information had been given to me by officials in my own
office having studied the Year Book which sets out the cost of Parliamentary
government. I went over it again myself today and I found the only way you could
build up the cost of the House and the Senate was by including furniture and
services and matters of that sort. So I threw those in too. The argument was
about additional members of Parliament, so you don't bring in the cost of the
extra salaries of Ministers and extra Ministerial travel because the argument is
not whether we have more Ministers we are not likely to have any more
Ministers even if the number of the House increases slightly. And even throwing
that in, it got up to a figure of the two Houses combined of under 50 cents or if you
like a year. So don't be frightened by that particular bogey. 6/ 
6.
Now, what I would like to say before I conclude and it does have a
reference to the Senate is a word or two about the course of conduct puvzsued
by the Senate in this last Session of Parliament. As you know we came back from
the last elections with a record majority, an all-time record majority in the House
of Representatives. If ever a Government was entitled to claim that the people
had given it authority, a mandate to govern, we could fairly claim that. And we
have set quite briskly about the business of putting into effect the policy undertakings
we gave at the election time. Several of them have already been given
effect and others are well advanced, but we are finding increasingly that the
composition of the Senate at present, in which you have the produce unfortunately
of two deaths of staunch Liberal Senators, a situation now where the Australian
Labor Party with the help either of an independent Senator, Senator Turnbull,
or one of our own Liberal Senators who decides to desert us on a particular
occasion in order to record a vote against us, or any one of that combination of
the ALP plus the DLP can defeat the Government in the Senate.
Now, the Senate was never designed for that course of conduct. It was
designed es a House of Review so that it could study in a more leisurely way
legislation coming up from the House of Representatives and send back suggestions
for the consideration of the House of Representatives. It was designed, in
addition, to see that the rights of the States were not trampled upon. But it was
never intended to act as a block upon the legislative process and the capacity to
govern of a democratically elected government. And I would never have assumed
that a Labor Party which is pledged to abolish the Senate, would turn to the
Senate, to use the Senate to defeat a democratic ally elected Government not
just on some monor matter or some clause in a Bill but to defeat the financial
programme of a government. Now I can say to his credit that this would never
have been acceptable to the former Labor Leader, Arthur Calwell. Nor do I
know any Labor leader in my time in Parliament who would have used the Senate
or his numbers in the Senate in this way. ii. hen I have heard Mr. W. hitlam speak
on occasion of the respective positions of the Senate and the House of
Representatives, it would have been difficult to imagine that he would have lent
himself as he has in recent times to this veto on the bill we put through in
relation to postal charges.
Now, we all know that increases in postal rates are urpopular. Of course
they are. No government likes to put up charges for the services it gives. But
if the wage bill is continuing to rise, and the Post Office is a very large user of
labour and cannot escape the extra costs which regular increases coming out of
the Arbitration Commission bring to its employees, then there has to be some
adjustment. In point of fact, over the period since 1959, when these charges were
last raised, consumer services have gone up on an average 22/ 0. In the Post
Office the increase proposed was in the order of 1570 to meet the growing costs
and to offset losses which were likely to accumulate. But the merits of the proposal
is another matter to argue and we as an elected government have to accept
responsibility for these decisions we take. What I'm putting to you now as a matter
of high principle is whether a government, democratically elected as oulshas
been, should be subjected to the resistance and the effective veto of a chance
majority from a hostile political force in the Senate. I believe that, if the Senate
pursues this course already, of course, it will have thrown out of balance our
Budgeting for the next financial year we will have to review the whole financial
position as a consequence of the denial to us of the extra revenue we believed to
have been needed. But it is set now on a collision course with the government and
with the House of Representatives, and is building up a constitutional issue of
major dimension between the two Houses. I would hope that inside our own Party
there is a clear appreciation that this is more than a piece of Party manoeuvring,
more than an attempt to score a political point or two. The Senate would appear
under the new Labor leadership to have set itself quite resolutely upon a course
which must inevitably bring it into collision with the House of Representatives and
with a democratically elected majority of record proportions. 7/ 
,4 7.
Now, how we deal with this in the future remains to be seen, but I hope
we shall have your sympathetic understanding in any action that we have to
take in relation to it.
Now, that took me rather longer, Lady Coles, than I had intended to
occupy you. Thank you for your very attentive hearing; thank you again
all of you for the support you continue to brin. to our Liberal Party, 



88J UN 196
VISIT TO U&amp; S, CANADA AND UK. L IBR W
LOS ANGELES, USA
EXTRACT FROM ' PEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. HAROLD HOLT TO THE LOS ANGELES WTORLD
AFFAIRS COUNCIL 31ST MAY, 1967
Bombing of North Viet Nam
The American and Australian positions are the same. In February, 1966
1 stated ( soon after the end of the thirty-seven day bombing pause)
" It has consistently been the view of the Australian Government
that North Vietnam must not be permitted to remain a haven
immune from military risk, from which military aggresssion
against the south can be mounted with impunity.
The case for controlled bombing is strong, and it has been conducted
with great care and precision. Reasons are
* It upsets the flow of men and materials to the fighting zones and
damages the transport systems through which that flow goes forward.
* It helps destroy the enemy's base areas, thereby weakening his
capacity to fight and so saving the lives of allied fighting men.
* It ties up hundreds of thousands of North Vietnamese workforce
in repair and reconstruction.
* It demonstrates to the fighting forces of South Vietnam that
America and her allies are giving them full support.
* It demonstrates to the people of South Vietnam as a whole that
we do not expect them to suffer and fight the aggressor only
where he chooses to fight.
* It has the political and psychological effect of reminding the
North Vietnamese that they cannot hope to win the war.
There are critics of these operations in your country and in mine.
Bombing is regarded as a horrible act of war that, in the name of humanity,
should be avoided at all costs. It is said to be militarily unnecessary and
without advantage. It is said that it is politically foolish, serving only to
strengthen determination in the North to continue the conflict and at the same
time making it difficult for the North to enter into negotiations for a peaceful
settlement. Sicce~ it is said, the North Vietnamese Government will not
negotiate under duress, it is feared that bombing might lead to the war spreading,
For example by provoking China, the neighbour and supporter of North Vietnam.
The United States Government has not accepted these arguments, nor
has the Australian Government. We have supported the bombing operations.
This is not to iay that we ignore the humanitarian aspects and are blind
to the political implications. But those involved in the stern endeavour to stop
Communist aggression from the North against the Republic of Vietnam, must
face the realities of the situation. In a violent conflict of this nature, when 2/ 
2.
force has to be resisted by force, these realities are harsh. The Communists
from the North have, for many years, sought to overthrow the Government of
the Republic of Vietnam by defeating its armies and by destroying all prospect
of orderly, constructive government.
You know their record of brutal terrorism among the village population
and of the endless guerilla attack. Not a day passes in which the Communists
do not bomb villages and towns in Couth Vietnam by mortar attack. These
mortars all come from the North. They have also organised in an increasing
degree conventional, full-scale military operations. All these things could
never have continued if supplies of equipment, arms and munitions and
reinforcements of trained men had not continually come from tne North. It
is the Communist Government in Hanoi, in the North, that is directing and
organising this unrelenting attack in the South.
It is the Communist Government in the North receiving supplies from'
Communist Russia and Communist China that is giving the support of this
material to Communist-led forces in the South.
In our view, in Australia, if this aggression is to be stopped, the source
of it cannot be immune from attack. We are dealing with a military situation.
Major military measures are being taken against those resisting this aggression
that can only be combatted by military measures. Is the opponent to be allowed
to organise and despatch his manpower and supplies unmolested. Are these
only to be dealt with when they finally arrive in the battlefields of the South,
intact and in good trim? This does not make sense. It can only prolong the
conflict. It exposes the soldiers in the allied armies, among them your men, who
are making the major contribution, to greater dangers. In the Australian view,
attacks in the North on the camps and depots of the aggressor, on his armmaking
capacity, on his roads and bridges, his railways and sea lanes cannot
be avoided if the aggressor's capacity in the South is to be reduced and the
conflict is to be brought to an end. To refrain fromthese measures is to aid
the aggressor in his attacks and to encourage him in the hope of victory.
Of course such a policy involves risks. It involves risks of escalation,
of involving the innocent civilian population, of narrowing the prospect of
peaceful settlement. But how much greater would these risks be if the necessary
military measures were taken in some other way than by bombing from the air.
It is not our view that a wholesale military attack should be launched against
the North, engulfing the entire country in the full horror of war. Surely
controlled bombing, limited to military targets, is the best way of sparing'
the population and avoiding wider risks.
We believe that the effective use of United States power must profoundly
affect the attitude of the rulers in North Vietnam. They must come to see that
they can have no prospect of success. We also believe that the restraint
exercised by the United States in the use of its massive power, while fulfilling
necessary military requirements, would have a beneficial influence in China for
the cause of peaceful co-existence. China is not threatened. Nor is China's
neighbour, North Vietnam. But week by week the cost and futility of aggression
are clearly demonstrated.
Suspension of Bombing
It is in the context of these considerations that we must judge the question
of suspending the bombing, a demand repeatedly raised especially among those
who overlook the basic military aspects of the situation. It would be foolish to 
4 3.
say that bombing should never be relaxed or suspended. Military
requirements alone will fromn time to time make a different tempo and
scale of operations desirable. -/ hat wve do know beyond argument is that
whenever there has been a suspension of military activity the other side
has taken full advantage of this to build up supplies of men and material
as rapidly as possible. But the political aspect can never be neglected.
Should the Communists be prepared in good faith to enter into negotiations,
there is a substantial case for suspension of bombing. In this case, the
Communists themselves must be assumed to be demonstrating their good
faith by a suspension, or at least a major relaxation of their own attacks.
But there are no signs that the Communists are interested in negotiation,
and in these circumstances military operations, including bombing, must
continue. lii ® ® 4ilie* 



VISIT TO C. 1' DA XiD UTT' . K
LOS YIEL3S, U. S. A.
ADDfLS BY THE PRIME 7 ITiER, P õ R. HRPfOLD HOLT
TO THiE L03 . f TLELO 1TRLD AFFI2R CTJUICIL 51ST MAY, 1967.
It is a very great personal pleasure for Mrs. Holt and
myself to be here in Los Angeles. I don't supnose there is an
area of the United States where we have more close personal
friends than we do in this city and my problem usually is to
find some giod official reason for coming here and renewing my
acquaintance with them. Thank you for providing at least one
occasion which is a notable one even in the eyes of my own
compatriots, ecause the 7orld Atfairs Council has a prestie
which has reached out well eyond the shor s of your own country,
and I regard it as an honour to have the opportunity of talking
to this repr sentative and very distinguished gathering of citizens
from the * est Coast of the United States of America.
It is perharns not inannropriate that I meet you on the
day following your celebration bf 1, emorial Day. e have in
Australia a somewhat similar comnmemoration on what le call our
Anzac Day that is the day which really marks the emergence
of nationiood for my country when in 1 15, April 25, tie Australian
and Nev Zealand forces landed on the shores of lallipoli and there
forged, in their comradeship together, the word Anzac which has
come to mean so much emotionally to us over the years, and each
year, or the anniversary of that day, we hold what is the most
solemn non-religious ouservance on any day of the ye'ar in our
country, and so I can well appnreciate the feelings which have been
passing through the minds of aillions of citizens of this great
epuolic as you have commemorated American p'articioation in struggles
for freedom down through the years of your history and at a time
when so many of your young manood is involved in the conflict in
Vietnam and in pre. erving the peace in other parts of the world.
I have always an interest and almost a fascination in
this city of Los Angeles and, indeed, of California -enerally
because in the ministerial career to which Mr. iHodgkiss has so
kindly made mention, I was for seven years Iinister of Immigration
in my own country and we haive, as you probaoly know, a vast land
mass approximately t; he same dimension as the United itates of
America if you will allow me to exclude ' laska and Hawaii. But of
metropolitan United State3 we have approximately the same dimension,
but we haven't more than 190 000,000 people we are just pushing
up to 12,0Q, OO000 people, Yet there was a time not so very lonT
ago before . orld * r II when the population of Californiat and The
population of Australia was the same we both had 7,000,000 people
and I used to be told, as Minister of Immigrition, that you coul't
increase the population effectively by more than aoout 2Y/ o per
annum that the load on resources and the proulems, social and
others created would make this impracticable for you.
As I looked across the Pacific to what going on in
this State of Cqlifornia I could see a very much more rapid _ rowth
rate occurrin, there and of course, you have fir outstrippe us.
You are now, understan approaching your 20th million in this / 2 
-2-
country, while we are still moving towards our 12th, having
started tolether at 7 not so very long ago. But you won't mind
my saying That it is a rather different pro7osition to build
population when you have to draw on so many other nationalities,
and there are today fourteen nationalities substantially
represented in the Australian community most of whom have come
to us in the post-war years. When you do not have, as you are so
fortunate to have in this countr, the vast resources of capital
on which to draw in order to ouil the community, and fortunately
for California, fortunately for the United States and, I oelieve,
fortunately for the free world, California has been able to take
advantage of the movement of people from other ] arts of America
and the resources of capital which you have here, the more ready
assimilability of your fellow countrymen into the California
environment. But having said that and acknowledied it with appreciation
and deep gratification, I wouldn't want you to think that, because
we are a people of less than 12 millions striving as best we can
to increase by assisted migration from so many countries that we
are not a significant country in the scheme oi thin's and certainly
that we lack significance in an area of the world which is becoming
increasingly vital for you. Let me just give you a few facts to
support what I am putting to you.
In the first place, we rank amongst the first twelve
trading nations in the world. India is regarded very properly as
a very considerable country, it has 42 times our population, but
it has only twice the value of our gross national product.
Indonesia is re arded as a very considerable country in our area
of the world. It has a populition of more than 100 millions, more
than nine times the population of Australia. It has only one-third
of the value of gross national production of my country.
Je have a very special relationship with the United States
and with the United Kingdom which makes us a good friend and ally
and a helpful friend in particular situations. You mentioned, &gt; x.
Hodkiss, the fact that I had recently been to four countries in
South-East Asia. One of these, Cambodia is a country which does
not enjoy diplomatic relations with the United 3tates. Those
relations were severed as you will know some time ago. But
Australia represents the United States' interests in Cambodia and
Australia represents C. mbodian interests in South Vietnam. So we
are able, in our own way, to serve a useful and helpful purpose
in preserving good relationships and in assisting the transactions
which necessarily must occur between one country and another.
I think I can fairly claim that there can be very few,
if any, Heads of Government that can be found around the world
today who would have been accepted in all of the four countries
which I have just visited. Some could have gone to one or two or
three of them but very few people who would, on the known policies
of those countries, and Cambodia would probbolv be the most difficult
of access, have been accepted in all four. Indeed there is a ban on
Western journalists in Cambodia but a plane load of pressmen
accompanied me on my journey an this ban was waived for that particular
visit. So Australia, not possessing any taint in the eyes of the
countries of . sia of having a colonial power nast, is accepted as a
friendly country. They know that we have hid to strugrle with the
problem of developing a vast continent, not all of it favoirable
in either its climate nor its terrain, but which has lent itself to
rich development thanks to the energy and courage of a pioneering
people. They have watched this and they welcome the guidance we
can jring to them. While it is fashionable in some intellectual
quarters to talk about the desirability of getting, to put it in / 3 
-3-
the crude terms they express, white faces off tue mainland of
Asia, all our experience and all the trends, or cattiinly
the more significant trends of contemporary history, are moving
in the other direction. -e are finding a desire t0 co-operate,
a desire to team together for mutually helpful purposes. I
have only to mention such recent institutions as ASPAC, the
Asian Development Bank, the sort of collaboration which occurs
in SEATO, the teamwork which was represented at the Summit
Conference at Manila as instances of the kind of thing I mean.
You have mentioned Mr. Chairman, that I shall be visiting the
United Kingdom to discuss British intentions regarding their
troop dispositions East of Suez, and I can assure you that,
knowing fully the mind of the Governments of Malaysia and
Singapore, they welcome our presence and the British military
presence on their territory as a factor contriouting to stability,
moderation and security in that area of the world. So you will gather
from these facts that this small country, measured in terms of
people but rich in potentil, with considerable agricultural
production ranking us amongst one of the great exporters of the
world, with fabulous mineral resources, the new discoveries of
which we are finding l. imost week by week with the kind of
influence we can exert through our friendship with your own
country, with ! reat Britain and the countries of the Commonwealth,
and the friendships we have develoned in Asia, Australia is able
to play a role which is not without significance for free people
and for the causes of freedom thro uhout the world today. .' e
haven't asked others to do the job for us.
It is true that we are linked with the United States in
the AIZUS Pact under which the United States, Australia and New
Zealand have agreed to come to the aid of each other in event of
aggression against one or the other, but we don't feel any sense
of eith: r condescension or inferiority in this because we have
played our own part in two . orld 7ars. It may interest some of
you of the younger generation who have perhaps not oeen made aware
of the fact, that Australia actually lost more man killed in the
First World Wir than did the United States. We were the first
alongside you in the struggle in Korea and we have been early with
you in the struggle in Vietnam, and there we are a great land
mass lying on your Pacific flank.
, e know that it would be against the security interests of
the United States ever to have Australia in unfriendly hands. For
our part, we are determined to do what we can to ensure that this
will not happen. Again it may interest you to know that not only
do we withhold from consumption for our own needs a higher percentage
of our gross national Product than any other country, with the
exception of Japan, an we need to do this for purposes of defence.
7e need to do it for the needs of our growing population.
You in California have had a very rapid rate of growth
and, I am sure, those who are in official positions here and have
to cope with the problems of rrowth know just what those stresses
can mean to a country, but taking the United States as a whole,
the annual growth rate in terms of population is not all that
fret. It is higher than in the United Kingdom. It is considerably
lower than it is in my own country and if you had to cope with t. 0
rate of population growth comparable with thit in Australia you
would find it necessary to construct an additional 500,000 homes
for your growing population with the schools the hospitals, the
trmsport ition systems, all the other capital facilities that a
growing population requires.
So we have on the one hand these pre.: sures on our resources / 4
r 
-4-
in order that we may grow is nation, we hive the obligation
which we cheerfully accepted to make a reasonaole contribution to the
joint defence efforts in the area and our proportion of gross
national product going into defence is greater than that of any
of the Western countries, with the exception of your own country and
of the United Kingdom. Je have not overlooked the obligations
we have in the field of civil aid outside our country, and again
it may interest you to oe told, seeing that we give our aid without
any strin s attached, no loans, all in the form of rrants or
technical assistance that per head of population, the civil
aid flowiny from Australia ranks third amongst the countries
of the world and is even higher than that pei head of the United
States or of the United Kingdom.
Now, let me say something about Vietnam in particular.
You mentioned the Middle East, Chairman. I don t claim to
be any considerable authority on that area of the world and
indeed, fr-nkly although I know it is occupying a reat deal
of attention and exercising a considerable amount of concern at
the present time, I don't myself see it developing as seriously
as some of the pundits would suggest. I don't oelieve for a
moment that any of the major powers want a Third iorld ' r and
it is my own celief, ner aps an optimistic one but it is a
jud-ment, that this flurry in the Middle East will settle down
in the course of time the ill-feeling uetween the Ara. ic
countries and Israel has been chronic ever since Israel has
struggled to establish a nation here under most difficult
circumstances and, for my part, I don't see it as becoming a
matter of glocal concern in the sense of global involvement,
but we have never from the word " go" been under nmy illusion or
delusion as to the . oriousness of the issue in Vietnam. Just
as we were the first to declare ourselves alongside you in Korea
when we saw this as a purposeful communist attempt to establish
domination over that area'of the world, and felt that if this
were allowed to go unchecked so this process would continue
down through the rest of South-East Asia and, indeed reach out
to other ' arts of Asia is well, so we hive seen the Vietnam
conflict in much the same terms from the outset.
This has been a much more complex and difficult business
than that which we faced with aritish and other Commonwealth forces
in what was then known as Mnalya, out there you had the challene
of communist guerrilla activity seeking to sauotage destroy and
subvert the community there, with a view to having finally communist
domination in that area of the world and it took us many long
years in a situation which ' as not nearly as complex as that we
Tace in Vietnam, where the numbers were very much smaller, but
we finally succeeded.
' hen I was over here last year I did make considerable
reference to the gains which had alrea y been achieved as a result
of the American contribution in South-East Asia and, in particular,
in Vietnam.
( Remainder of the transcript incomplete in parts).
There was a good deal of talk about a domino theory.....
argued the premise that, thanks to the American intervention and
the strength of American participation, we were seeing the domino
theory operate in reverse. ' e were seeing countries that were
formerly being threatened re-establish themselves social, economic
and political conditions, and we saw this in such countries as
Korea and Taiwan.
In the course of my own most recent journey I have had
an opportunity of seeing some of the. e things at first hand myself.
I have seen the improvement which has occurred in Malaysia since
we have overcome the communist threat there, and what h. s ooen 
happening in Thailand. Thailand, with suostantial American
assistance has set out to ouild up its strength aginst the
communist threat in that country and I would only wish that
the press which gives this episoaic treatment day by day of
what is going on in Vietnam, would occasionally point to the
substantial achievements which have resulted from your participation
in the struggle there the strength thit you have given to other
countries the rebuilding and the strenpthening which has gone on
as a result of your participation and then, indeed, of the
importance of the conflict there than is readily apprehended
by some meubers of our r.: spective communities,
I want to say something in very particular terms aoout
one aspect of the Vietnam operation, because I have noticed with
some concern that the bombing policy which has been carried out
very thoroughly by the United States has come under question
in various quarters. It has oven put, on the one hind, that if
we were only to cease the bomoing the negotiations for peace
would commence. Jell I know that your President wants peace
and he hasn't spared himself in the search for peace.
I can assure you that my own country is hankering for
peace. . e have a vast country to develop. Quite apart from the
loss to Australian life and l0b, the damige that is done, we
can ill spare the resources that go into the military operations
there and if a just and enduring peace could je secured by
nevotiation we will support every endeivour to secure this result,
but I have followed this as closely as any human being can. The
messages we hive received from all the sources where these
attempts have been made there hAve jeen well-meaning efforts on
the part of the Secret-ry-jeneral of the United Nations, there
have been well-meaning efforts on the parts of a numer of
countries including Canada and Italy. But there is no substantial
reason of which I am aware to believe that Hanoi is prepared to
enter into negotiations and to use the pretext that this would
happen if only the bombing would cease is runnin against all
the evidence that comes to us. Every time there as oeen a
lull in the bombin, this has been seized on with alacrity in
order to build up the supplies and strength of the other side
to the damage and to the detriment of our own cause. Now on
this the American and the Australian positions are, I believe,
identical. WSEGTIO3S liD ARS. ERS
Q. Do you think an embargo would De effective ag. inst North Vietnam?
Mr. Holt I think in suostance as far as we are concerned, there
is a trade embargo. There are other countries, of course, supplying
goods but that would involve a major decision as to either the
attack on the shipping in Hai Pong or the mining of Hai Pong. I
know this is a m~ tter which is exercising the minds of your own
administration a good deal. I prefer, since the decision does not
lie in my hands, but virtually in the hands of your own administration,
not to express a view which might be an embarrassment to them but
they have to allow th't in taking this action they might involve
to a very much greater degree, not only China but Russia, who is,
of course one of the principal suppliers of North Vietnam. Je have
made it clear that it is not our purpose to destroy Vietnam nor to
subjugate their country, but we do intend to press on with action
which will prevent the aggression and infiltration proceeding from
North Vietnam.
7ould you care to make a forecast on how you think the war will
end? Y'hat are the various steps involved?
P. M. I wish I knew how the conflict would end. It would, I hope
proceed from a will to negotiate and, apart from oeing an optimist
by temperament, I don't put that beyond the ran; e of possibility / 6 
-6-
in the not-too-remote future. I have had some contact nd
experience with the communist mentality. je hive seen this in
the 3erlin airlift, in the Cuoan crisis, in many examples in
contemporry history both in the internal field and certainly
in some of the domestic issues which have arisen inside countries
such as my own, where there has some of our
industrial organisations, and you have found . hat where there
seemsto be a complete impasse a brick wall created between you
and the opposing side, that it some point they make up their
own mind that the -ame is just not worth will
decide themselves The time to call it a day and I believe that
particularly over recent weeks when the gooA weather his
persisted in North Vietnam, must make the leaders ponder and
ask themselves where are we going to pet to if we persist
with this? They can't win the war on tie ground. They can
only go ahead taking punishment indefinitely. They might look
to the time when as in Malaya as the thing was, they could
carry on guerrilla operations, but the country as a whole would
be able to carry on is : alaya carried on despite this, and with
the punishment which is being inflicted industrially on the
country and prospects for future economic progress, apart from
the dama e which might be inflicted on the forces engaged in
the field and so on, I feel that the time must come when the
say this is when we negotiate. Now, for us and for you and
you in narticular because you have the large share of the burden
on this matter, it is not merely a matter of negotiation in order
to stop the agression, the fihting. There must be a settlement
which will stick. There must oe a just and enduring settlement
which will enable the people of South Vietnam to decide their
own destiny in their own way, and it is not to be peace at any
price much as we all lon Tor peace, jut when that time comes,
we will all Oe better equi-ped to know just how we should conduct
our negotiations.
0 .' ould you co; iment on the position of Ho Chi Min in his own
country? Is he a -eorge hington or a Benedict Arnold?
P. M. I think that that largely depends whether you are a communist
supporter or a supporter of a different system of government.
There is no doubt that he has enjoyed a strong support from those
who have been politic'lly inclined md accent the communist and
socialist way of life. In North Vietnam, as indeed in South Vietnam
and through much of South-East Asia, the greater part of the
population live off the land and do not look very far oeyond their
own particular area of cultivation and they have been accustomed
through the centuries to having one particular " ar Lord or one
dominant regime, usually extoring from them what can be extracted
and so there isn't the same individual and national conscience
thit we experience in c untries such as our own which have a
democratic libertarian tradition but I have seen the evidence
of an opposition building up to the Ho Chi Min regime. The
intelligence that we get out of North Vietnam is not very
considerable, but I would think that he still does exercise a
very considerable influence over his own administration and
over his country. It would be difficult to appreciate the effort
put into reconstruction after the damage that has occurred there
if this were not so. He is now of course, a very old man in terms
of normal public life. It may be that his successor will be no less
determined to push on the sort of policies that he has pursued.
I think it is fair to say that although there is a reat deal of
Chinese communist influence in North Vietnam the NIorth Vietnamese
don't want the Chinese there any more than the South Vietnamese . ant
the Chinese in South Vietnam, and if a negotiation could be conducted,
I think that a line of division and a course could oe established
whether it involves a movement as it did previously with people from
one area to another, in order thit those who wanted to live one
kind of life could go to a country offering that others who / 7 
-7-
v-inted the sort of life -:.-hich we hom ill develop in South
Vietrnm c iuld move there, but I don t think any o us ca-n
cla-im to be a-uthorities is to the thinking, or the state of public
opinion in 1' jth Vie tnaim at this time. 



FOR PRESS EMBARGO: Not for publication
or broadcast before
9 31st May, 1967
TIEXT OF SPEECH BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER AND 1 3 JUN 1967
MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY, ' S
MR. JOHN~ McEVTEN, SA
AT THE EXPORT DEVELOPIOTIET COUNCIL DINNEKR,
HOTEL CANBERRA, 31ST MfAY, 1967
I recall when E. D. C. was established in 1958 to advise
the Government on the expansion of our expnrt trade. The thought
in my mind, which had the support s~ f the Gcvernment, was to invite
a number of highly experienced, highly respected and highly
competent people from the commercial world to join with a few
similarly experienced officials of the Gove rnm ent Service.
It is fortunate for the country that those who were
invited to join what became known as the Export Development Council
readily accepted the call to serve the country and establish this
Council under the Chairmanship of the late Sir John Allison.
Now, nine years later, no one would query a claim that
it has been a most valuable adjunct both to government and to
business. The Council has been fortunate in its Chairmen. First,
Sir John, then the late Sir Alfred Armstrong, and now Dave McGrath.
As exports expand, benefits should flow to those who
invest in, and to those who work in, the export industries. This
is essential. However, on the establishment of this Council, the
basic motive in my mind was more profound than that.
The majf'r cbjective was to generate for the nation aexcha~ nge
bigger earning of foreign exchange. Adequate resources of foreign/
are an essential to national growth.
With my official advisers and my Cabinet colleagues, I
join in working for the fast growth of this country, a growth
built upon sound foundations. I see growth sound growth
providing a widening level of prosperity, an assurance ' qf job
availability, and with these the basis upon which a great and
continuing migration programme can be confidently embarked upon.
Earnings from export represent the most natural generation of
holdings of foreign currency. Without sufficient foreign exchange,
no great plans for national growth could be carried through. 
It was as a Council concerning itself with the earning of
more foreign exchange through export that the Council was seen as
essential to the grand plan of fast, sound, national growth. It has
a long record of devoted service and a long record of successful
achievement. While the political government of the country can, and
should, plan for growth, both the industrial growth itself and the
earning of foreign exchange through export is predominantly in the
field of private enterprise, not of government. So what we sought
to create was a sense of partnership, the reality of partnership
between the Government and its senior officials and those in private
enterprise who have brought their wealth of experience and knowledge
and imagination into the partnership.
To bring big business so closely into association with the
admiinistrative side of government, both at the political and at the
official level, is the perfect setting to facilitate log-rolling by
vested interests. From the outset we all understood that the Export
Development Council was never tn be a facility for the promotion of
private interests, individually or collectively, through contact with
the Government. There are many things in connection with this Council of
which we may all feel proad. High on the list of these things I
would put the fact that there has never been an instance of the
Council, its committees, or its individual members ever attempting
to influence the Government at any level for purposes of individual
profit. In view of the close association of so many people with
government at high level and with those in government whose policy
and administrative acts bear upon the profitability of business,
this is something of which you can be proud.
Impartiality has been the keynote of E. D. C's. advice.
This is quite a record. I am sure it will be sustained.
We have big dreams of growth. To make these dreams come
true, we have big practical requirements.
I remember saying when addressing an Export Convention
in 1960 that those competent to make the calculation had satisfied
me that Australia needed to lift its earnings through export to a
higher level of œ 250 million a year within the next five years. To
all who heard me quote this figure, or at least most who heard me,
the figure sounded dramatically high, but to many it sounded
ridiculously high. But, having estimated our need, government and
private enterprise went to work to step up our income. The end
result was that at the end of five years our export earnings had 
increased by an annual rate, not of œ 250 million a year, but a rate
of œ 500 million a year.
You would not wish me to say that all of this is
attributable to the work of the Exprt Development Council. Of
course it isn't. But the Council has a long record of identifying
the things that should be done, could be done, by government or by
business to improve our export record.
The Government has now for many years regularly invited
those whom you choose from amongst yur members to come to the
Cabinet room and give the Government ynur advice twice a year.
Policies that the Council has proposed have been adopted by the
Government and have to a large extent produced the results in
business which were forecast.
This leads me to say " Thank you"; and leads mc. furthr
to. say YOUR WORK IS NOT DONE.
Australia's need + o increase its foreign exchange arning....
is as great to--day as it has ever been. What you have donc is tn
prove that a group such as those who -ompose this Council can make
a very valuable contribution to the sound growth of the nation.
This, I believe, must produce a very satisfying feeling in all whn
have. served on E. D. C.
Dramati c things are happening these days in Australia in
the mineral fields,. Expansion of lead and zinc production, a moder".
industrial nation now self-aufficiont in copper and with a surplus
for export. The formerly depressed coal industry transformed into a
bright setting. New production of tin and the revelation of our
immense resources of bauxite, of iron ore, of natural gas, and now
of nickel; a new confidence in oil! These are splendid discoveries
and splendid developments.
Australians P. we a Lot to all cf those who have contributed.
There are those who believe that our problem of earning
sufficient foreign exchange need no longer bp a worry, that the
metals will solve it,, True, minerals will become much more imprrtant
foreign exchange earners. E. D. C's. estimate of Australia's oxpnrt
needs of $ 5,000 million by the mid-1970' s means an increase of
about $ 2,300 million over our current level f exports. Minerals
will fill only a part of this gap.
However, let me put this issue of foreign exchange earnings
in its proper perspective. Foreign exchange is a form of money. We
will not be a great ationL through merely being a rich nation. 
Our objective, if you rmnember, was fast, sound, national
growth. That is, millions more people, millions more jobs, hundreds
of thousands more factories and farms. The objective of earning
foreign exchange was not an end in itself. It was a means towards
making possible that kind of national growth.
As I see it, while the minerals are exported as such, or
upgraded into metals, we will undoubtedly earn much exchange, but
that alone will not create jobs by the hundreds of thousands or
great industry. The kind of industries that you have been concerning
yourselves with to a large extent, the farm industries, the manufacturing
industries, will continue to provide the greatest basis for
wealth production. Alcng with the tertiary industries, they will
alsn prmvide the basis for job creation.
Let us salute the -owth of the minerals industries, but
not take this devel] npment as grounds for sitting back.
I have spoken on othor -' ccasirns our option to choose
the comfort of stagnation. For my part, and I am sure for ynur part,
we would all prefer to sufi the discomfort of growing pains, so
that we may leave a nation greater and stronger than wher' we found
it. I give you the Toast
" THE SPIRIT OF SERVICE TO THE NATION"
-o0o-



TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE ACTING PRIME MrINISTER AND
-AINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY, MR. J. McEWEN,
AT THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON,
CANBERRA, 1st JUNE, 1967
Index Foreign Exchange Vital
The Kennedy Round
Wheat Other Products
Gains and Losses
Questions Page 
TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER
FOR TRADE AND INDU . MSRT L JHNMW70
NAT ION AL PRESSWCLUB LUN RE ON2 CgAN BERRA
I am just back from the Kennedy Round discussions
and negotiations and these will represent the subject matter to
which I address myself today. These were interesting and important
in themselves but with possibilities and repercussions that not
everyone quite realises.
I thought that before I turn to speak to you of some
of the facts and aspects of the Kennedy Round, I might make a few
general observations of our trading circumstances that would bring
the Kennedy Round and he possibility of Britain joining the
Common Market into what I believe to be the correct perspective of
importance. FOREIGN EXCHANGE VITAL
Australia s a major trading nation. For us our balance
of payments are of tremendous importance to our economic growth.
Over the last 10 years our growth in Australia has
meant we have been geared to import requirements of about 13% of
our gross national product -a quite u~ nusually high percentage of
imports. In terms of current prices this means imports valued
at just over $ 2,800 million, to which must be added a bill for the
so-called invisible items such as freight, dividends, royalties, etc.
now in excess of a further $ 1,400 million.
We cannot develop without earning foreign exchange to
pay for these imports and essential services which are basic to
our development and which now are running at the combined level of
., s4,2OO mil. In 1965/ 66 exports and other invisible earnings
provided almost 80% of our foreign exchange requirements. The
rest came from the essential element of capital inflow Government
borrowings and private capital flowing in.
However, experience has shown this capital inflow to
be a fairly unpredictable element in our growth requirements. For
example, in 1965/ 66 we had a high level of capital inflow amounting
to $ 938 mil. whereas THIS YEAR we look like receiving ONLY HALF
this amount.\ 
Growth we must have and indeed growth we will have.
iff we are to achieve something approaching a
growth rate on average between now and the mid-1970' s, it is
reasonable to expect that expenditure on imports alone to meet
the demands of this growth could well be of the order of $ 4,700 mil.
compared with $ 2,800 mil. in 1965/ 66. This means that we can
contemplate a rise of exchange to pay for imports of 6% each year.
Allowing for capital inflow at a reasonable level,
by the mid-1970' s exports will need to be earning $ 5,000 mil. a
year to cover their share of our overall foreign exchange requirements.
I recount these figures to place in its proper
perspective the importance of the role of export earnings.
As a nation we will grow in strength, or we will
wither according to the adequacy of our export earnings. It is
against this that I propose with you to have a look at the
Kennedy Round.
THE KIENNEDY ROUND The basic aim of the Kennedy Roundwas to obtain a
significant reduction of trade barrier-s by wqy of an across-theboard
cut in tar-iffs and concurrently a reduction in non-tariff
barriers. Australia's tariff making policy with the Tariff
Board is designed to give sufficient protection to Austrialian
industries, but the whole concept of the Tariff Board is not less
importantly to avoid giving excess protection to our industries,
Clearly a proposal to cut all our protective tariffs
by 50% is a proposal that ould be completely destructive of the
Australian economy and entirely unacceptable.
So at the first Ministerial meeting of the Kennedy
Round in 1963 I had a fierce and long battle at Geneva to have
Australia absolved from the 50% cut and to have it accepted that
Australia should pay in tariff reductions only that which would
equitably reflect the advantages gained in the dismantling of nontariff
barriers to our major exports.
For the first time in negotiations in G. A. T. T. we
had the prospect of meagingful negotiations on the bulk commoditieswheat
and the coarse grains, meat, butter and cheese where the
tariff is of relatively minor importance. The real barriers here
are devices such as quotas and variable levies.
These were the objecl'-ives and opportunities presented
by the Kennedy Round. How does the outcome measure up? 
A -i -: comont ñ li n. be es,: e wvith-f I rIa
. a CC u a C. QiLg thle asic ciemcntaS of Ogemewre rrece
in th,: niLdI css. i oni waih ded on M~ ay 1 6th; iL will be some
w'? ks etbefoz-e the actual 0* KCcohlnsoo esziofs will be
f rJ. aLis e d It %, ril] e -en latcy' ho&amp; t.-iey al,? publ. ished,
. YLOJ", dmn
K ? gi; 7c~ Lr:! wee -ie rn&amp;) t v:. ce Lrnd he: sive ever
unerak,.-ii. A2. r-ot 50 co~'' m: c rizg _, or ab~ t80 of
wvorld tx-. ade acp d
L. esot. ce c: 1.4rff CU3averag-ing
~ bIt3% or, ao atd L0io 0n1 3.. r~ tep eC -t.
Tn n-rb.. dyl CDprg CDr .11
n~ wc2 . n -1 j-Cf&gt;, r-o j' Io L cen gl f
1, C, u Ir. 1 1 Y, . icl h
Cr,-P .0,. 2/ 10i1n 9\ 7 ab ~ F:, icd an. E;
thee a S~~ i
II&gt; 3 C. 3il0S''. O r&gt; h2tf. C -Ina4 if the
i~ more id2 Sfd uo a C. ri' : ccitlsoeJ lrf was profitable
&gt; j: nd a t Sa:. e rii rs 1' e u a ale-s v/ oal2d be at
hig9her -p irL as tu-he e i -I. Prt era w . JLJJd, Lecrn committin g
LtI. ems el' uo s Ko a~ n a -erno. n i-L rit e uicc:--whi: ch oive:'-a
2. ri od wculd, lhove Dek-tiro Ic e~ c-i: vpoi t ab I~-
TheTr, m ig'n Lc e 4 il. s hrigher ' L-r~ p2 a-ct'-ual
mia rk et-V p r-; c -s j. r 19 6' 1! 0 cr d i 1~ 56 4./" G-5 ct prices ca be
expected to flutute L abCve -the. new : ni' pun ch as the . y have done
during the cuircncy of er: x ar~' lnS
aC. Ce0 2 ' age le vzl-&gt; 2c;-uarkc--; pri-, es -brov. e the
midnimum cunnot, of coir--e', L c4: TCfo., cas--9u'ft there can
be no doubt-th;-at the S-4-Zn7 iCYeIj. : ~ i. h ivr.~ ap. L 
But there can be no doubt that the substantial increase in the
minimum price should move average market prices much nearer to
remunerative levels than in the past.
One aspect of the new agreement which makes it
better than the old agreement is that minimum prices have now been
prescribed for a wide range of different wheats.
. This will ensure that floor prices are much more
effective than in the previous agreements, where the minimum price
applied only to the highest quality wheat traded leaving great
scope for fluctuations of the discount differential for all
other wheats. In the judgment of some experts at Geneva, and
they were there from the exporting countries and the importing
countries, the increase in the average commerfial price of wheat
expected to result from the higher floor price should be, these
experts say, as muzch as 8 to 16 US cents per bushel.
If this is the case, the gain to Australia in
foreign exchange from an export of, say, 300 million bushels, a
year, and thats about the average of the last three years, would
be from $ US 24 million a year to $ US 48 million a year.
In addition we have obtained for the first time,
the commitment of affluent importing countries such as the United
Kingdom, Japan and the European Economic Community to accept
joint responsibilitity for providing food aid to the developing
countries. Australia has in practice extended its food aid in
the form of wheat. She now accepts with the other countires a
contractual commitment to provide wheat as food aid to the
extent of 225,000 tons a year in a total programme of 4-J metric
tons a year. 
In these various respects our export trade will be
more profitable,. our access to markets more secure. Affluent
countries will share with us the cost of wheat aid to the needy,
and in general our competitive position in world markets has
been preserved and improved.
OTHER PRODUCTS The whole thing is not ruled off yet but the
United States, for domestic reasons, is under compulsion to conclude
its negotiations to a very strict timetable. Other countries
are not under exactly the same pressure. For this reason our
negotiations with certain important other countries are not yet
quite finalised. In the case of some of these countries we are
confident that satisfactory arrangements covering a variety of
products will be successfully concluded but these cannot be
described at this stage as finalised.
On 1 -Pfm r-' nd veal we expect to finalise arrangements
which will improve our access to important markets such as the
Euro pean Economic Community and Japan.
Our industry will benefit not only from greater and
more predictable access to these markets but the new airangements
will reduce th4 possibility of having to divert meat -to some
other markets such as the United Kingdom and the U. S. A.
Important negotiations are still going on with the
European Economic Commnity, On beef and veal the E. E. C. has
declared its willingness to reduce -the Community tarifi' from
to 16%; but more importantly than that, over 5 months of the
year, to permit imports free of the import levy which might otherwise
have been imposed during that period, and which can make pale
into insignificance the cut in duties. 
This concession should really open up the Common
Market for Australian frozen beef and veal in our peak selling
season. Also there are a number of other products such as
honey, beef offals and tallow where there will be reduced tariffs
on Australian exports to the EEC, which is a most important market
for these products. In the case of Japan discussions have taken place in
the hope of securing improved access to that market. The results
of these discussions have been quite encouraging. The present
duty on sheep meats and beef offals will also be reduced.
Out of this I see these negotiations as having opened
up a much better, and quite worthwhile opportunity for expansion
in the export of all our meat products to Japan.
We also have from Japan an undertaking that some of
our most important exports to Japan wool, coal, iron ore and
hides and skins are to be assured duty free entry in the future.
In a number of other markets important for
particular products we also expect to make gains apples and
pears into Swe( den and Denmark, reduced duties on wool and zinc
ores into Norway and many others. The full extent of such
concessions cannot yet be catalogued.
We launched a campaign in 1961 to develop an export
consciousness amongst manufacturers.
Since then there has been an annual increase in the
export of manufactured goods of about 20% per annum. The current
rate of export of manufactured goods is more than double what it
was 5 years ago. Our manufactured exports will consequent upon the
Kennedy Round, benefit from the tariff cuts agreed amongst the
large industrialised countries. The concept is that concessions
given to one are given to all. 
On the other hand, and as a result of the negotiations,
some of our preferences in markets such as the United Kingdom and
Canada will be affected.
GAINS AND LOSSES There have been gains and losses for Australia as a
result of the Kennedy Round,
In the case of the United Kingdom we face the
prospect of a cut of in our present preferences on raisins,
sultanas and currants, canned peaches, canned apricots ( but not
canned pears) canned pineapples, unmilled rice and leather, and
perhaps some other less important items.
This is the outcome of the United Kingdom from the
outset offering a 50% cut in all her tariffs. It didn't eventuate
but their position never altered in respect of the items I just
mentioned. The original objectives of the Kennedy Round have not
been fully achieved. There was no success in the attempt to write
a world agreement on dairy products. However, the significant
importers of the major dairy product, butter, are so few in
num~ ber that the door is not closed against bilateral discussions on
this item. Sugar is one of cur great export items, but
-practically every sugar exporting country is a developing country.
These countries have decided to negotiate a Sugar Agreement within
the organisation of not within the organisation of
G. A. T. T. So it was never a matter up for negotiation in the
Kennedy Round. However, there will be a world sugar conference, under
the auspices of U. N. C. T. A. D. later this year.
At this stage we have not secured anything on wool
in the United States market. 
Overall, there is no doubt the net results of the
Kennedy Round will have been generally beneficial to Australia and
to the world at large.
When our gains have been evaluated we will be making
payments from selected items in our tariff. Let me describe this,
such payment on our part will have been made without in any way
undermining necessary protection of our domestic industries.
Over quite a major part of Australian imports, the
tariff to date has been free for British Preferential imports with a
nominal non-protective Most Favoured Nation duty on imports from
other sources. These m. f. n. duties wilibe eliminated over quite a
wide range of products, as our preferences in Britain have been
halved over a number of products. In addition some protective
tariffs have been reduced, will be reduced, where the Tariff Board,
being asked has found that a reduction in t~ e m. f. n. rate of duty
was justified. For some other items, there will be a reduction in the
margin between the British Prefcorontial Tariff and the m. f. n. tariff,
again without impairing the protection for Australian industry.
These are the types of concessions which Australia
is making, and with which we will pay for the advantages we have
gained. Of course, until the negotiations are complete the
individual concessions on offer cannot be revealed.
So much for the Kennedy Round. 
Time, I think, does not permit me to go, in detail, into
a discussion of what may occur as a result of Britain's application
to join the Common Market, but you have a question time. But let
me say this, in respect of Britain's application to join the
Common Market. Before she made the earlier application she went into
close consaltation with the Common Market countries, describing the
circumstances of her trading contractual commitments to countries
like Australia. Jointly they looked at what would be the effect of Britain
joining under the Treaty of Rome and what, if anything, could be done
to ameliorate the impact upon countries like Australia.
Out of that examination in 1962 Britain and the European
Co~ mmunity issued a statement that, if Britain should join, then for
the major items of world commodity trade world agreements would have
to be relied upon to safeguard the interests of those who had
hitherto depended on the historic terms of access to the British
market world commodity agreements.
The fact that in Geneva it was not possible to achieve
world commodity agreements on other than wheat leaves me with' little
confidence that we could rely upon the early conclusion of worthwhile
world commodity agreements as an alternative to our present
marketing arrangements in Britain.
All thinking Australians will follow developments in
Europe closely over the next few months. It's still too early
to say whether the British application will succeed. But we have
been served notice as a nation not to rest on our laurels nor to
rely too heavily on existing marketing arrangements With Britain.
These recent events must act as a spur to Australia
to-seek out new markets as a hedge against the future. The 
Commonwealth Government will do all in its power, and the Trade
Department as its instrument, to assist, but ultimately success
will depend on the initiative of individual industries and
individual traders.
What I've been seeking to say is that, with our dreams
of expansion that we have and the actuality of our fast growth,
there is one essential ingredient to growth, and that is command
of adequate resources of foreign exchange. And that, given the
most favourable circumstances of raising exchange other than by
selling goods at export, you still depend to the extent of
for your requirements on the sale of exports, the sale of export
goods. We must be efficient at home, we must be active at
home; but above all, we must have the right to sell. The days
were when one produced. something one could take it out and sell
it at best. To-day the world is full of countries who say, no,
we won't receive that item at all, we won't receive this item
without something like 100% tariff, we won't receive that item
except to the extent that we can't produce it at any old cost
ourselves. What we've been trying to do is to negotiate a way
through the totality of these obstructions to our opportunity
to earn the wherewithal to pay for the growth that we all insist
on having. We've had a bruise or two in this in the items that
I have mentioned, but over-all there are distinct, identifiable
gains for Australia and a new level of predictability in our
trading opportunities for the future.
-oOo-
QUESTIONS: Mr. Wood: Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can give us some
specific idea of the size and composition of the parcel of industrial
tariff cuts we' re offering Japan. And could you also comment
further on the proposed review of the U. K./ Australia trade treaty
which you mentioned on Friday?
Mr. McEwen: Well, in the nature of things, first of all let me say
whatever is offered to one country, if accepted, becomes agailable to
all. This is the essence of the thing. But to indicate that we've
offered to reduce a duty on an item would be completely dislocating
to normal trading. Th'is is one of the trade secrets. It's never
done.
Mr. Samuel: Mr. McEwen, you referred to the silliness of other
countries producing things at any old cost with tariffs of 100%.
I wonder if you've had time to look at the speech of Mr. Rattigan,
the Chairman of the Tariff Board. He referred rather critically in
many ways to the traditional appraach of both the Government and the
Board itself to tariff matters. One of the things he suggested was
that industries which were very high cost and required very high
tariff protection should be encouraged to phase out their production
over a period of time. I wonder if you've any comments on that?
Mr. McEwen; Well, now, you expect accuracy from me and I expect
it from you. I referred to the " silliness" of other countries
doing this? I did no such thing. I referred to the fact of it,
and it is a fact. I haven't read Mir. Rattigan's speech, but Mr.
Rattigan is the Chairman of the Tariff Board, a man whom I have
immense respect for. He was the Deputy Secretary of the Department
of Trade and we're personal friends. He expresses his views. If
he were expressing a proposal to the Government I'm sure he would
address himself to me. He's not done so. When Mr. Rattigan
addresses himself to me, when the Tariff Board addresses itself to
me, then I'll take this up and study it quite carefully. But 
the position is that we make no tariff alterations in this country
except on the advice of the Tariff Board, and the occasions when we
don't act completely in accordance with the advice of th.; Tariff
Board are very few indeed. And when we do depart from thie advice of
the Taiiff Board we explain why we departed from the advi. ce. I don't
know wy other country on earth which doesn't alter its , ariffs
exnept by having a public inquiry in which all interested parties
in its own country are free to go and give evidence in favour or
agairst, and in which every foreigner in the world who thinks he's
interested is equally free to go along and give his evidence.
Australian tariff-making is as clean and as open as anywhere on
earth. And the Government acts on the advice of this body,
or acts with the advioe, and
mostly upon the advice of this Body. If the Tariff Board, or Mr.
Rattigan as its Chairman, felt that there was aneed for us to
depart in our policy-making, I'm sure they would suggest it to ma.
If they thought there was a need for a review of some existing tariffs,
I'm sure they would suggest it to me. This has not been done.
If, on the other hand, there are interested parties in Australia
who feel that some tariff is too high and that it ought to be
reviewed, they are equally free to make a request to me to have a
Tariff Board hearing not for the purpose which is normal, to
consider whether the tariff ought to be increased, but for the
purpose important to them in the contingency I speak of, of
examining whether the tariff should be reduced. There's nothing
that isn't wide out in the open of what is done in tariff-making.
Therc's nothing in our tariff-making that doesn't preserve entire
opportunity for the Tariff Board and all the interested parties to
make proposals to the Government and when a hearing is on for all
foreigners to go to the Tariff Board and make their proposals,
Mr. Catmull: Sir, what do you feel Britain's chances are of
succeeding in its application to join the Common Market? 
11.
Mr. MoEwen: Quite frankly, I'm completely incompetent to answer
that question. I don't know.
Mr. Wood: Sir, as a follow-up to the question just before that
one, you say the Board has to get its reference from you,
could you give us some idea of when you'll be meeting the Tariff
Board, and are you still considering the idea of part-time Board
members?
Mr. McEwen: Just before I was going overseas Mr. Rattigan got in
touch with me and suggested to me that, in the opinion of himself
and the Board, it would be useful if we had a meeting I think
he used the word " informal", and I think, over a luncheon. I
instantly agreed to that. This will be when it comes off, my third
meeting with the Tariff Board in eleven years, so I don't stand
over them very much.
As to the question of part-time Board members, I made
a statement in Parliament explaining what prompted me to canvass
this thought and to consult, as I've always done is my ministerial
career, people who had an interested view on this kind of thing.
There was not much support for it, and that might be overstating it.
But whether as a result or not, I don't know, but I had at about
that time a letter from Mr. Rattigan explaining to me in convincing
terms that there were now circumstances in which the Board would be
in the future able to deal more expeditiously, have a greater
throughput of work, than had been the history over the recent
several years. And I accept this as a correct judgment. I think
that probably disposes of the matter.
Mr. Connors: Mr. Minister, Russia, who is a major member of the
International Wheat Agreement, was not present at the G. A. T. T. for
any of the current negotiations. Russia has been a major importer
in the past, and I believe, according to a B. A. E. report, that
she may be an exporter around 1970 or something like that. I was
wondering has Russia given any indication that she is agreeable to
what was negotiated at Geneva? 
12
Mr. MoEwen: No, I'm not aware of Russia indicating this at all.
What was agreed at Geneva is not fulfilled yet. There needs to be
legislation or the approval of~ Governments in all the countries: who
are concerned. I've no doubt this will occur. When this is done,
then I would imagine it may be fruitful at that point of time to
sound the Russian reaction, but Russia has never been a disruptive
influence in recent years as an exporter of wheat and the Agreement
itself commits all the traditional exporters of wheat to not sell
below the prescribed minimum, and I don-It think that Russia will be
a dislocating factor in the scheme.
Mr. WNood: Another one, Mr. McEwen. Do you have any specific
evidence, historic or otherwise, to support your contention that a
rise in the minimum price for wheat will lead to a rise in the
world price?
Mr. McEwen: Only what I mentioned. That is, that over the wh~ le
history of minimum price, sales have been more often than not above
the prescribed minimum price. P7irst point. The second point T
said and this is not my own judgment but the judgment of the
people who are engaged in their life in wheat transactions who were
there as advisers to the delegations, to every important delegation
at Geneva, the Americans, the Canadians, the Australians, Argentina,
the delegations of all the major importing countries in each
case it was accepted that the new and higher minimum price would
lead to a higher general commercial level. There were various
views. I know of no view expressed that the commercial level could
be expected to be less than 7ff cents above the prescribed minimum.
I tended to round that off in my speech to 8 cents. Others ventured
an opinion, 16 cents and one who spoke with considerable authority
said he though it would be 20 cents above. This is nct my view.
I can only Taote to you, and that's all I sought to do in my
speech, the expressed views of experts. 
Mr. Baudino: Mr. McEwen, if I could just changre the topic. In the
past you have been a critic of the principle of " one vote, one
value" in Australia. Redistribution has reared again at the
moment. Do you still subscribe to this?
Mr. McEvqen; Well, first of all I have never been a critic of the
principle of " one vote, one value". I have been a defender of the law
which has stood since 1900, 19012 which this is on the subject
you're mentioning, I'm sure stipulates that in electorates I
can't bring to my mind the description, but you'll know what I'm
talking about and its's there in the Law electorates where there
are vast areas, sparse population, population of different interests,
that the Electoral Commissioner shall have the right in proposing
boundaries to propose boundaries which would result in a differential
in numbers 20% above the mean or 20% below the mean. If this has
been a good law in this country for 60-odd years I've defended it.
I still think it's a gooa law. Was there another part of your
question that escaped me? No.
Mr. Hutchinson: I might intervene one on the same question, Sir.
Do you think that the difficulties of redistribution posed by the
fact that, as a result of the referendum, the Constitution will not
be amended and therefore the Parliament cannot be enlarged, do you
think those difficulties are surmountable?
Mr. Mcawen: I don't think there have ever been any difficulties
about redistribution. There was a challenge by me and my Party to
a particular proposal, which, let me remind you in one aspoct,
would have taken the State of Western Australia where for many
years the Country Party has provided about half the Government
and the Deputy Premier, and is very strong; a redistribution proposal
that would have drawn lines impossible for my Party to win one
seat in Western Australia, and by general agreement impossible for
the Labor Party to win more than one seat in Western Australia.
And the State of Western Australia, which is a third area of
Australia, to have its nine Members reduced to eight. This'll do
me for an illustration of what I objected to in that proposal, 
14.
which was thrown out. But from the day that it was thrown out
I have believed that there was no reason why the Government
shouldn't have gone ahead next day and reappointed Electoral
Coinmissiooiers to make a new proposal. How long ago's that? I
don't remember, but it's a good few years. : 62? 1 think in ' 62
we could have had a redistribution, and in ' 67, before the
referendum or after the referendum, we can have a redistribution,
and we ought to.
Mr. Hurst: Mr. McEwen, in your absence abroad your Government
has had its troubles in the Senate. Could you give us your
personal view on this? Do you think there's any, there is a case
for changing the Senate, or do you feel that it should be abolished?
Mr. McEwenj: Oh, look here now, be your age. No comment.
Mr. Long: Sir, when you were oerseas did you have qn opportunity
to discuss with anyone the idea of the proposed Industry Development
Corporation, and, if so, what was their reaction to this?
Mr. MoEwen: Nlo, I'm afraid the simple answer is that I did not have
an opportunity, or didn't seek an opportunity, to discuss this.
I had a pretty big job on my hand and I concentrated on that. 



VISIT TO US, CANADA AND UK
WASHINGTON, USA
EXCHANGE OF TOASTS BETVWEEN PRESIDENT J OHNSON AND
PRIME MINISTER HAROLD HOLT OF AUSTRALIA IN THE STATE
DININGROOM OF THE VHITE HOUSE 1ST JUNE, 1967
PRI SIDENT JOHNSON Prime Minister and Mrs. Holt, members of the
Cabinet, members of the Diplomatic Corps, members of Congress, members
of the Press, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Tonight we are fortunate to celebrate not one, but three very welcome
visitors the Australian Prime Minister and his lady, and the first day of June.
They make a very warm and happy combination. The Prime Minister and I
have spent a very fruitful day with each other. We have been doing what comes
naturally to each of us talking. Now, this evening, we have joined you at the
table, if only to demonstrate a first law of politics man does not live by words
alone. Prime Minister Holt, you and your gracious lady make this house a
very happy one tonight. After dinner, we hope to repay you with some
entertainment down the hall in the East Room. I think you will feel at home
there. It is the room where we Americans indulge in something very close to
an Australian blood sport but here in America, we call it a press conference.
On those occasions, Mr. Prime Mdinister, I am often reminded of you for another
reason. There always seems to be a boomerang loose in the East Room.
So that is one privaie bond between us. It gives personal strength to
the public ties that unite our two peoples. History already records our affection
and our trust and the partnership and alliances they invigorate. It will some
day record what the casual, the cynical, the doubting, the short-sighted, or the
impatiently critical may miss. That is our shared success in helping to build
a secure, stable, and prosperous new part of the world the new Asia.
The nations of free Asia many of them new to independence have already
turned a corner. They are determined that aggression will not turn them back
and, Mr. Prime Mlinister, so are we.
This climate of hope owes a great deal to an Australia that offers
Asia an example of what freedom can mean. The free Asian need only look
south to see his tomorrow. He will see an Australian Government, led and
directed by a competent management, elected by the people, and devoted to
the people's interests. He will see the free and vigorous Australian people
-whose living standards are amon--the highest in the world who share widely
intheir nation's wealth who hardly know any poverty at all and who are
virtually each and every one of them employed who have the highest rate of
home ownership to be found anywhere in the world.
All Asia can see hope when they look at this happy land a land where
government and private industry put the fruits of the earth to increasing good
use for all, with the help of Ed Clark. As the Ambassador said to me for the
last 13 days awaiting your arrival, ' Let us all look to tomorrow and when we
look to tomorrow, let us look to Australia.'
Let us honour the shining record and the promise of our good friends
and our good partners the Australians. Ton~ ight, to those few we could crowd
into this room and this is one dinner where we didn't get any rejections I
ask each of you to toast one of their bravest and one of their best the Prime
Minister of Australia. 2/ 
7-2.
PRIME MINISTER HOLT Mr President, Mrs Johnson, members of the
Cong ress, the Cabin-et, the Diplomatic Corps, the judiciary, all the other
many distinguished people who are here tonight.
I am, of course, gravely handicapped by the fact that there has been a
misfunction in this particular instrument. So the President either by accident
or design has assured that I shall be speaking to you off the cuff. Frankly, I
prefer it that way because when one speaks that way, one speaks from the heart.
Tonight, my heart is very full. It is a great honor to the Australian people; it
is a great honor to the Australian Prime Minister and his wife, and to his
government to have a function tendered to him in this fashion and to hear as
I have heard tonight the moving words which have come from the President
of the most powerful, the mightiest, richest, strongest nation in the world.
So I say ' Thank you, Mr. President as President of the United States.
May I say thank you also to Lyndon Johnson and Mrs Johnson our warm
and very dear friends. I feel that the friendship which has long existed, cemented
in the comradeship of struggle in order to help others to achieve the liberties
and the freedom towhich we all aspire that has developed between our two
countries has been warmed by the growth of this friendship which has
developed between Mr. and Mrs. Johnson and Mr. and Mrs. Holt. Long may it
continue long after both of us have left the offices which we at present enjoy.
Vie are honored by the presence of you all. I was impressed by the
distinguished names that came before me as we received you together with the
President and Mrs. Johnson in the receiving line this evening. I thought, how
many Heads of Government could come to a-function such as this and find
themselves among so many friends close friends some old friends, and
some new friends. I don't know any people who make their friendships more'
quickly and abide more deeply than the friendships that develop between the
people of America and the people of Australia.
You have kindly included in the record of music, which we delighted
in this evenin-Y, the Australian tune some people have tried to make a
national anthem out of it ' Waltzing Matilda'. WNell, it hardly rates that. But
at least no Australian can hear ' Waltzing Matilda' without a beating of the
heart and a quickening of the pulse. And Mrs. Hammerstein, who has almost
been assimilated by you, stirred as that number came up.
Now, M~ r. President, earlier today, we had this exchange of words
to which you refer. I must acknowledge my gratitude and indebtedness to you
for the very valuable talk we had together, and for the talks I had later with
your distinguished and most able secretaries, Mr. Dean Rusk and Mr. Robert
McNamara. The unfortunate thing about all this is we can't say a great deal
about it. That, of course, is a large part of the value of these discussions.
They are intimate discussions. reveal to each other what we think, what
we know, in a way which could not be publicly disclosed without some difficulty or
disadvantage in one direction or another. But it has its problems. The press,
of course those people that meet you in this other room here Md prove
difficult to you in my own country, they prove difficult to me are always
anxious to know what it is we have had to say to each other.
I recall it particularly, because you may recall that on the last time
we met in this room, you had in the course of your speech a few words of
verse. I found it a bit hard to draw on my limited repetoire at the time to come
back with something that seemed appropriate. I was delighted to find that
tonight you hadn't extended me even further by some fresh presentation of some
classic tract from the beauties of English literature. But this was taken up by
a cartoonist in my country perhaps struck by the fact that not much came out
of our public communications and he drew a very graphic cartoon of yourself
and myself under which he had me making this statement " We had a frank
exchange of poems". .3/ 
1 did come along tonight prepared in case you did slip one out quickly.
It was three lines from, I think, ' Julius Caesar' by Shakespeare. I think it is
relevant to our respective problems.
' On such a full sea are we now afloat; and
We must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.
That sums up, I think, Mr. President, where you and my country stand in
relation to one of the most significant conflicts of modern history, a conflict
in Vietnam, which to my mind, overshadows in significance even the topical
and troublesome conflict which you see flaring up in the Middle East.
The conflict in Vietnam is fundamental to the future of free men. It
is a fine thing, that in the history of mankind, three Presidents of the United
States from different branches of the politics of the United States a
Republic President and two Democrats have seen that this was an issue
between men to be free or men to be slaves.
You are fighting the battle for men to be free. You, Mr. President,
I believe will go down in history not because you took up that struggle which
had been so clearly perceived by President Eisenhower and by President Kennedy,
but because more clearly than any other leader of the European race, you
have seen the Asia of tomorrow, the burgeoning, blossoming Asia of a new era,
that you have seen and I believe I have seen for my country as I moved about
it perhaps more than any other Head of Government not of Asian race himself.
The last time we were here, we talked of this together and you said
many things which were significant to the future, I believe, of mankind. Since
then, I have had the opportunity to go through more countries of this area.
Perhaps we shouldn't speak so much of Asia as if it were just a grouping that
described a whole lot of people in much the same terms, because there are
greater diversities of cultures, of traditions, of habits of life, of physical
appearance, of outlooks, than are to be found anywhere else in the world but
her hope. To my mind, the 20th century may have been the century of Europe,
but the 21st century will be the century of Asia.
If this be the case, it will be because an enlightened President of the
United States of America saw that in the prospect that the people of Asia had
to throw off the shackles of the past, to throw off the tribulation of the past, to
poverty, to disease, to illiteracy, to hunger, to ill health, to all the things
that have kept man bound through the centuriesand by modern technology, by
principles of freedom, by the friendliness and encouragement and help that
enlightened people in a modern age could bring to three-fifths of mankind, we
have virtually transformed the world in which we live.
This is the promise you hold out to us, Mr. President. I hope that
with the courage of resolution you have shown in so many other directions, you
and your people will have the courage, the resolution, and the vision to see
this hope of mankind realized. Thank you for your friendship.
May I say this final word. The President and I today were exchanging
views as to how we approach the problems of life. I said, " Well, I like to
base my philosophy on being fair, firm, forthright and friendly. He said,
" My objectives are peace, progress and prosperity. I said, " Let's marry
the two together and I think we have got it made.
Thank you very much. V/;* hue you are on your feet, may I ask you to
join me in a toast to the President of the United States of America, and
VMr s. Johnson. 



VISIT TO US, CANADA AND UK
OTTAW~ A, CANADA
RESPONSE BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT
TO THE OFFICI AL WELCOME BY THE PRIME MINISTER
OF CANADA 4th JUNE~, 1967
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Pearson, distinguished members of the
Diplomatic Corps, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a very great personal pleasure for Mrs. Holt and myself, and a
privilege in which my Government and my countrymen share, to be with you on
a period of your national history which has such significance for you.
This is my second visit to your country and I regret the interval which
has elapsed since I was last here. But that also was an occasion of some historic
significance for Canada. It was the year 1952, in which In this distinctive
Parliament building you were host to the Parliaments of the Commonwealth
through the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. It was my great honour
to be Chairman of that notable conference. I have long, wished since then to be
able to see something more of your country and to meet more closely with your
people. Although I had heard and read much of the great economic and cultural
development which had occurred over the years, I confess to still experiencing
some surprise at the remarkable growth which has occurred in this capital city
of yours, at seeing how imaginatively you have developed your architecture and
the beautification of the city. This I believe symbolizes the notable growth which
has been occurring throughout Canada, strengthening your economy and making
you a more significant member country of the United Nations.
Your contribution there, of course and this has been particularly
marked during the period of office of your distinguished Prime Minister has
been influential well beyond the numbers of your people. Vie like to think that
as you, with populations that are not large as world populations are marked
these days and as the populations of many other countries can demonstrate, that
we do have a performance out of relation to our numbers and even an influence
going well beyond our numerical strength and I welcomed very warmly, Mr.
Prime Minister, the things that you have said in your short but very meaningful
speech here this afternoon of the desirability of the closeness of our two countries,
which have so much in common, which have built a friendship in the comradeship
of war and in the pursuits of peace, in the growth of trade between our two
nations. Vblth so much in common, if we pursue them as closely as we can, our
policies together can make a contribution growing in significance with the years
ahead of us. You and I have already talked of this in an informal way. I hope
that in the years ahead, not only as our populations increase and our economic
strength develops, but as our own contribution to a peaceful and progressing
world is enhanced, that our discussions together, the better knowledge we shall
I hope develop of each other, will contribute more significantly to the peace,
to the progress and the prosperity of the world.
You have spoken of our participation in EXPO ' 67. It has not been in
the Australian tradition to take part in these great international expositions.
Wie have felt that we could make a more significant contribution in relation 2/ 
to our own national situation if we took part by ourselves from time to time
in the expositions of individual countries. But when we took into account the
significance for Canada, our historic Commonwealth partner, in the
celebration of its centennial, then we came unhesitatingly to the conclusion
that Australia should be there. And it gratifies us indeed, Mr. Prime Minister,
to feel that you have judged our contribution to be a worthy one.
Certainly the attendances already have more than flattered our
expectations and we hope that this experience will continue throughout the
period of the Exposition. As to the talking chairs, I must confess that while
at one time rabbits were regarded as the principal plague in Australia, there
are fellow countrymen of mine who think that talking politicians now rank in
the same category and it is perhaps not without some appropriateness that,
as you recline in a comfortable chair in the Australian pavilion, one of our
more notable citizens, sometimes in the political field but I hope more
frequently in other fields of science or culture, will address you on some
matter of national moment.
You were good enough to say that we had established some degree of
international supremacy in the fields of tennis and swimming. ' We hope to
maintain that. But being an ambitious people, we think that before the year is
out we may have chalked up another notable gain by taking for the first time in
its history, I believe, the Americas Cup back from that country to Australia.
If we can get it there, I think our American friends and allies will find it even
more difficult to regain outside the Heads of Sydney Harbour than the Davis
Cup on one of our tennis arenas.
However, I am sure that, despite the friendship you have with your
great neighbour, you will be wishing us well. We smaller countries always
like to see the other tackle the bigger fellow and succeed. It is a commendable
ambition and one in which I am sure we shall have your good wishes.
Now I don't want to add another chapter to the record of long-talking
Australian politicians by abusing your patience on this warm afternoon. Your
record for hospitality has been evidenced again today in that, after a period
of cool weather, you have turned on a sunny Australian day with a temperature
that must be very uncomfortable for that handsome guard I have just had the
honour to inspect. And so I must not detain you at length.
But thank you again for the warmth of your welcome to Mrs. Holt and
myself and our party representing as we do in your eyes the Australian
Government and people. We are greatly looking forward to the remainder of
our stay with you and we are delighted to have an opportunity of contributing
by our presence to the success of the ambitious and imaginative project which
you are so successfully carrying out.
Long, may Canada prosper, long may it strengthen in its influence
and its economy, long may the friendship between our two countries be
successfully sustained. 



VISIT TO US, CANA. DA UlK
MONTREAL, CANADA
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR HAROLD HOLT
AT MAYORAL DINNER, CITY HALL, MONTREAL JUNE, 1967
Mr. Mayor and Madame Drapeau:
It was a very happy decision of the Australian Government to
decide to be represented at the Montreal Exposition. Our motives were
largely stimulated by the friendship over so many years with the people of
Canada and our desire to join in celebrating the centennial of this great
country of yours.
You mentioned some of the origins we have in common and you
hrought to mind a little jingle that was originated about the early period that
you mentioned in the history of my own country:
" True patriots we, for be it understood
Wle left our country for our country's good."
But I think that our Mother Country, if it could look at the results that the
offspring have produced, would be sorry to have lost them and be very
proud of the achievements through those years. It is also, I understand, not
merely the centennial of Canada but the 325th anniversary of this beautiful
and historic city of Montreal. I say you have cause for a double celebration.
Although the principal purpose of my own visit here was to join
in celebrating Australia's special day, I feel that already there has been
added benefit for us from the very valuable discussions we held with your
Prime Minister and members of the Cabinet, the new knowledge that we have
acquired of the remarkable growth which has proceeded in Canada since my
own first visit here for the Parliamentary conference in Ottawa fifteen years
ago. I scarcely recognised Ottawa. I found it equally difficult to see
in the Montreal I had visited for only a short and inadequate few hours on
that occasion the beautiful city ou have here today. But we have a strong
feeling, and I was delighted to fhcS your Prime Minister echoing this,
sentiment that our two countriesfgrowing in strength with their economies
burgeoning, with their populations growing rather more rapidly than those
of other countries and with a special relationship with some of the m jor
powers of the world you oniented principally as you have been 4n the past
towards the North Atlantic and the North America, we with a growing and
special place in Asia and the Pacific. If we can contrive to keep closer
together in the years ahead than we have in the past, if we can think closely
together on the great international questions which will affect the future
of mankind, then I am certain that Canada and Australia together will be
able to make a significant impact for constructive and useful purposes on
the thinking of other countries of the world, and it is with that object in
mind I have pressed your Prime Minister to come and visit our country. / 2 
-2-
I hope there will be an increasing stream of Canadians who will
find if they attempt the journey that it is not so formidable an undertaking
as they might have imagined. There are some very agreeable stopping
points along the way Tahiti, if you must practice your French; there is
Honolulu, if you wish to see how a multi-racial community has turned that
lovely island into a thriving economy and a very enjoyable place to stay; and
then Australia, the oldest continent but with some of the youngest and the
liveliest people that you will find on the earth.
Je regrette profonddment, monsieur le Maire, que je ne peux
parler francais bien. Mon francais, mon professeur a mon ecole etait un
ecossais. Ainsi ce'st difficile pour moi parler en francais a vous.
Mon secretaire, however, in order to meet this situation, has given me these
lines which I am very happy to adopt. Vous avez une ville ancienne et
gracieuse et vous en avez fait cadeau a toutes les nations pour cette
exposition brillante. Au nom del'Australie, je vous apporte nos meilleurs
souhaits et nos congratulations les plus cordiales et chaleureuses.
You must be tremendously gratified with the success which has
already become evident for this imaginative courageously planned,
ambitiously projected exposition. You, Mr Mayor, have become something
of an institution in your own right. I became very envious when I learned
that of the 48 members of your council, you can count upon the regular
support of 45 of them. That is a majority which any politician like myself
would very much envy but I am sure that it is due to your own drive, your
own courage, your own enterprise that this marvellous exposition has been
brought into being and has become a success to be admired around the world.
We are greatly looking forward to visiting it ourselves. We are
proud that Australia should be accorded its own national day of celebration.
I hope we shall prove worthy of it. I am told that just about four times as
many people have visited our pavilion as was estimated for us, in advance.
I don't claim that it is because those who want to rest there find themselves
addressed by people like myself as they recline in those chairs; indeed,
it has been cut down quite considerably. Well, if that is a mark of popularity,
perhaps I should take that hint myself and content myself with saying on
behalf of all my party here with me and indeed on behalf of Australia, which
is proud to be represented here with you and I am sure will derive advantage
from our presence with you, the best wishes for the continuing success of the
Exposition and our warmest congratulations, Mr Mayor and your gracious
wife, and to all associated with you in this marvellously conceived project. 



15 JUN 167
VISITL O U1., CANADA AND UK
N3 YORK, U1SA
ADDRESZS TO THE AMEIRICAN/ AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATION
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HOLT AT THES
RIV*" ER CLUB " TH JUN-i, 1 W7
I want to speak about matters which are of domestic concern to us but
which I believe are also of importance in the relations of your country with
my own. The mou we can devel6p our own economic capacity in the international
field the more we can help strengthen the American position in our area of the
world. I believe it to be an abiding interest of the United States of America, at
the highest policy level, to assist Where it can to strengthen the economy and the
international significance of a staupch ally and friend who can mean so much to
America in our area of the world.
Growth has been our major objective in the field of economic development
and this has been spelled out in terms of people and capital of vision and
enterprise. These things have been our watchwords since the end of Wlorld
W ar 11. Our objective has been to make the nation secure, prosperous, able to
help our less fortunate neighbours and play a proper part in the defense systems
of the free world. Our needs have been people and capital. Our vision has been
reflected in our long-standing relationships with Britain and America and a
recognition of our special regional position in Asia. I have, as many of you
will be aware, just come back from another visit to four countries of Asia wlich
I think it would have been difficult for many heads of government to have taken
as a general peregrination.
Some might have got to one, or to two or to three of them, but it is a
mark of the special position we occupy in that region that I was able to go in all
friendliness and to be warmly received in such diverse countries with such
diverse policies as Cambodia, Laos, Taiwan and Korea. And what I saw there
heartened me tremendously in the vision I have of the kind of Asia which can
develop in the future a vision which I am glad to say your President shares
and in which I believe the other leading members of your administration fully
endorse. The people and capital we. need have been coming but the pressures of the
day are casting some shadows ahead to us. The United Kingdom, for example,
is facing fundamental decisions, both in her economic relationship with Europe
and in her military and strategic dispositions E~ ast of Suez. These are matters
I have already discussed to some degree with Mr. Wilson and with President
Johnson. I will be discussi ng them further with Mr. W., ilson in London next
week. The Australian economy continues to thrive. The grQwth in gross national
product last quarter compared with the corresponding quarter 12 months previoutly
was 13% F. ' ihere had been a rise of about 2-1 per cent in price level over the
period, partly as a result of government decisions increasing charges in various
directions to help finance a growing defence bill. But the net growth, even
taking that into account, remained considerable. The earlier period, however,
to give a balanced picture, had been affected by drought conditions in some parts
of Australia and an increase in farm income between the two periods was from
266 million to 436 million US dollars, an important factor in the rise. But the
increase in non-farm GNP was, nonetheless, very high at 10 per cent. .92/ 
Vie shall take increasing strength in future years, thanks to the efforts
which many represented heie today are making, from our growing export
returns from quite dramatic mineral discoveries and a lessened requirement
for oil imports if we continue to make useful discoveries of oil and natural gas.
In the week before I left Australia there were five promising new discoveries
three of oil, one was at Roma in Queensland which was estimated to be the
best since the Moonie discovery. More than a thousand miles away, off the
coast of Victoria, the ESSO-BHP people had a strike which, while it has not
yet been fully assessed, is certainly mor promising. And over on the coast
of WTestern Australia, just by Barrow Island, where a well had been sunk on
another island, Pasco Island, there was, again, another very promising
discovery. The other two discoveries were a natural gas strike just a few miles
from the Coast of Victoria closer, indeed, to the shore than the earlier
ESSO-BHP discoveries of natural gas and an important nickel discovery over
in Wlestern Australia by a company in which Anaconda has a substantial
interest. And I mention this as the experience of one particular week. I
don't say we can do that every week, but we have been doing it in enough weeks
over recent years to raise great expectations for us of the strength this will
brin; to our external position.
While the current state of the economy and I speak subject to dry
conditions in some areas which raise a little concern for the season ahead and
the wheat crop represents a generally favourable picture, our national
requirements for defence and for development continue to place heavy
requirements and pressures on domestic resources. Our manpower is fully
employed. The migration inflow continues to be steady with a gross intake
this year of about 140, 000. V; e have had one of our best trading years, with
imports and exports likely to be close to balance.
On the other hand overseas reserves, while still at a comfortable level,
have been falling to some degree as a consequence of a combination of
factors. We have had reduction in the level of capital inflow following the
policies of restraint exercised by the governments of the United Kingdom and
the United States of America and these are our two principal sources of
capital. There is a reduced availability of overseas loan money. What is
available calls for higher rates than we have been accustomed to pay.
The Interest Equalisation Tax continues to irk us and operate against
us quite unreasonably. Wrhile borrowings have been reduced, we have been
repaying loans of the past. Our total government indebtedness to the United
Kingdom for example, is now more than œ stg 100 million less than it was
years ago. And there are overseas guided missile destroyers, submarines and
the F-1ll aircraft.
There are also our overseas disbursements for military aid in respect,
for example, of operations in Vietnam and the contribution we are maling in
Malaysia. We cannot afford a blockage in our growth systems without direcy
affecting our defence capacity and our capacity to give useful aid to others.
Britain and America have provided Australia with most of its capital
since the war and, despite an increased amount generated internally, we
remain a capital importer and are certain to continue that way. Actually
per cent to 90 per cent of our fixed capital investment is generated within
Australia. But it is the remaining 13 per cent which is of great value to us in
opening up new industry and giving us new techniques. 3/ 
7e understand the reasons why Britain and America have placed restraints
on the outflow of capital. But we do not feel we are asking for special favours
when we ask that you here in America consider some early relaxation of those
restraints. cannot afford to have our defence and aid programme slip out of
gear. And, remember, we have doubled our defence effort in the last four years.
ie are also the third largest aid diver in net termsn per head of population. It is
all given in the form of grants without conditions. There are mutual advantages
for both our countries if our development in these fields continues.
Defence expenditure has more than doubled since 1962-63. It is now running
close to five per cent of gross national product and this percentage is I am
informed only surpassed by the Unite: i 2tates and the United Kingdom, which do
not have our higher rate of population growth and the degree of provision for
housing and other capital works which accompany . that higher rate of population
growth. withhold from consumption a higher percentage of our gross national
product 27 per cent than any other country in the world except Japan.
The impact of your Interest . iqualisation Tax is one exa. mple of a difficulty
which persists for us on the capital market. You have granted exemptions to
Canada and Japan, and we find it difficult to understand why Australia cannot
receive the same benefit. 7. e are actually losing reserves to the United States on
government capital account unless this borrowing is facilitated. Ou r existing
government debt in New York is requiring repayment and interest charges at the
rate of $ UC35 mcillion annually. Australian Government guaranteed corporations
like the airlines and other instrumentalities also owe money in the United States
and their repayment and interec: charges amount to up to an additional $ UG33 m.
a year. These are continuing burdens, and we hope they will be understood
sympathetically. And to get the full picture of our payments out to you, there is
the growing dividend payment from increased United States investments in
Australia and a degree of borrowing inside Australia over recent years by Unite d
Statec corporations which in earlier times were able to turn to their own
borrowing sources in the United States. Co we want these things to be understood
csypathetically and, we hope, acted on appropriately.
Our efforts to strengthen our position externally are frustrated to some
degree not solely by your country by various policies which continue to
operate against us. I've mentioned the interest equalisation tax, on which I
believe vie have strong case. Our country has been a good ally of the United
States none stauncher over recent years. 7e have not looked for a dollar of aid,
but we have looked for a sympathetic and realistic understanding of some of these
problems. In the last 17 years our exports to America have increased by only about
half the increase of our imports from-the United States. To put it another way,
today Australia imports $ US6C. 3-a Iead from America but exports only $ UC31.
a head. In another form and I think this makes the point a little. mrre
3raphically some 12, 03, 33. Australians import 6C. 33 dollars value per head
from you, and some 23, 330, ; 3 Americans import less than 2. 2 dollars per
head from us. And I have not taken into this account the difference in per-capita
income in our two countries which, in 1965 amounted to 3, 502 dollars an
American citizen and 1, S3dollars an Australian citizen. ! hen you take per
capita consumption measured in terms of consumption capacity again the
disparity beco--es all that much wider.
Australia is, in fact, the fastest growing market, I understand, for
American exports. As we grow and develop vie are going to buy more American
goods, and in the defence field as we grow and strecgthen nationally we will be
playing a larger part in the joint policies that we have in our area of the world,
and, indeed, in the international situation generally. 2o you have special
reasons, including self-interest, in supporting our growth. 
The United States purchases from us less than half the value ($ US375 m.)
of goods that we purchase from the United States ($ US80C And this
unfavourable balance has been a chronic feature of the trade between our two
countries for many years. VWe feel that on raw wool we have been given a raw
deal. One of the major disappointments of the Kennedy round was that no
American offer to negotiate a 50 per cent reduction in the wool duty emerged,
although we had a very confident expectation from our earlier discussions that
this would be so. Furthermore, the benefit of the reduction in the wool duty from
34 cents a pound to 25-cents which was made in 1947 was quickly impaired two
years later when the United States we having paid our quid pro quo for this
arrangement introduced subsidy arrangements to encourage local production.
America is, in fact, the only industrial country in the world to impose a
duty on this raw wool, and it puzzles me that Australia should have only .1 of
one per cent of its wool enter without this duty when more than 67 per cent of New
Zealand wool enters the United States duty free. And I remind you that I speak
for a staunch United States ally, not an unfriendly power. I might also note
here our position on sugar, dairy products, meat, lead and zinc. These items
comprise 70 per cent of the value of our exports to the United States of America,
but eachof them is currently under threat of some restrictive action or
legislation in America.
These are anxieties in Australia about what the future holds in our trading
relationships in all these commodities. We are watching with keen interest for
the results of the Tariff Commission inquiry into the effects of imports on the
American dairy industry, and into the need for restrictions on dairy products
not at present subject to import quotas. These may be problems lying ahead for
Australia. There are others imminent. The bills before your Congress
proposing restrictive quotas on imports of meat and lead and zinc, and tighter
restrictions on dairy products, would cut us back perhaps by $ UCS0m. in our
present trade if they become law. You will understand the unease in our
industries at this possibility.
A cut-back in meat exports would be a matter of difficulty for us. The
chances of alternative markets for meat exporters if they are restricted further
in the United States are not good, because the only other major world markets
are Britain and the European Economic Community.
There is quite a long history to our meat transactions. It began as a story
of growth by us to meet your need and we were supplying a type of meat which
was not being supplied by the market here, the inferior quality meat for hamburgers
and that sort of thing. Then at your request, we voluntarily limited our meat
exports, but this was soon followed by more A, er ican restrictions. At present
the latest American estimate of 1967 imports is 402, 000 tons being ab out 2, 000
tons below the quota. So no quota applies. However since quotas are imposed
if imports are estimated to exceed a " trigger" point the legislation sets an
effective upper limit on imports. For 1967 this " trigger" point is 444, COO tons,
or 24, 000 tons less than actual imports in 1963 when Australia agreed to restrict
exports voluntarily. This suggests that we are losing ground, and the
uncertainty is disturbing to our industry.
The other field I mentioned lead and zinc also has shadows falling. The
United States is the world's biggest market for lead and zinc and, as such,
directly and indirectly affects all world exporters when restrictions are imposed.
The recent slackening in demand has led to new proposals for the reimposition
of quotas. No-one liked the old quotas, though we accepted them without too
much protest, but if present intentions are carried out the new quotas would be
more permanent and, under the proposed formula as we see it, they could lead
to a progressive reduction in the rate of imports. Our industry considered the
situation so serious that it arranged, for the first time, to submit evidence at
the recent Senate Committee hearing. Spokesmen for the administration
opposed the proposals and for this we are grateful. Rut the Commnittee reported
favourably on the bill and the risk remains. 
Another problem I shall mention is sugar. Y.' e would like o feel
that as the world's largest sugar exportr after Cuba ( which, of course, has
been denied access to American markets) we would be in line for more
generous allocations when there were needs arising from short-falls in
supplies against quotas. It is true we gained access to a lucrative
American market when the break with Cuba took place But we did not
take advantage of the 1963-64 world shortage to divert to more lucrative
markets. 7. maintain . d exports to Am rica in excess of '? CO, C00 tons,
thereby foregoing profits elsevihere.
On wheat, I acknowledge with appreciation that th United States
accepted an Australian request regarding the question of ' basing points'
in the recently concluded international VWheat Agreement.
But the overall result, even there, fell disappointingly short of our
earlier stated objectives, and to secure any agreement at all we accepted
the obligation of increasing what had been a voluntary provision of wheat
aid to the extent of 130, ? C tons per annum to a commitment of 225, 00C tons
per annum. Some of the anxieties I have rmentioned may not develop into
hurtful events, but the possibility is there, and in a spirit of frankness and
of friendship, I wanted to tell you how we feel about them. 7 e need
stability in our trading relationships, just as you do. As a good friend, we
prefer to speak about these things while there is still time for consideration,
rather than grumble too much after the event.
THE MIDDLE EAST
Now if I could turn for a fevw minutes to two matters in the
international field.
have never been able to ignore the incessant condition of
tension that has prevailed betvween Israel and the Arab States ever since
Israel came into dxistence as an independent State. But I am sure all of us
hoped it was not going to bring a major resumption of hostilities among those
countries in the immediate area, or bring us a. d others so close to the brink
of involvement as we may have come in the last few days.
7 e have had at least ten years in which these tensions had been kept
under some sort of control, ten years in which many of us had begun to hope
that realism and tolerance, with the help of the United Nations, would
ultimately bring a political settlement of th! s unhappy conflict.
It is all the more depressing, therefore, that a conflagration has
flared again, and in so doing has threatened to spread to the point of
embroiling the great powers, and possibly a great part of the world, either
directly or indirectly.
At this point in time, there is nothing helpful in accusing either side
of having started the trouble. e can only be thankful that the Security Council
has at least managed to agree on a resolution calling for a cease fire. This
was clearly the first thing that had to be done if we , vwre to avoid the prospect
of another " World ar. 
6.
There is no disagreement among us all that the first thing to be
done is to stop the fighting. Then we can look again all of us to see
if, together with our friends, and through the United Nations, we can find
ways of making it possible for both sides in this unhappy and long-lasting
confrontation to live together in peace.
Meanwhile, we in Australia are grateful for the unsparing efforts
that the President and the Administration of the United States, and the
Prime Minister and Government of the United Kingdom, together with other
Governments, have made to brin3 the Security Council to a point of
decision. VI ETNAM Cn Vietnam, I do not need to explain at length to this gathering
why we are involved there. The short answer is because the Republic of
Vietnam asked for our help in combating the attacks directed against it
from the Communist regime in the North, and because we saw this
Communist-inspired and direct -d agression as a threat to free people and
small nations small nations in particular everywhere.
V: gave our help because we believe the Republic of Vietnam has
a right to secure the separate, independent status that was granted to it
under the Geneva Agreements of 1934: that is people have a right to choose
their own way of life and be free to pursue with confidence the social and
economic development for which they yearn.
The Communists in the North do not want this: they want to
impose their own communist way of life on South Vietnam. In Australia,
we believe that if the Communists were to succeed in this, then all Nations
in South East Asia would come under the same kind of pressure.
This is the Communists' proclaimed programme of ' National
Liberation". But properly understood, this programme is not national
it is the programme of the Peking brand of international communism. It
does not liberate to produce a free society it operates to produce anoth
satellite in the Communist orbit.
Our aim, therefore, is both defensive and constructive. Wa ew ant to
see the ambitions of people in the new countries of Asia develop their own
new societies, offering the material and social benefits that other modern
societies now enjoy, but preserving their own national and cultural identities.
Neither we nor you are bent on overthrowing the present regime in
North Vietnam. Strongly as we reject the Communist philosophy an society,
we have no aggressive aims against North Vietnam, nor against its neighbour and
supporter, Communist China. Let them work out their destinies free from
our interference. 3ut they must not interfere with others.
No aggressor can expect his bases and communications and his
war-making capacity to remain immune from attack. This would grant him an
unacceptable military advantage, and j eopardise more lives in the villages
and battlefields of the South. It is for these reasons that we in Australia
continue to support strongly limited, controlled and discriminatory military
bombing of selected targets in the North. 
7.
The struggle may be long and bitter. 3ut there is progress. The
Military campaign has not been won, but it is now certain that it cannot
be lost. Despite the ravage and destruction of the war there is heartening
evidence of consolidation in South Vietnam of military, political, social
and economic progress.
Air Vice Marshal Ky and his Administration have lasted longer than
most people predicted, and in doing so have made significant gains not only
in the estimation of their people but in the establishment of order and
security. This is further encouragement to us to see out the issue in Vietnam.
hope the end will come soon, but we cannot look forward to
this with any confidence at the present time. The cost of the war in men and
resources falls heavily on South Vietnam and the United Ctatec in particular.
It is costly to my own country. V.' e are as eager as anyone else to end it.
V: e are anxious to see any avenue to a settlement thoroughly explored, to
seize any opportunity that right offer a credible advance to a settlement.
The hard fact, however, is that not only is no settlement in sight,
but the regime in the North shows no inclination at all despite the flurries
of expectation that occur from time to time to be ready to talk of peace.
All efforts, and there have been a number, to open any sort of negotiation
with the North Vietnamese r1eime have completely failed.
I know of nothing new in the diplomatic field that allows us to hope
this situation might soon change. Until it does, we and you have no
alternative but to continue to combat the aggression. V'' e must hope that a
more realistic view of his prospect will lead the a-grssor finally and
we hope in the not too distant future to the negotieting table. 



S16 JUN1967
LIBRAN
VISIT TO CANADA A. D U. K.
YORK, U. S. A.
; DDRES iY HE RME MINISTER, MR. HAROLD HIOLT
TO THE F~ r-,. ST iL. ETR IC COUICIL AT THE ALDORF HOTEL
9TH JUIE, 1967.
" 7e are, in Australia, a community with a
strone European tradition and history but we find
ourselves increasingly involved in Asia, and whether we are
classed by the geographer as part of asia or not we
increasingly think of ourselves as involved in its
problems and concerned with its potentialities. And so
I want to speak particularly about the region of Asia
in general. It is misleading, in a sense, to sreak of the
problems of Asia as if Asians are oneset of people. There
are wider differences of anpearance, hauits of life,
historical uacksroun. and culture to be found in Asia than
is to be found in a-iv other area of the world. I have
just come oack from i tour not the first by any means
but my first to the four countries, Cambodia, Laos,
Taiwan and Korea.
I was particularly struck with these differences
which existed in countries with adjoining boundaries or
which w'ere located close to each other. The dissimilarities
were more obvious than the similarities. Yet, I suppose
it is not so surprising when one thinks of the history of
the British Isles and The marked differences in language,
in approach in temperament, in physique, hajit of life
of the people of E. land, Scotland, Ireland and . ales.
The differences are even more manifest in the
countries of Asia. do well to bear this in mind, because
so many of those who speak about the region adopt broad
descriptions which i thLnk could be quite misleading and
dangerous if they are to form the basis for policy-making.
Even the people of the area, themselves, talk about settling
things the Asian way, repudiating, at times the efforts
being made by others outside the region to deal with their
problems as thouh settling thin s the Asian way meant
that all Asians tried to settle things in the same way.
I would be very surprised to learn that the
people of South Korea settle things the same way as the
people in India, or the Indonesians the same way as the
Burmese, or the Chinese even the same way as the Vietnamese,
and so on. Therefore we do well to remember that we are
speaking of a very diverse range of peoples with different
problems and often different aspirations, and certainly
different attitudes to the problems of life.
Then, we get the other sort of cliche which is
popularised in some of the left wing and more doctrinaire
ournals such as the Iew Statesman, which occasionally
is taken up by thi politicians who hold that it is wrong
something immoral to have white faces either in uniform
or in industry on the mainland of Asia.
Many of you represented here today are on the / 2 
-2-
mainland of Asia in industry, and you will find to varying
degrees that your presence is welcome there that you can
do a great deal to assist in the prosperous growth of the
people of this region.
But more particularly I speak today about the
question of havi n white faces in uniform on the mainland
of Asia, and to challenge the proposition that this is
either in some way immoral or unwelcome to the people of the
region. I would go so far as to say that the contemporary
trend is entirely in the opposite direction. Nowhere is
this better exemplified than in the recent experience of the
United States of America. Even some Americans, I think
would ue surprised to learn how many security cormitments your
country has gladly accepted in the countries of Asia and
around the periphery of Asia. Those commitments cover
South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Thailand, the Philippines and
now actively in South Vietnam.
In Australia and New Zealand we have our
associations with you of a security kind in the AlZUS Pact
and the South-East Asia Treaty Organisation, where again
we co-operate on a multilateral basis to combating communist
infiltration and aggression in the region.
But that is not the end of the story. Your military
participation has not only been welcomed by these countries,
in some instances it has nreserved them from being overrun
by the forces of communism. This is particularly true of
course, in South Korea. I am proud to say, were the
first country to declare ourselves alongside you when you
made that historic decision to intervene and help in checking
communist aggression there.
I think of this as one of the two critical and
historic policy decisions made by the people of the United
States in contemporary times. The other was the Marshall
Plan, which for the first time that I can recall in human
history, set out in a disinterested way to assist other
nations to build up their economic strength, reconstruct
after the devastation of war and build again a secure place
in the expanding world.
The jesson of the Marshall " lan should have been
taken up by ticse countries who were assisted as a result
of it to establish themselves again in economic strength.
I find myself dissatisfied with the extent to which they
have taken up their share of the burden of helping to improve
the lot of the rest of mankind, less fortunately placed. The
United States continues to set a fine example in this particular
direction. The other historic decision which I believe opens
up a new watershed of human history, a new phase in the
history of man, was the decision and all that has since
flowed from it, to intervene in the crisis which developed
in South Korea. Had you not decided that way at that time,
South Korea would, of course have been overrun and been
part of the Chinese Communist dominion. There would have
been no South Vietnam conflict because not having chosen
to intervene at one point, it would not have seemed worth
the cost an the struggle to intervene at the other.
I question whether Taiwan could have been held
from communist incursion. Down through that whole region
of South-East Asia there would have been no effective / 3 
check on communist penetration. I know there is a school
of thought which believes that because these people have
strong national sentiments they would not have welcomed the
Chinese. That may be so. But they would have proved
incapable of resisting the incursion of the communist
philosophy and the so-called wars of national liberation,
which are not national in sentiment and certainly do not liberate.
As far as the national aspect was concerned that
would have been submerged by the general Peking-oriented
nhilosophy of communism. So far as lioeration was concerned,
they would not have been free.
I; e would have been faced with a very different
kind of world from that which, with reasonable fortune,
and by our own endeavours, we can sustain in the future.
It is my conviction that we would not have had
the favourable turn of events in Indonesia had the United
States not been present in strength in South Vietnam. There
in Indonesia, you not only had a very strong communist
party but the administration was leaning increasingly
towards it, and I question whether there would have been
the encouragement for resistance to these forces in
Indonesia had they not seen that America was in strength in
South Vietnam, determined to resist communist penetration
and further communist expansion through the area of South-East
Asia. That gave them heart to take un the struggle
themselves, and you have now a reasonable prospect that
Indonesia a potentially rich country of more than 100,000,000
people will be, if not part of the free world camp at least
a co-operating member of the international community
developing its resources for its own uenefit and that of
international trade generally in the years ahead.
As you turn around the neriphery of Asia you
find a receptiveness to people from beyond the mainland.
I could instance country after country. In Thailand there
are protective forces of the United States and even a
small representation from my own country. In Malaysia we
are more strongly represented with the British and other
Commonwealth forces. In Korea, Vietnam and Taiwan there
has been substantial assistance, military and economic,
by the United States.
There is an increasing tendency to co-operate in
such institutions as the Asian and Pacific Council in the
Asian Development bank, in ECaFE, in SEATO and in the Colombo
Plan. I feel that, in view of the conjecture going on
about the British position East of Suez in future years
acknowledgement should be made of the contribution of the
United Kingdom, first in combating the communist inspired
guerillas for many years in what was Malaya, and then in
more recent times, with considerably expanded forces helping
to resist, and successfully doing so over a period of three
years the confrontation of Malaysia by Indonesia, This
underlines, I believe, the importance of a continuing British
presence in the area. Around the whole arc of South-East
Asia, the only area in which the United States has not taken
up a defensive obligation has been in relation to Malaysia
and Singapore. This area they have regarded not
unreasonably as a Commonwealth and primarily a British / 4 
-4-
responsibility. 3ut on that matter there will be further
discussions before the final British decisions are taken.
-e can all sympathise with the United Kingdom's
view at a time when the country is under very heavy economic
pressure. But over recent weeks, there have been in two
areas East of Suez in Hong Kon and in the Gulf of Aqaba
dramatic illustrations to the British Government of its
involvement, in a world role whether it wishes it or not.
The rioting in H ong Kong and the short war in the Middle
East have shown thit Britain is directly concerned in a
significant way.
There are, I know some in this great and
powerful country who would like to leave the problems of
the world where they are. Just as in the long, long ago
there were many who felt you should stay out of Europe.
But you didn't stay out of Europe, because you responded
to the call of free men for help in desperate days, and
now as the new area of crisis has moved to Asia you are
committed again in strength and to a different type of war.
The undeclared war. But war nevertheless.
I was in South Korea very recently, and was
heartened by what I found there. There is a tendency
to think of these countries as small countries, weak
countries not very much worth bothering about. But
most of the world is made up of relatively small countries.
There are great powers, of course and their
aggregate populations are a very substantial portion of
the world as a whole. But if you examine the membership
of the United Nations there are many countries which are
not all that large but which do have a significance in the
scheme of thin. s. South Korea has 30,000,000 fine,
vigorous, to uh, industrious people and it was heartening
to me to see how they had taken on the problems of
industrial development.
Whether you look there, whether you look at
Taiwan whether you look at Malaysia, Thailand or even at
neutral Cambodia, where Prince Sihanouk has personally
directed himself to the task of economic development you
will see progress being made. I was shown with some pride
the new port of Sihanoukville. There the Cimbodians are
trying to secure, for the first time, an outlet to the
sea instead of having all their goods come through what
has in the past proved dangerous territory along the Mekong
River. In each of these countries there is something to
see of growth and progress. In Malaysia Tun Razak, the
Deputy Prime Minister, outlined to me the developmental
objectives of his country. In Thailand you can hear the
same story. In Taiwan which like Korea can noint to one
of the highest rates of increase in gross national product
to be found anywhere in the world, there is much to see
which most of the western world knows little about.
Unfortunately most of the countries of Western
Europe know very little about the developments which are
occurring in this area. I cannot recall, for example, any
senior member of the British Cabinet going through this area
over recent years. Some may have touched in Singapore or
Kuala Lumpur. But none has made a run of an instructive 
kind. If you were to speak of most of the countries of
iiestern Europe, you would get the same kind of result.
Yet, east of Suez, there are currently nearly
three fifths of humankind, and they are stirring as they
shake off the shackles of the past, as they find
themselves capaule of resisting the aggression of the
past. These are the things that have held them back,
not lack of auilities, not lack of skills, not lack of
culture. Most of them have cultures and skills older
than those of your country and mine. But, for the first time
in centuries they are getting a chance to exoress themselves
in a constructive and positive way.
This holds tremendous promise for us all. I
was canvassing this with the Prime Minister of Canada, Mr.
Pearson. Canada has a Pacific border but that nation
has been oriented for most of its history to the North
Atlantic and North America. The Canadians are pretty
capable international traders, and when they see the
potentialities in Asia I do not think they will long
persist in that kind of orientation. At least they will
devote some of their view to what can happen across the
Pacific. I give full credit to your own administration
for their recognition of Asia. The first senior America
representatives I can recall passing through my country,
who had made their own personal assessment of what was
happening in this area of the world, were Governor Dewey
and John Foster Dulles. These men paved the way.
Your own President made the first historic visit
of a United States President to the region and to Australia,
and his recognition of the area's potentialities has been
shared by the administration.
There is hope in this for mankind as a whole.
My own country since the 1950' s has built up its export
trade east of Suez from 15 percent Pf our exports to more
than 40 percent of our exports. Japan, with whom we had
virtually no trade right into the 1ite 1940' s now ranks
as the largest purchaser of Australian goods in value in
the world and it is rapidly rising.
The potentialities may Je better understood by
some comparisons. India, with forty-two times our
population, only possessed twice our gross national product
in value. Indonesia, with nine times our population, only
rates one third the value of our gross national product.
As these countries build their economies, with assistance
from the stronger countries of the world, they will in the
years ahead show tremendous growth.
My country is committed to growth. believe
we are favourably placed with those of you who have
already come to help and share to serve as a springboard
to the burgeoning economies of Asia. W. e hope more of you
will come. Those of you who do will, I am sure, stay
happily with us and build the greater Australia of the
future. But this prospect, can only be secured if we
are firm in our resolution to resist aggression where we
find it in that area of the world and elp the Asian
people to be free. These people aspire to a better order
of life and are prepared to work for it and give their
skills to it. / 6 
-6-
The United 3tates, with its ima-inative realistic
anpreciation of the problems and potentialities ol the
region, is contributing to the hopes expressed by us in
our declarations for freedom at Manila.
CANLE . IA. ~ i 



FOUNDATION STONE CEREMONY AT ROYAL MELBOURNE
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
Q. C1AUG 1967 ~ Melbourne, Victoria 3DJL, 16
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Mr Wood, Mr Anderson, the Hon Lindsay Thompson, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen, students
I was interested in what you had to say about our talks last
week. I thought I was coming to a much friendlier atmosphere here this
afternoon, but what you have said In your Introductory remarks underlines
the fact that, quite apart from what the Commonwealth Government is doing
by way of reimbursement grants and in other direct payments to the States,
we are and this project is concrete evidence of it, literally concrete evidence
of it we are contributing financially in other important ways. And of course
when I say I speak as the representative of the Commonwealth
Government, but we really should include those people throughout the
Commonwealth, whether they are in one State or another, who are contributing
by their tax payments to the revenues of the Commonwealth which ' n turn in
one form or another find some of their way, at any rate into the activities of
the States. As you were saying, this particular historic college has come
a very long way in the eighty years since Francis Ormond assisted it to
develop with a grant of l' 1, 000. In those days financial objectives were much
more limited than we find at this time.
It is appropriate that the first function of this sort which I
should attend as Frime Minister should be in substance the largest project of
its kind that has been undertaken under this new programme 6f aid for advanced
education purposes. This is one of the two largest building projects of its
kind in Australia. The other one ~ s in Sydney. But taking the money provided
for this project, together with the funds the Commonwealth and State provide
for recurrent expenditure, the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology is by far
the largest recipient of funds within the advanced education programme.
You get some idea of how Commonwealth provision has grown
over recent years when I tell you that from 1961 when our expend-* ture on
education was of the order of $ 45 million, mainly for universities, it has
grown to $ 150 million in the financial year just closed, 1966/ 67, which more
than trebles the 1966/ 61 contribution. Of: course the provision for the years
immediately ahead is considerably greater even than that very large figure.
Inside these expenditures are important new areas of assistance, notably that
made to the olleges of advanced education. Perhaps more important though
than the rate of building and the growth of the student body to which you have
referred, Mr Wood, is the quality of the College itself, and its reputation and
standing in the community. Your cdle ge can claim the highest standard in
its own field in the Commonwealth of Australia.
The prime purpose of Commonwealth assistance is t o enable
the standards of these colleges of advanced education to be raised, where
indeed they need raising, to the level where they provide a genuine alternative
to the university. They will differ from the universities, but they should by
no means be inferior to them. As I read through a list of some of the / 2 
-2
distinguished graduates taking their diplomas from these advanced colleges
of education, I found some of the most notable names in the industrial and
academic life of this country.
From this College alone, you could point in the academic
field to Professor Gordon Brown, Professor in Engineering at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Professor Freeland, Frofessor of Arch-Ite.-ture at
N. S. V1. University. In industry, Mr. WJeichhardt, Chairman of Directors
of I. C. I. Sir Ian Beaurepaire of Olympics, Mr Hans Ernst, Managing
Director of the Cincinnati Machine Tool Company and Mr Perrett who is,
of course, one of our outstandng arch4tects. In the Public Service, Mr G. F.
Browne, Chairman of the Victorian Railways Commissioners, Dr Lennox,
Chief of the CSIRO ' Pool Testing Authority, Dr Symons of the Commonwealth
Serum Laboratories, Dr Grose, of Defence Science Laboratories and Dr
C awsey also with our Defence Science Laboratories. From other Colleges
than RMIT, Sir Mquriae Mawby, one of our distinguished leaders in the
mineral field, and Professor W-; arner, an authority in the metallurgical field.
Now when I recite names of that order of distinction as the
product of colleges such as this, then the point is made that those who come
from these colleges can make for themselves a place in the life of the
community in no way inferior from those who come from our universities.
Indeed the practical knowledge which usually accompanies the work in a
college such as this is becoming increasingly appreciated.
I find myself, as with advancing years my eyesight tends to
weaken, that 1. am taking an increasing interest in the products of industrial
design. Considering such mundane items as the bathroom, the stove, even
wrist watches and matters of that sort, 1 have come to the condusion that
most of these are designed by alert, ikeen-eyed young men and women who
have yet to experience some difficulties which those of us have reached a
more advanced stage cf life experience.
I don't know why we can't standardize, for example, on a red
dot for hot water and a green dot for cold water, particularly when one has to
grope throtgh the mists of the bathroom or when one travels abroad and
they alter the initials in accordance with the description of hot or cold in that
particular country. And occasionally when I try to prepare a modest
breakfast myself down at the seaside, I find that I have to dart for the glasses
these days because the signs on the stove aren't clear enough to tell me
whether it is on or off or medium or high or low, and matters of that sort.
So I do urge that whazever care is given to the theoretical side
of studies and I expect to have a more responsive chord to strike in an
organisation such as this than perhaps in one of the universities that the
practical outcome from those studies will always be borne in mind. It is
all very well to study the humanities but the theories to be applied to the
humanities must at some stage be put -nto practical terms for the human
beings in relation to which the humanities are expressed. It surprises mie
that in so much of industrial design the practical application of what is
intended for a mass of people tends to be lost sight of in the theoretcal
applications-by a person having his own idea, perhaps, of what 4s wanted
rather than visualising the needs of the community as a whole.
But perhaps I may briefly outline what we in the Commonwealth
and our Advsory Committees see as the distinctive features of the colleges
of advanced education. / 2 
-3
I would name them as a wide range of courses to provide a
broad educational basis and cross -fertilisation of ideas; a substantial
proportion of tertiary students; standards of building and services, which can
stand equal to those to be found amongst the best in the world; emphasis on
new teaching techniques; the development of liberal studies both as an
essential ingredient i n all courses and as new courses in their own~ right, and
in making references to liberal studies, I am making no particular allusioni
of course, to any political movement in the country; t heir difference from
the universities in their emphasis on vocational and applied courses; the
part-time students; teaching rather than research; and a close association
with industry and commerce.
As I met members of your Council a little earlier, it was
quite obvious from what I knew of their activities that you have managed to
maintain that close association amongst leaders in their own field of industry
and commerce with the work of the RMIT,
As part of the plan to raise standards, quite apart from the
much larger sums to be provided for buildings and recurrent expenditures,
the Commonwealth is making available for the triennium 1967/ 69 special
unmatched grants of a quarter of a million dollars for research in advanced
education, and of half a-million for library books and materials in colleges
of advanced education. WTithout wearying you too much with statistics, let me
just summarise by saying that from 1965/ 69, the Commonwealth expects to
contribute to advanced education and technical training the following totals
To all States $ 36. 6 million; to Victoria $ 20. 2 million, to RMIT alone
approximately $ 6 million. This $ 6 million reflects a total State and Commonwealth
programme of some $ 13. 9 million It is interesting to reflect on the
fact that in Victoria, for some reason of historical development, we find that
the diploma student population of colleges 3. n this State now totals upwards of
68 per cent. of the total Australian enrolment. In addition to the diploma
students there are large numbers of individual trade or craft students.
Now you have another disti-nction. You are the only Australian
college of advanced education to have a Royal Charter. Yours is the oldest
college in Melbourne. Ballarat I understand is the only older Victorian
college. You were founded at much the same time as our public schools
and the Melbourne University.
Reflecting on the burst of education activity about the time
when you were founded, perhaps there is a parallel in that we are now seeing
again a similar age of expansion in education. New universities of adva nced
education; new emphasis on science education; a quickened awareness of the
importance of training our most valuable asset, the young people of our
community. The Commonwealth has played a significant and, I hope you will
feel, an imaginative part in this new emrhasis on education. Nevertheless,
we have continued to recognise and act on the basis that the States have the
primary responsibility for education.
In referring to the new emphasis we have given to it in our
Commonwealth role, I must pay a tribute to my predecessor, whose drive
gave so much lift to the programme and also to my colleague, the first
Commonwealth Minister for Education, Senator Gorton, who is bringing so
much energy and enthusiasm to his tasks.
In the Department of Labour and National Service, my
colleague, Mr. Bury has been active in the work of the Froductivity Committees
and in the programme of training of apprentices encouraged by that Department.
In other fields in our Australian National University the new university we 
are establishing in Papua and New Guinea you get further evidence of this
Commonwealth activity. It is not often recognised how much we are now spending
on education. I gave these figures earlier and mentioned that the total
would be incieasing very rapidly. But it is rather interesting to note that
payments to the States, the colleges of advanced education, the universities,
the science laboratories and teacher training in the financial year ahead of
us will have increased from $ 0' 2m. to $ 115m. or roughly an increase in that
one year of per cent. The grants for colleges of advanced eduation in the
new financial year will be more than double the grants of the last financial
year. We are of course spending a great deal on education in our own fields
of responsibility, partly by way of assistance to students under the various
scholarships schemes, and partly in our own territories. Mr Thompson may
be interested to know . hat the Commonwealth's payments to the S13tates for
education are increasing at a significantly faster rate than the Commonwealth
payments for its own immediate responsibilities i A recognition I believe
of our growing support of the States in their programmes.
Now, the importance the Commonwealth is placing on
colleges of advanced education is evident from the percentages I have just
given. In the words of my colleague, Senator Gorton, they are to be treated
in the important field of capital development in all respects as universities
as to standards, priorities and so on.
Why is the Commonwealth providing this assistance? Wie
believe in the importance of giving our young people a chance to develop
themselves for their full potential. Wle believe that in these colleges there
is a genuine alternative to the universities on which insufficient importance
has been placed inthe past. Vie value the wide range of courses the colleges
offer, the cross -fertilisation of ideas they encourage, we value the emphasis
they place on the inclusion of these liberal studies in technical training.
And we value the empl'asis they place on vocational and applied courses which
fit their students well for playing their important roles in industry and
commerce. These are the features of education which the colleges of
advanced education emphasise, and which the Commonwealth, in partnership
with the States, hopes to promote, Of them the RMIT is a notable example.
But much of the value of these colleges will be lost if the general public is
not made aware of their existence as a genuine alternative to the universities,
and if people are not given every encouragement to use them.
As to your new project, this is the first and largest of
those being undertaken under the Commonwealth $ 24, million capital
assistance programme for the 1967/ 69 triennium. Your 8-acre site is in
a unique situation I believe the project will take you up twelve storeys
high, and it is being redeveloped under an ambitious scheme which should
result in more unoccupied ground space by 1974, combined with three times the
amount of floor space. It is estimated unless they have gone up since these
notes were prepared for me to cost $ 3C million over a ten-year period.
I thought there was a rather ominous ring about your comment, Mr. Wood this
building is the first step.
The Commonwealth has committed itself during the present
and past triennium to assistance of 1$ 2. 6 million towards the project, to be
matched by a State grant, and already to a further $ 360, OCO unmatched out of
its $ 10 million grant to State technical colleges. They are also providing 
substantial funds to the RMIT for recurrent expenditure over $ 3 million
during the 1967/ 69 triennium. Without this assistance from the Commonwealth
and State Governments, it would not have been possible for the
Institute to develop these buildings and to cope with the enormous increase
in student population for which you are now preparing.
The Commonwealth Advisory Committee on Colleges of
Advanced Education in its report to the Government during 1966, commented
that it has found this t ype of education going on too often in old gaols and
breweries. Well, you should be doing a good deal better than that, Mr.
Wood. The Commonwealth/ State programme of $ 48 million during the
coming triennium for capital projects is evidence of the serious and
determined approach by both national and State Governments in partnership
with the problem. The new building to be erected on this historic site will
be evidence in concre~ e and steel of the outcome of our endeavours.
But, as I said earlier, perhaps I should fittingly close on
this. While we will see a massive project in terms of concrete and steel,
it is in the quality of the student body and the achievements which they are
able to carry out in these buildings, in the maintenance of the splendid
tradition which marks the RMIT as an outstanding example of what can be
achieved in the advanced education field that we will count the results in the
years to come from the financial provisions we are now undertaking to make.
It is in the hope that there will be added important new and significant
chapters in the distinguished history of the RMIT that I now have pleasure
in formally laying the trowel or whatever the phrase is. I saw the size of
it a moment ago. I felt I should have got a union ticket out before I took
hold of it. It will serve as a useful implement for the next Premiers'
Conference if for nothing else! 



Speech by the Prime M inister, Mr. Harold Holt
OPENING OF MURRAY 1 PO.: 3R STATION
KHANC0j3A, 22ND JULY, 1967.
Mr. Fairbairn; Mr. Morton representin the Government
of New South " ales; Mr. Rylah the Government of Victoria; and
Mr. Riches the Government of South Australia; Mr. Courtney
representing Her Majesty's Opposition in the Federal Parliament;
Mr. Pettitt representin the Country Party; Sir ' illiam Hudson;
Mr. Raymond Hill MLr. . ilkinson, f. Thiess Mr. Perini and Mr.
Loutit who are all representative of Contractors who participated
in this gre: at scheme; and also Mr. Rodd; and then the Commissioners;
Mr. Dann and the Assistant Commissioners, Messrs. ; arrell and
Skinner; Your Excellencies; ladies and gentlemen:
I felt I should give you that full introduction oecause
it helps to demonstrate just how many people and interests have
been participating in this magnificent scheme. I come to the
Project today, not to the Snowy Scheme generally for the first
time but erha s not as often as I should or would have wished,
usually concerning myself with the Snowy Project from the documents
which reach us in Cabinet, the graphs, he diagrams the pictures,
the statistics and the narrative; and we sit around the able
as each year the Minister puts his bid ( as the Treasury rather
indelicately calls these a -nroaches from Departments) and we
consider what we should aptly for the needs-of the Snowy Mountains
Authority in a particular year. 3ut I find it a very different
thing from doing that to come to what is for most of us a rather
remote area and to see carved out of the native wilderness this
magnificent engineering project.
I don't know how most of you feel about it as most of
you no doubt close to the project itself have become a bit blase
about it out to me it is a stirring thin. to feel that here in
this young country of ours we have added this magnificent engineering
achievement, this further stage in what has oeen a most imaginative,
ambitious Australian project, the largest and in many ways the
most successful that we have ever undertaken. And it spells out
quite a few things to us as we have heard the Minister give us his
stor it was a very good story, I thought, because it absorbed
about five of the best points I had hoped to make to you here this
afternoon. 3ut, be that as it may, as he unfolded this story we
had a picture before us of the happy combination of Government decision
and planning with the enterprise of competitive entrepreneurs,
themselves setting out to give the oest service they could on a
tender basis and' how successfully that has oeen was demonstrated
by the Minister in his speech.
I was certiinly most impressed and it couldn't have
been a more timely tonic to me, having come from three days,
afternoons and nights of Cabinet discussions on the Judgel to
find at least here is one section of the Australian economy
measured in terms of Government financial provision which is
keeping inside its 3udget allocation, inside its estimate, and
producing the results inside the scheduled time. That is a
matter for congratulation, of course, to all concerned.
The other thing which must strike anyone who cares to
think about the matter at all, sitting in this reat ouilding,
is how well we do in Australia to recognise that with less than
/ 2 
-2-
12 million people trying to develop a continent the size of the
United States we make he machine and we make power come in aid
of our quite inadequate population.
Here I suppose the actual mannower involved in operating
this equiroment, :. hich will bring to INew South . iales and Victoria
the additional electrical power to assist industrial growth in those
States, will be quite minimal when compared with the outpouring of
power from these impressive machines. So we have much cause, not
only for conratulation for those who have contrijuted to the
enterprise, but of self-congratulation as a nation that we are
seizing the opportunities available to us and making machine and
power serve the needs of the Australian population.
This is the first phase, I am told, of the Snowy/ Murray
diversion. The three earlier power stations already opened Guthega
in 1955, Tumut 1 in 1959 and Tumut 2 in 1962 ha-e a combined
capacity of six hundred and sixty thousand kilowatts. This new
Murray 1 Power Station is lar er than all of them together, with a
capacity of nine hundred and fifty thousand kilowatts.
It is important to see this particular occasion in its full
context. Immediately, this power station marks the first completed
project in the second half oi the two-pronged Snowy development.
Today's opening represents the expenditure of two hundred million
dollars one quarter of the estimated total cost of the scheme of
eight hundred million dollars, and the revenue already received is
of the order of one hundred million dollars. So the Government is
not only getting this project completed within the time allowed for it
and within the cost estimated for it 17 or 18 years ago, but it is
getting its money oack on time as well.
It goes without saying that there has been great skill both
in planning and execution to bring a nroject as large as this to its
oresent stage without excesses of cost or time. There must by now be
many thousands of Australians to whom the nation should be grateful
for this achievement and not really our fellow Australians but all
who have contributed from whatever country to this project. I am
sure that the Ministers responsible Sir .; illiam Hudson ( who so richly
deserves the tribute warmlyaccordea him by the Minister), our able
present Commissioner, Mr. Dann, would all want to je amongst the
first to pay tribute to the many thousands of workers, many of them
recruited from overseas, whose untiring work has brought all this
about. Nor could it have , een achieved without the work of the
many engineers, skilled in a wide variety of disciplines and
techniques who helped plan it all and watched over its successful
achievement. In this spirit I am sure you will recognise my motive if
I permit myself to mention specially the various Ministers in
successive Commonwealth Governments who have played their part of
leadership in the project. There was first Mr. Nelson Lemmon,
Minister for ' orks in the Chifley Government; and then successive
Ministers in our own Governments since the end of 1949; our present
Governor-General, Lord Casey; the late Sir . illiam Spocner; and now
my colleague iMr. Fairoairn; and, together over the past years since
1949, they have oeen responsiule for bringing this scheme towards its
full maturity. I should also mention the willing and effective
co-operation in this great scheme that we have received from successive
Premiers of New South ' ales and Victoria and their Public ' orks
Departments and Electricity Authorities, and of course the South 
-3-
Australian Government has also had a close interest in this
development. jehind them all as guidiny and guardian angel has
stood Sir Hilliam Hudson. In fact it might also oe called " The
Hudson Authority", so closely hAs he been associated with it. 7e
are very glad to see him here today and the nation owes him the
conratulations and thanks already voiced uy my colleague. all
join in wishing all those concerned including Mr. Dann and his
colleagues, successful progress as they carry on the good work.
The fact is, of course, that the Snowy Project,
although it serves directly in principle two of the major States,
is a national achievement and serves national purposes. It has
been warmly supported oy all political parties and all of us, as
Australians, can take pride in the example it his set us in many
fields. It has been the product of successful co-operation oetween
the Commonwealth and the State Governments between management and
workers. In a sense it has been an international project as the
flags that you see around you here today will help to indicate.
International in that some 33 nationalities are represented amongst
the employees of the Snowy Scheme and amongst the contractors and the
suppliers there are of course many countries re" resented is well.
Fallure in any of these import &gt; nt relationships" ould have materially
affected the successful working of the roject but, ouite obviously
from the results, that cooperation has een close and effective.
I now want to say a word also as my colleague did,
about our attitude to the future of the Snowy Aountains Authority.
It will oe immediately recognised that a good deal of the success of
the organisation springs directly from the fact that they have been
associated with a project so exciting in itself, the nation's largest
single effort at development. In a sense, the very name the Snowy
Mountains Authority implies that its role ends once the Snowy Project
has been completed. There would be understandable criticism if the
Authority were retained fully in its present form without any major
project to sustain it and I am sure nboody, least of all those
associated with it, , wants to see the Snowy Authority to turn before
our eyes into a sort of white elephant.
But there are skills and experience gained in the
course of this great project which it is eminently desirable to have
continue serving the national interest and, with this in mind the
Government has turned in a responsible and constructive spirit to
seeing how much of the very valuaole skills and experience now
existing in the staff of the Authority could oe retained for further
projects of national importance. After a great deal of thought, it
has oecome clear that elements of the investigation design and
scientific services staff, including the hydraulic laooratories, could
very usefully be retained. Staff in these sections will not form a
nucleus for construction activities but, with their snecialised skills,
will be available to assist in major civil engineerin .: ork. It is
in this field particularly that the Authority has justly earned
Australian and even world-wide acclaim.
Je found that Commonwealth and Territory programmes
were not in themselves on a scale sufficient to maintain even these
important skills, so we approached the State Governments who have
themselves of course lirge constructive authorities, to see if they
had suitaole civil works in which they would ue prepared to engage
the Authority on a scale which would sustain a workable organisaion.
It now seems that the States individually would not have sufficient work
to justify retaining the specialised and necessarily expensive skills
of the Authority. But we find that their combined needs would justify
maintaining the specialist staff I have mentioned. So we can see an
/ 4 
-4-
important future for those who remain with the Authority. It is a
future which I like to see as spreading the successes which have
attended the Snowy venture into many parts of the Continent, and
overseas as well, in support of our Colombo Plan projects.
Just oefore we came here, Mr. Dann very kindly
presented to my wife and myself a oeautiful small table made up
of stones taken not only from projects in the Snowy area, but also
from those projects which the onowy authority has assisted in
overseas as part of our Colomoo Plan arrangements. This will be
a constant reminder to me that there is a usefulness in the Authority
which stretches even beyond the border of this country.
I am sure we can see the future of the Authority
in this way as forward looking constructive and efficient. There
will be no need to look back Ath regret on the disbanding of a highly
efficient organisation geared to achieve a very special purpose.
Rather, we will be looking forward to a new Authority holding
to-ether important specialist services and we will be seeing those
not needed for this purpose taking the skills they have learned and
applied in the Snowy pro ect out into the highways and plains of
Australia and perhaps into other parts of the world in our immediate
neighbourhood. And in this connection, Mr. Morton, we were delighted
to learn that the offer we made to the Government of New South '
that the advisory and designing services of the Authority could be
made available on suitable terms to your Government in relation
to the Eastern Suburos Railway, has oeen gldly accepted by the
Government of New South * ales.
Turning to development generally, there will always
oe found, of course, critics to argue that a government is not doing
enough for development. This Tovernment, we believe, is doing a very
great deal and we turn to the facts to tell that story for us. There
has ueen, over recent years in particular, a remarkable development
in Australia both oy private enterprise and by puolic authorities.
The result has been that Australia devotes a greater proportion of
its national product to fixed capital investment than does any other
major country in the world with the exception of Japan. That is the
only country that surpasses Australia in what it reserves from its
gross national product for its fixed capital investment. Our
percentage is in the neighbourhood of 27% of our national product
compared with just under 25% in Canada, 24% in NIew Zealand, and around
about 16% or 17% in the United States and the United Kingdom. This
investment comes very largely from our own domestic savings. ie
take pride in having an economy which can and does produce savings
of this order and a people responsible enough to accumulate them in
a continent which cries out for development.
Over the past ten years there has in fact been an
increase in the percent ige of our gross national product devoted to
capital expenditure by pblic authorities. Ten years ago a little
over 3 per cent of went to public authority investment. Now
it is a-little over 4 per cent and that is just short of the total
percentage of our G._ I that we now apply for defence purposes.
This increase reflects the concern which we and other Governments
have with providing our fellow Australians with their basic needs.
But the smallness of the fiures underlines at the same time the
wide scope left for the rest of the community to plan and execute
its own investment decisions.
In its own field of expenditure the Commonwealth
has oontinued to place great emphasis on capital works. If defence
expenditures are excluded, the pro ortion of expenditure from revenue
devoted to capital works has over he past 10 years remained over 
of the total and, as I shall mention in a little more detail
later, this has been coupled with ra-idly increasing grants to the
States for important capital works.
The place of the Snowy project in the Commonwealth's
own capital works prora~ mme is interesting. In 1949-50 we sent
million dollars on The Snowy and that was 4% of our total capital
works expenditure. The peak of expenditure on the Snowy was in
1959-Go when we spent 56 million dollars and it occupied no less than
2U% of our capital works budget. As the Scheme nears fruition and as
other caoital works projects are developed, the proportion of the
Commonwealth's capital works expenditure devoted to the Snowy has
now reduced to auout 10%, but this is one demonstration of the
broadening of the Commonwealth's developmental activities.
In the late 1940' s there was a concentration on
the Snowy project. That was due partly to its size but partly, I
suggest, oecause there were not many other major projects being
developed. with our new emphasis on development at particular
places and to meet particular needs, the number of active developments
has increased enormously. In the private sphere there are at present
associated mostly with mining some'of the biggest projects being
carried on in Australia today. In the public sphere the concentration
is on transport and on water. . es-tern Australia and Queensland in
narticular are benefiting from the 50 million dollar programme for
the construction of beef cattle roads. . iestern Australia and South
Australia are benefiting from the Commonwealth's expenditures on rail
standardisation in Western iAustralia alone the Comnmonwealth has
provided some 53 million dollars since 1962-65 for these purposes.
NewSouth -ales and Victoria have benefited from the Snowy Scheme
itself and from other assistance iven b the Commonwealth. I think,
for example, of the development of coal loading works at Newcastle
Port Kemola and jalmain in New South ' iales, of the railway standardization
and the Murray River developments, including the 3ufFalo and
Chowilla Reservoirs in Victoria. In Tasmania we have agreed to
assist with the financing of the Gordon River Project which will
accelerate hydro-electric development in that State.
In addition to these projects, the Commonwealth
has been active in promoting the national water resources development
programme which was announced in my policy speech last year. Through
this scheme we are wanting to extend the conservation and use of
water in rural industry and Australia surely is a country which
desperately needs development of this kind.' There are many other
projects related to water use and conservation with which the
Commonwealth has been associated. I hardly need rehearse these,
but they show how importantly we rate the efficient use of water and
how widely spread are the projects we are willing to assist.
In all of these projects we are tryin, to take a
national view. The money and resources bein' devoted to them are too
important and too scarce to waste. ; e cannot afford inefficiency or
laxity to enter into our decisions aoout development projects. , e
have made them and will continue to make them on the oasis of
jud ments about tieir economic importance and their national significance.
Much as we all would like to see our own particul r local projects
prosper, the national government will only oe serving the people best
when it endeavours to see parochial considerations in their national
setting and act in the interests of the nation as a whole.
As I have su gested, our concern for development
has extended beyond the projecs undertaken by the Commonwealth and
its instrumentalities. In this the Snowy Authority is an example of
whit is becoming a firmly established Commonwealth policy. / 6 
-6-
ie reco nise th-t both the national and ti. e
State governments canm n should play significant parts in the
development of australia. The Snowy has men one such development.
is it araws to its conclusion, the important skills it possesses
will be made availale to all pulic : uthorities throughout the
Commonwealth. Likewise we hive accelerated greatly our grants to
the States for canital purnoses. Ten years a ro tiese grants totalled
only 60 million dllars-la-st year they totailed 257 million dollars
and will be over 325 million dollirs this year. It can oe seen that,
far from the Commonwealth's expenditures on its own capital projects
declininY as expenditure reduces on its . reatejt single project the
Snowy Scheme they are, in point of fao rapidly increasing. Further,
the emphasis is on partnership with the States in'the int-rests of the
nation as a whole. Turning now to m immediate task today it is to
open the Murray 1 Project. I am old that each of the 10 , eneratin.
units in this station can ce started un automaticail ly by the closin.
of a switch in the control room. For The purposes of today's
ceremony I have been told to close the switch in front of me. Now
I add that any memuer of my family knows ti-t my mechanical ineptitude
is a matter of notoriety. At one point you are asked not to leave
this p lace until we have done so. I asked Mr. Dann what closing a
switch meant whether you pushed it foriaird or pulled it Oack. I
regret to say he ; asn't too sure himself and I hope that if I pull
it the wron, way, you all don't leave this place oefore I do.
However, I ave since oeen -cmforted by the information from Mr.
Dann that it only moves in one direction. So, by a fairly simple
process of trial and error, we shall get there. When I do eventually
successfully pull it in the right direction, the Numoer 1 unit will
start its full automatic sequence if everything goes according to
plan and will be comnnectyd to the line for the generation of
ower. It and the nine other units will each ce aule to produce
thousand kiloiatts of power for tAe grid which links New South
ales and Victoria for power purposes. I understand that, apart
from the noise you have already heard, you will hear some noise from
the turbine valve when I close the switch and the water be rins to
turn the t. uroines. ithin acout 20 seconds the machine wil oe: in
to rotate and then two minutes later the turbine will be producing
full power. So0 -is I now close the sitch, I have much pleasure
in declaring open the Murray 1 PoKer Station. 



EMBARGO: 8 p. m. Monday, 31st July, 1967 Q. t~ 6
DEAKIN MEMORIAL__ LECTURE
Title :" ALFRED DEAKIN.-HIS LIFE AND OUR TIMES"
" The Liberal Tradition in Australia"
INAUGURAL LECTURE DELIVERED BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. HAROLD
HOLT, CH, MP, AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MELBOUR NE 31ST JULY, 1967
When Alfred Deakin died, the Commonwealth of Australia was
not quite twenty years old. It was peopled, in Deakin's phrase, by a little
more than " five million Australian Britons" and had just emerged in the flush
of victory from the horror of World War 1. Six States, six former colonies,
united in a Federation by constitutional processes, had been fused by the
searing process of war and were beginning to reach out again in the forward
march as a nation. Deakin had watched the nation's ordeal from the wings. It
was the evening of his brilliant career, for his memory was failing in those
years and his intellectual powers were almost spent. Yet he saw the nation
he had done so much to create, and in whose service he had exhausted his
strength, face its first great test and emerge triumphant, with honours
written large on the banners of its short history. This was one measure of
his labours, and those of his fellow-founding fathers. He, and they, had
built well. What Alfred Deakin achieved in Victorian politics, in the union
of the States and in the first thirteen years of Commonwealth are well recorded.
The honour board is bright with his achievements, and in a nation not given
to loving, or even liking, its great men, his name Is revered and remembered.
He was a Liberal, with a little and a capital and it is of the man and
his work, and how, in the perspective of history, we see him against the
events of our time, that I speak to you tonight.
There was an age of Deakin and it embraced many things. The
spotlight fell first on Federation, and Protection as a policy for the nation.
These were our beginnings as a nation. Many laboured in those vineyards at
the beginning of the century and the credit must be shared. But Deakin was
the architect, the leader, the advocate three times Prime Minister in the
first thirteen years of Federation. His was the mind and his was the heart
that gave the new nation a course to steer.
We knowa good deal about him for he wrote as fluently as he
spoke and his letters and papers are voluminous. They are, however,
fragments of a whole, for in the six years that were left to him when he took
his leave of politics his wearied mind was not able to finish its task of giving
us his complete, personal story. His own book, now published as " The
Federal Story, is only part of the record.
He was born in Fitzroy in 1856, the only son of English migrants
who had made a honeymoon voyage to Australia and landed first in Adelaide,
where a daughter, Sarah, was born. Then the lure of gold brought the / 2 
2-
family to Victoria. Young Deakin had the great boon of a happy home. He
was not born to riches, and had no castles to defend in later life. Nor was
he born to poverty. There was no bitterness in his heart.
His father made a modest living in the coaching business
between Melbourne and Bendigo, and with Cobb and Co. Alfred had a good
education, first at a small mixed school ( mainly for girls) in South Yarra and
later at Melbourne Grammar School where it is fair to assume he learnt the
art of eloquent speaking from the talented Dr Bromby, a Cambridge man who
was then headmaster. Deakin was a voracious reader. He devoured books
and poetry of every kind with a fever that consumed most of his leisure hours.
Some biographers have been tempted to give him a dual
personality#. a lively, larking schoolboy, casual with his studies and a
dreamer, a visionary beyond his years. I don't think he was two people.
We all have our dreams, but it so happened that Deakin made many of his
come true. He was, in my judgment, a normal, intelligent schoolboy,
showing early signs of scholarship and the questioning of an alert mind on
matters of religion, philosophy and the social problems of the day. His
Christian faith was real from an early age but was never neatly packaged and
his mind wandered in lively interest through spiritualism and along nonconformist
ways. He was a liberal but, in the tune and temper of the times,
he was also a radical.
He came to politics at the age of twenty-two. Behind him was the
law he had had a few briefs as a barrister, some teaching, including a
period voluntarily given to night classes for the street urchins who excited
his interest and compassion, and experience in journalism as a political
writer for " The Age". He won the seat of West Bourke in Victoria in 1879
and resigned on his first day in Parliament at the conclusion of his speech
moving the Address -in-Reply because of an irregularity in the poll caused by
a shortage of ballot papers.
" If I am the representative of the majority of electors of West
Bourke, I will be returned again. If I am not their representative, I have no
right here. He was returned again and for twenty years was a State Member
and a Minister for seven of those years.
In those turbulent days when the life of the colony was raw and
privilege rated high, the Liberal spoke for most of the people against the
entrenched representatives of the aristocracy of wealth and prcperty. There
was a force and a fever about Deakin, the State politician who, though always
a Liberal, began as a free-trader and was converted by David Syme, the
proprietor of " The Age", to be a foremost advocate of Protect ion. He
injected the basic elements of long-lastingiberalism into Victorian politics
and is remembered, not only for what he did to bring Vi ctoria to the
Federation but for his irrigation policies and factory legislation.
His writing was his highroad to politics and in politics he found
his life's work. The British historian F. S. Oliver has aptly described
politics as " the endless adventure of governing men". Deakin was quick to
catch the tide. For him it was a vocation as well as a great adventure.
He was, like Sir Robert Walpole in another century, a
conspicuous example of the man who came at the right time. W alpole, you
will recall, fathered the system of Cabinet Government in the British
Parliament. Deakin was the right man fcr the infant Federation and showed
his superb skill by achieving so much, despite the fact that he headed a
minority party In government during his three terms as Prime Minister. / 3 
-3
He did, in his time, what Walpole did in another way in the eighteenth
century, an immemorial service to democracy by advancing the purpose
and authority of the Parliamentary system.
It was Walpole who governed Britain for a record term of
twenty years as chief minister and gave the House of Commons so much
of the strength once held exclusively by the Crown. It was Deakin who, on
the Australian scene, focussed the thinking of the States and State-minded
people on the institution of the Federal Parliament and on the national issues
that flowed through its corridors. The strength of the Australian
Constitution was there but it needed the eloquence and steadfastness of
Deakin to make it manifest and make a people one.
I find much in common between Walpole and Deakin though
the differences were there too. On V1 alpole I quote from Oliver
" He is the archetype of the normal politician who forces his way
into the highest positions. Hfe had a strong, clear, practical
judgment. He was valiant and steadfast. His crowning merit was
faithfulness to the King he served and his country. Neither fears
nor temptations could ever shake his fidelity.
Deakin was out of the same mould nearly two hundred years
later. Oliver goes on
" At the same time it would be senseless to deny that he ( Walpole)
was a self -seeker, an opportunist, a man without any tincture
of book-learning or philosophy."
Deakin was none of these. His scholarship was plain for all
to see and hear. He took nothing personal from politics and he commanded
respect on both sides of the House.
For all his magnificence as a speaker he seldom tipped his
shafts with venom. He was not ' vindictive. I think the sharpest tongue he
turned on a fellow member was when he once described the late W. M. Hughes
as " behaving like an ill-bred urchin whom one sees dragged from a tart
shop, kicking and screaming as he goes. It was a rare excursion and was not
his usual form. He later apologised for it.
The art of politics has not changed all that much since Walpole's
day or from Deakin's day. But the practice of politics has, and of course
the issues and causes have. The British blend of representative with party
government, from its beginnings, left a politician no choice but to usel~
best endeavours to defeat his opponents and, while that habit is still with us
today, we do it in a rather more sophisticated way. What we are concerned
with are the principles that guide us in power and which govern our conduct
in opposition. This is where we recognise the constancy of Liberalism. It
is a philosophy, with a translation in practical terms into a party platform,
and always matching the contemporary scene.
Gladstone asked and answered the question: " What do I
understand by Liberal principles? I understand in the main, THIS, by
Liberal principles: the principle of trust in the people, only relieved by
prudence. BUT, by the principles of thieir opponents I understand mistrust
ofth pople, only relieved by fear
am talking to an audience largely composed of Liberals 
-4
tonight and it is worthwhile us all remembering that the Liberal idea is
permanent, though the forms of expression are shaped to the times in which
we live. We are in the words of our own party platform, " dedicated to
political liberty and the freedom and dignity of man
Deakin wrote " we are liberal always, radical often and
never reactionary". There has inevitably to be change in emphasis according
to the needs of the times. There are today issues of great importance to the
nation which occupy the attention of politicians but they are not of a nature that
attracts radicals or do they call for radical thinking in the terms of those early
years of Federation. There have been changes in our party and in the opposition
forces, and in the Parliament itself. New systems and methods of communication
between the politician and the public have changed our habits and the tasks
which fall on Ministers andi back-benchers alike. But the old values remain.
It is because of the very fact of our pledge to political liberty and indiv.' fAival
freedom that we can absorb change and maintain our identity. Some comparisons
are appropriate. Deakin stood for a two-party system in Parliament, but he
never secured it in his own right. So he sought it, first by negotiation, and then
by fusion. From the outset of Federation he also recognised that the Senate
would be a party house and not a States' House, though it came into being to
satisfy the anxieties of the States who had taken a half -century or more to come
to the point of Commonwealth. Things, then, really haven't changed all that
much. Let me recall the procession of events and the course the
Liberals followed in those early years which eventually gave us the Liberal
party as we know it today. In 1901 the non-Labor parties were largely identified by:
their attitudes to the national issue of Protection as a fiscal policy for the nation.
There were the Liberal Protectionists under Barton and Deakin, and the Free-
Traders under Reid. The Labor Party held the balance of power in the first
Parliament, but it gave sufficient support for the Liberals to govern, with
Reid and his supporters making up the official opposition.
Then, in 1909, with Protection a settled policy for the
nation, the non-Labor forces of Deakin and Reid came together officially as
one party called the Liberal or Fusion party. In 1916, when the Labor
Government split on the issue of conscription, the late W. M. Hughes and others
who supported conscription, were expelled from the party and after attempting
to maintain a shaky Government with the Parliamentary support of the Liberals
for a few weeks they merged officially with the Liberals to form the
Nationalist party. So briefly there was a clear-cut two party system, but in
1919 the Country Party was formed and that party has retained its identity
to this day. The Nationalists were reorganised in 1931 into the
United Australia Party under the late J. A. Lyons, who like Hughes, was a
Labor man who had broken with his party and the Scullin Government, in this
instance, on matters of economic policy during the depression. The U. A. P.
was with us till 1944. That was the year of the re-birth of the Liberal party,
the year when the Liberal Party re-established itself -An name and policy under 
the leadership of Sir Robert Menzies. Its policy was broadened to meet the
needs of modern Australia and ; n response to the urge for reform and
rejuvenation from those who had become increasingly dissatisfied with the
limited horizons of the U. A. P. It was closer to the Deakin concept of a
party with a wide appeal, not limited by any of the divisions by wh! ich society
tends to stratify itself.
Deakin was a Prime Minister of minority governments there
were mostly " three, and sometimes four, elevens" in the House of
Representatives. But his skill as a negotiator, his affability, his patience
and the constructive nature of his policies enabled him to secure support,
substantially on his terms, to carry out effective and progressive government.
This gave us a permanent tariff policy, imperial preference, a defence
policy, a Federal legal system, an arbitration system, a basic wage and
age and invalid pensions.
In the Parliament today we have three parties in the House of
Representatives, and we are getting things done because of the way in
which, by our coalition with the Count ry Party, we are able to operate a
two-party system in terms of work and practical politics. The present
coalition has shown durability in the seventeen years of government since
its formation in 1940, although we have competed for votes and although the
role of the Country Party has been affected by the national need to promote
manufacturing industry and as urban growth outruns rural growth.
In the Senate, as you know, we are a long way from effective
two-party government having four parties and two independents or again
in terms of practical politics, three parties when we count the coalition as
one. There is no doubt that the advent of the Democratic Labor Party, as
yet another group, disillusioned in recent times, as others were in the past,
with Labor policy, has influenced attitudes in the electorates -and in the
Parliament, where the party is represented only in the Senate.
There has been little change In the principles the Liberal Party
applies to the conduct of its business and this if I may seem to speak in an
apparent contradiction is why we have been able to adjust smoothly to changes
in the political, economic and social worlds around us.
The party constitution says " Once an endorsed candidate is
elected by the people as a Member of Parliament he represents the whole of
the people in his electorate and is not subject to any directions from the
party's organisation. When he becomes a Member of the Parliamentary
Liberal Party he, with his colleagues, is expected to implement the party's
platform, but is favoured with complete freedom of action without any attempt
to coerce hiim This stands in remarkable contrast to the highly regimented,
sternly disciplined org-anisation of the Labor Party, where policy-makers
outside Parliament dictate what the elected representatives should do and,
furthermore, exclude parliamentary leaders from a vote on policy-making
decisions. In the Liberal formation, the party has policies through which
it expresses its Liberal philosophy. It recommends sometimes strongly
and advises the parliamentary party, but final decisions are in the hands of
the elected members, with Cabinet giving the lead.
To give an example of the freedoms the Liberal Party allows.
In the Parliament, while Senators meet with members of the House of
Representatives i n joint Party meetings, the Senators also hold their own
party meeting to determine their approach to issues in the Senate. And
again, of course, the same individual freedoms apply. Labor, on the other / 6 
-6
hand, has a single Parliamentary Caucus which determines the actions of
both parties and all their members, In both Houses.
The Liberal Party has its rules, its platform, and a
wide-ranging organisation. You might call it a loosely-knit co-operative,
inside as well as outside the party room and Parliament. There was a
signal demonstration of the liberality of the system recently during the
discussion and debate on the " Voyager" disaster. This was a grave matter,
raised by a Liberal back-bencher and taken freely through the party room and
the Parliament, although the Government had long ago reached a considered
judgment on the issues that were then re-opened.
And while 1 am on this point I would remind you that,
despite criticism of the growth of Cabinet power and its apparent domination
of Parliament, here was an example that the end authority remains with
Parliament in all matters. It is true, however, that the increasing pace of
government, and the number and range of matters that now have to be dealt
with, require positive leadership from the Cabinet and also decisions by the
Cabinet which, in Deakin's day, would have been the subject of long and
exhaustive debate in the Parliament.
The individual parliamentarian has a duty to represent
his electorate, to watch the interests of its people and be responsive to their
needs. He can do that most effectively when his representation fits into the
pattern of stat and national policy. He must, figuratively, lift his sights
from the parish pump to the Snowy Mountains.
There is, to my mind, as clear an obligation on the
Cabinet, as there is on the individual member, to take the responsibility of
leading in matters where new ground has to be broken or where action has to
be taken that has not been the subject of a mandate from the electorate. A
government, in simple terms, is elected first of all to govern and the
greater Information available, by virtue of their office, to those charged with
this task should encourage them to be bold, imaginative and forward-looking.
This is vital for a Federal Government today which has
to give leadership in significant fields not strictly within the constitutional
division of its powers. There is an old judgment, and a true one, that power
tends to move to the centre. Certainly, political responsibility has flowed
that way, although the Federal Parliament is not much larger or its powers
substantially greater. In the first Parliament there were 75 members in the
House of Rperesentatives. There has only been one major increase to 122
in 1949 and a recent submission to referendum for another was rejected by
a large majority. Yet to the business of Federal Government and Parliament
now come the needs of near twelve million people and a weight of extra
responsibilities which include national development, immigration, social
services, education, health, aborigines, civil aviation and tourism.
To deal with the work~ the Ministry has trebled in size
in the last fifty years. Deakin's last Ministry in 1909 was nine strong, with
one Minister without portfolio. Today the Ministry has twenty-six members,
of whom twelve are senior ministers making up the Cabinet.
You might like to have some Budget comparisons not the
one just coming up, for that is the business of my colleague, the Treasurer
but the one produced by the first Deakin Ministry in 1905-6 and the one we
brought down in Canberra last year. 
-7
Deakin's first Government raised $ 24 million, spent $ 9 million
and gave $ 15 million back to the States.-
Receipts towards our last Budget were 400 million, of
which me spent 600 million and gave 800 million back to the States.
! n Deakin's Budget, the States got 62 per cent of total receipts, . last year
they got 34 per cent giving substantial evidence of how the responsibilities
and commitments of the Federal Government have grown.
Defence has become a major itern in our Budget nowadays.
In 1938-39, the last year of peace before World War 11, the Federal Budget
was creeping up towards its first œ 100 million figure ($ 200 million) and the
defence provision was 800, 000.
The total Budget topped; 10O million in 1939/ 40 and included
a provision of œ 12 million for defence and war, which in the event grew to
million in the first year of the war. In our last Budget, the defence
provision reached the record level of 000 million.
In brief, spending on defence 30 years ago tock
around 8 per cent of the Budget. ( In Deakin's day it was much the same).
Today defence is taking close on 20 per cent of the Budget.
The first basic, or minimum, wage in 1907 was four dollars
twenty cents a week. Today the minimum wage is thirty-seven dollars
forty-five cents a week.
There are new issues to face today, totally different from the
battle-cry of the Deakin age, and in a different nation and society. We have
absorbed into the British stock from which we sprang, people of forty or
more different nationalities. We are an affluent society, we have full
employment, a total wage system and a prescribed working week.
The Labor Party today has not the industrial issues to support
that it had in other years and in seeking new footholds of power it is, of
necessity, moving towards the centre. The pull of Labor to the left has
lost its momentum and the party is now seeking to invade ground firmly
held by the Liberals, while at the same time being reluctant to jettison its
doctrinaire attachment to socialism, a borrowed philosophy that has not
had any significant revision since 1921 despite all that has happened in
the forty-six years since then!
The issues bef ore us are those of national growth, the welfare
of our people, national security and our place in the international community.
We are deeply committed to the orderly and energetic development of the
rich treasures of this continent, a better education for our young people,
improved health for the population, security for the aged and infirm, the
advance of our technological skills, aid for the under-developed nations,
a strong defence system, fulfilment of our obligations under treaties and
the continuing encouragement of a special relationship with Asia.
These things carry us forward, and others drop away into
the mists. The imperialism of Deakin's time has gone and the " White
Australia" cry from his first platforms does not have the same relevance,
and happily the term is no longer used by us. It is true that we have an
immigration policy with restrictive aspects as do all countries in one form
or another, but it is humanely shaped,
it takes special note of our geographical position in Asia and it has recently / S 
8-
been liberalised. Today we have just on 40, 000 people of non-European
origin living in Australia, of whom almost half are now Australian citizens
by bi rth or naturalisation. We are proud of our British heritage, and proud to share it with
these new Australians. While some of the old forms have disappeared, ties
of kinship remain and the traditional institutions of Britain are mirrored in
much of our life today. We have added to this special relationship with
Britain a complementary friendship with America, which too has drawn heavily
on British stock and institutions in the beginnings of its growth to be a mighty
pow'er. Liberalism is not static it belongs to the old world and the
new. In all the movements that have taken place it has been flexible,
pragmatic if you like, and yet it has never lost sight of fundamental
principles. I said earlier that the art of politics had not changed but that the
practice had. One biographer has ifiiminded me that Deakin was the only
Prime Minister of Australia to be summonsed for riding a bicycle on a
footpath. I confess tkat, as Treasurer, I was fined for speeding on the road
from Portsea. Mention of. this makes a point that the pace of politics is faster
today. It is also tougher and more demanding althougH we have new services
at our command. The stresses that took their toll of Deakin have been
replaced by new stresses and no parliamentarian can insulate himself from
them. We live in a jet age and we move into the supersonic age of
flight In three or four years' time. We live in a space age and, when the
orbiting satellites of the two most powerful nations on earth wink overhead
in the night sky as they pass in their endless orbits, few of us spare them a
glance. We live in an age of instantaneous communications and of the
exposure by television of public figures to audiences of millions in almost
every corner of the globe at any one moment in time. We have a new intimacy
with the world. The death of Julius Caesar took two years to become known
throughout the Roman Empire. Today we can speak by telephone to the South
Pole, we can see the shape of the earth on which we live photographed from
outer space. We can see pictures transmitted from the cratered surface of
the moon. In Canada recently when I attended Australia's Day at EXPO 67 in
Montreal I was able to read a facsimile of that day's front page of " The Sun"
newspaper, published here in Melbourne.
These are some of the fascinations of our day and age, but with
their excitements come new pressures on public men. Today a Prime Minister
goes round the world, not " trailing clouds of glory", but trailing a comet's
tail of cablegrams which lengthens as he goes and which keeps him posted with
going ou at home and jui abx eirywhe -else. He flies the jet streams at
33, 000 feet and six hundred miles an hour and can girdle the globe in fifty
hours. He sleeps, if he is lucky, in catnaps. Mostly he is at work on
his papers in flight and at most stopovers he has to face tlepress, radio
and television. He is expected to know what happened at Khatmandu that
very day and " Would he like to comment on what the Leader of the
Opposition said last night". The critics are unforgiving if a loose phrase by
a tired traveller can be taken the wrong way. 
-9
He has dinner when he should be having breakfast, and
lunch, perhaps, in a no-man's-land of time above the clouds. He breaks
every known rule for good digestion. It used not to be like that. It took fifty
days to London In a ten-thousand-tonner at the turn of the century and a
travelling pprllamentarian had time to rest, to study his subject, prepare his
brief and be on his mettle for his first engagements. He also had the perfect
excuse, if affairs of state abroad could best be handled by diplomatic absence,
of pleading he couldn't spare the time that would be taken in travelling. Now
it is a case of " Come over for a day or two.
In my foreign journeys, I have travelled many routes,
across the Pacific, through Asia, across the Atlantic, over the Polar ice-cap.
You measure your journey in hours, not weeks, and drive yourself just a
little dizzy by keeping up with the clock changes, especially when you find
yourself flying forward into yesterday! On my last journey I had two Sundays
going over and lost a Wednesday out of my life on the homeward run.
At the beginning of Federation there was really only one
popular route for parliamentarians bound overseas to London and back by
sea. Yet I note from the record that at one Imperial Conference Deakin
attended he was in London for six weeks and ave-Zaged only four hours' sleep
a night. So the pressures obviously were there though the forms were
different. The practice of politics at home was also different. There
was a sharper awareness among the voting public, they had things on their
mind and they wanted something done about them. The class divisions were
clear-cut and there were great causes around every corner. Apart from
organised meetings and street corner addresses, the press was the only
means of political communication. And the press of the day had " fire in its
belly". Newspapers took up opposite positions and saw little compromise.
" The Age" stood for protection and tariffs, " The Argus" stood for free trade.
Political speeches were reported at length and the
reporter, a fast, skilled and knowledgeable fellow, happily inserted his
comments, according to the policy of his paper.
A two-hour election speech of those days would rate ten
minutes on radio or five on TV today. It would rate half an hour on the
platform and half a column of main points in a daily paper. Speeches in the
Parliament of the new Federation were packed with immense detail. Many
ran longer than two hours and on one occasion Deakin spoke for three and one
quarter hours. I shudder to think what would happen to the business of the
House if Members claimed so much of their parliamentary colleagues' time
today. When Deakin made his first election policy speech as
Prime Minister at Ballarat it got six columns of solid type in the daily press.
And the type was smaller and the columns wider than they are today.
I liked the warm and friendly touch of one report of
Deakin's first Eastern States election campaign. He went by train to Sydney
and by carriage to the City Hall, where the " Town Clerk formally welcomed
him over a glass of wine, the Lord Mayor being absent in Melbourne for the
Cup. i Today news reporting of politics is not interlarded with
opinion and it is good that this is so. The opinion is supplied by editorials
and identified commentators. The cover is not as extensive, though major 
q 10
policy speeches and Budgets always get extended space. There is no
violent collisbn of newspaper policies as there was in the wilder, colonial
days. The general habit of the press, while broadly liberal or conservative
in its inclinations, is to keep its columns open to other opinions and the
presentation of policies opposed to its own. The press treatment of
politicians is much more an exercise in personal journalism and human
interest than it used to be.
Throughout his Federal political career, even as Prime
Minister, Deakin wrote anonymously for the London " Morning Post" and
for all his familiarity with the press, he remained sensitive to the
harsh light it shed on men in the posts of political power. In his " Federal
Story" he says
" Public life in Australia is impaired by the almost entire absence
of respect for the privacies of official life and for the persons
of those in power. The passion for equality which sways the
multitude contains a spice of envy which encourages the belittling
of even those whom they are delighting to honour. The crowd
always retains to itself the privilege of chastising its gods in
time of adversity while worshipping the m in days of prosperity."
Now it chastises them, even in, aiys of prosperity:
I like Oliver's comments. He says that a politician's critics
claim that " A politician lacks natural intelligence as well as education;
he has no foresight, no constancy of purpose beyond the pursuit
of his own advantage M oralists, idealists, humanitarians
are equally severe. They are shocked by his unveracity, by
the deadness of his soul to all the higher emotions.. he is never
more than a lip-servant of sacred causes and then only when they
happen to be in fashion.
" Soldiers, sailors and country gentlemen are convinced that no-one
who talks so much, and obviously knows so little, about the
conduct of war and the management of land can possibly understand
any department whatsoever of public affairs.
" The great army of company directors, and others of a certain age
whom newspapers describe as ' captains of industry' condemn
him for his lack of practical ability, initiative, push and go; they
suspect him of being a lazy fellow who likes to draw a salary for
doing next to nothing.
" Jingoes denounce him as a traitor if he is not forever plucking
foreign nations by the beard.... pacifists consider him to be the
chief cause of war
" The magnates of the popular press, secure behind their private
telephone entanglements, sneer at his want of courage; and the
man-of -the -world most ingenuous of dotterels takes up the
same tale from his club arm-chair
" What humbug, it is, for the most part, and what a welter should
we be in, if the politicians, taking these lectures to heart, were
to hand over the management of public affairs to their critics"' 
11
Ours is a grudging democracy which holds politicians
in low esteem. In the United Kingdom, with its long political tradition,
there is more respect for the office-holder, and he is more likely to be
judged on his merits. In America, the political leader is built into something
larger than life-size and there is disenchantment when it becomes obvious
that the leader cannot live comfortably In the rarefied atmosphere that has
been created for him. In Australia there is a comparative apathy towards
political issues. For example, you do not see the same surge, the same
vitality of political interest in student bodies that you get in other countries.
This, I believe, is because we have moved along ordered lines under the
Constitution, and because we have become an aiflucnt society, with a clear
course ahead of us, comfortably situated in a congenial Pacific environment.
Most contemplate the dangers of our geographical location as casually as
they accept the promise and opportunity opening before us. There are real
dangers in this if we let complacency over-ride the satisfactions of a job
well done. I find great encouragement in the type of young men and
women who are now being attracted to the Liberal Party. There is no " fiery
cross of Federation" ( as Deakin put it) for them to hold aloft and make the
sky bright with its blazing, but they have a challenge to take up. I have
mentioned it earlier and I repeat it now
It is concerned directly with the continuity of good and
responsible government.
II t i s concerned wi th tie growth df Australia and the
development of our new external relationships.
* It is concerned with the preservation of free enterprise
and political liberty.
It is concerned with Australia today, strong and free,
going forward across new horizons.
Our critics have said " Where are the great memorials
to all the years of Liberal rule?" My answer simply is that the nation itself,
and the shape it is in, is the finest memorial of all. The orderly but rapid
national progress in qn environment of political, social and economic
stability; the preservation of liberty, personal freedom and incentive for the
individual; the continui-ty of em, 51lyment, improvement in living standards and
social welfare, the growth in international influence these are some of the
more notable achievements consistently sustained in the years of post-war
Liberal leadership. Australians would do well to recognise the good fortune
we enjoy in a world where so much wretchedness, turbulence and insecurity
persist. We do not wish to be remembered by solitary spectaculars,
but by what we have done to ensure the happiness, prosperity and security
of the people of Australia and to be respected abroad for our policies and
achievements. There are new excitements around us and adventures
to share. The skills of new Australians have been joined to our own. Things
are happening in the cities and on the plains, along the valleys and over the / 12 
12
mountains. From the gold and the wool and the wheat of Deakin's day, we
have spread our energies and our initiatives very widely indeed.
We can make most things that others can make; we
have found oil and we are taking gas from the sea. The immensity of our
recently discovered mineral resources and the rapid start with their
development is helping to shape a new order of growth.
We can travel through the old kingdoms and former
colonies of Asia and we number among them more friends than most European
nations can count. This is the wider world in which we have to live now, and
we take our place in it with confidence, secure in the knowledge that the
Federation, the Commonwealth of Australia that Deakin did so much to
establish, has strength and that its people are proud of their great inheritance.
There is one final matter I want to put before you
because it will be of critical importance to all of us in the years ahead. I
refer to defence and the British Government's historic decision to make a
total military withdrawal from the mainland of ' South-East Asia by the
We are facing fundamental changes in our defence
strategy and in our foreign policy. For some time now we have had under
active examination the alternatives for Australia in the event that Britain
should decide upon the course its Government has now declared. In o~ ur
planning we take account of the interests and capabilities of our friends in
this area and elsewhere. It is appropriate to remind you that our defence and
our security are covered by two parallel defence lines in the Pacific and
South-East Asia. The first line is one of friendships, trade and aid
over the whole area. Our trade has increased by loseon f pr cenwflth
Asia in recent years but much of it has been with Japan. We must diversify
this effort so that we can help the economy of Asian nations to become viable
and so assist them to develop their own defences.
We are giving 0. 7 per cent, of our national income to
external aid and in this we rank second in percentage terms after France,
among the aid-giving nations of the world. At this time, the average level
of world aid for the needy nations is declining and nations like America and
Britain are reducing the relative percentage they give. Australia on the other
hand is still increasing her level of aid.
Already we are associated with every established
international aid-giving organisation of any substance and we are giving our
aid without strings. Our traffic in friendship is also increasing. As your
Prime Minister, I have been to Asia three times in 20 months and my Ministers
have been in the aggregate many more times than that. A cultural exchange
programme with South-East Asia in due course will, also, I hope add to
goodwill and understanding. All these things are elements in the first line of
defence. The second line of defence is one covered by treaties / 13 
13-
with friendly powers and includes currently a military capability in South-
East Asia. We have been associated with Britain for many years past in the
Commonwealth area of Malaysia and Singapore. Yet this is not the only
forward post we are manning or where our only interests lie and I need not
tell you how vital it is to us that the cause for which we are fighting in support
of the United States and other allies in Vietnam should be sustained until an
honourable peace is won. It would be wrong for me at this stage to attempt
to indicate to you what the new shape of our military defence line will be,
but I want to say this. The two defence lines that we have are of vital
importance to us. Their strength is a responsibility that a Government has
to assume for the people who have placed it in power. It is a responsibility
falling sqtnrely on a sovereign, independent nation
In the first days of Federation, Alfred Deakin fought
stoutly for an Australian Navy. He urged the formation of a permanent
Australian military force and for compulsory national service to support
those forces. He foresaw the tasks that one day must come to a young nation
in the Pacific and Asian areas. We face them now. There is no turning
aside from our geography nor must there be any turning aside from what we
Liberals conceive to be Australia's national destiny. 



R Is
CHAMBER OF MANUJFACTURhES
A7-NNUAL DINNER, SYDNEY, N. S. W. L I BR A9
AUGUST, 1967
Main points from speech made by
the Prime Minister, Mr. HaroldiTlolt
Developments since , iorld_'\' ar II
Since the second world war thereo has been a
tremendous surge of development which has completely
transformed the Australian economy.
iiany of you will have little difficulty recalling
the days when it was said " Australia rides on the sheep's
back". There was some important mining activity and an iron
and steel industry. But in the main, manufacturing was still
confined to food processing plus some embryo industries
struggling to penetrate the local market.
There was a time when the tag " imported" appeared
to mean " superior". The pos,_ ibility of exporting manufactured
goods would have been regarded as rather fanciful in those
days. In the two decades since, Australian primary
industry has progressed to a point where it is one of the
most advanced and diversified in the world; it is highly
productive with perhaps the only obvious limit to its
potential being the barriers it meets in marketing its
products overseas. This development has stemm--ed largely from the
application of capital and improved technology a
development in which secondary industry has had a large
and important role to play. Improved machines and
fertilisers combined with the skills of our farmers have
combined to make these adva-nces in primary industry possible.
The massive mineral discoveries of recent yeors
not only offer gi eat new sources of export earnings but they
will provide new sources of power and the prospects for the
development of a great new range of processing and manufacturing
industries. They are also calling for many products of
secondary industry, for mining on the scale envisaged in this
country today is a highly inechanised, capital intensive
operation. Once we got settled down after the immediate
post-war period, Australia's manufacturing industry made
rapid progress. For some, old traditions die hard, but I
think it is fair to say that in this period the old tag
" imported is better" was laid to rest. Dfanufacturing
quietly and efficiently went about the business of supplying
a wide range of domestic needs, and a whole new range of
consumer durable industries appeared to meet the demands
of rapidly improving standards of living which put
refrigerators, washing machines and other appliances into
almost every home and added an ever-growin' stream of
motor cars to the roads.
The Lord lyayor and Yr. Askin might, of course,
have mixed feelings about some of the blessings engendered
by the latter item. I recall here Henry Kaiser's aphorism
" problems are opportunities in work clothes' ( quoted at
the Queensland alumina opening early this month). And all
these things demanded great quantities of the products of 
the more basic secondary industries such as iron and steel
and these in turn responded with a tremendous development
and expansion which can be seen so dramatically in the area
from Newcastle to : i', ollongong and at Whyalla.
Australia now has a very wide range of manufacturing
industry with over 60,000 factories employing about 1.3 million
people. This is some 28% of the work force, a proportion which
is higher than that engaged in manufacturing in Canada, France
and Japan and little lower than that in what are truly the
great industrialised nations of the world. For instance, in
the United 63tates the proportion of the work force employed
in manufacturing is 29%.
Dut these bare statistics, important though. they
may be as indicators of industrial progress, do not reflect
the impact that manufacturing industry has had on the lives
and well-being of millions of Australians.
If I may again revert to the immediate post-war
period in the first post-war census, that of 1947 the
Australian population was about 7.6 million, today it stands
at 11.7 million. In those days the wrork force numbered
3.2 million, today it is about 4.7 maillion. But this
accumulation of people and of workers did not come, as it
were, only from our own resources, many came to us from
overseas. Our continuing immigration policy has since
become an absolutely basic factor in the economic life of
Australia. But these new settlers needed jobs and they -wanted
homes and all the things that go with them. IW. anufacturing
has delivered on both sides; it has provided the goods and
the jobs. Some 26% of the work force currently employed in
manufacturing industry are migrants. In the period ' 1947-61
the male wiork,, force employed in manufacturing rose by
270,000 of whom 222,000 or 82% were people who arrived in
Australia since 1947.
Pe rcentage o Jirants of
otl Emplonmnt-in rcent age
Car and ship-building industry 28
Petroleum and coal products 36
Extracting, refining and founding
of metals 33
There is no overall figure for th-e iron and steel
industry, but the employment of migrants is relatively highin
some cases as much as
In the vollongong-Port T,' embla area where there
has been so much manufacturing development, 28,/ of the
popjulation is overseas-born. For these people the development
of industry in Australia is not just a statistic, it is a
vital part of the way of life they have come to emnbrace in
this country. I talked earlier about the importance in this
country of the production of consumer goods and particularly
consumer durables. But we must remember that Australian
industry is not merely concerned with producing washing
machines and T. V. sets, important as these things are in
our standard of living. Australian manufacturing industry
is much more varied and sophisticated than many people
realise. 
vle produce items many people associate only with
the most highly developed industrial economies. For example,
radio telephone equipment and transistorised airways beacons
are made here. 4e have developed some unique and complex systems
like the Jindivik pilotless jet, the Ikara anti-submarine
missile and the 1! alkara anti-tank guided weapon, products
which have been produced not only for our own use but for
export to overseas markets including the United Kingdom and
the United States.
In one of the most advanced fields of technology
space exploration we are making a contribution. At ioomera
Australia has one of the largest land rocket ranges in the
world 1,200 miles long over practically uninhabited country.
Currently we are engaged, in conjunction with the United States
and B~ ritain, in investigating problems of re-entry from heights
exceeding 500 miles.
New Opportunities for Trade
If I may re-enter the early post-war period I would
like to say a few words about exports of manufactured goods.
In this field also there has been notable growth flowing from
manufacturing industry. I mentioned a few moments ago some
items which we export to the United States and Britain but
these were only a few of many items which we now manufacture
and export to countries from which wie once imported the same
types of goods. But we cannot rest upon our laurels, we must
continually be on the lookout for new markets for the products
of all types of industry.
4e are all aware of the remarkable development of
our trade with Japan. For the three years prior to the signing
of the Trade Agreement with Japan our exports to Japan averaged
,134m. In 1966-67 we exported goods valued at .588m. to Japan,
an increase of 339% during the period of the , gAr eement.
But the importance and attraction of the Japanese
market should not be allowed to lead us into neglecting other
areas of Asia where trade prospects are bright.
Our exports to other Asian countries last financial
year exceeded .416m. or 13.7%-0 of our reported exports even
though our share of the total market available in Asia was
small. In Malaysia, for instance, wie supplied about of
the market. It is true, of course, that much of the available
market is virtually closed to us because of the nature of the
products required or other economic factors, but there is a
vast, largely untapped market for Australian products in the
Asian area. As economic development in Asia proceeds opportunities
will increasingly arise for alert Australian exporters. Taiwan
is planning an iron and steel industry and Australia will have
an opportunity to supply iron ore. In South Korea, the
extraordinary economic growth there has created a potentially
large market for Australian foodstuffs and materials, machines
and machinery. In some countries such as Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos 
trading opportunities may presently seem to be small but if
there can be stable government and peace in the region these
nations will11 progress to a stage wNh: re improved trading
possibilities will arise.
Zconomic rehabilitation in Indonesia would open up
another dimension of trading opportunities.
Tariff Policy lvuch has been written lately about tariffs and
tariff policy and some people have been demanding that the
Government should state just what is its tariff policy.
Some years ago Sir Robert Dlenzies, in his 1962
inaugural John Storey memorial lecture excellently summarised
the Government's position. I would like to quote to you the
relevant parts of his statement on that occasion:-
" The Tariff Board is a purely statutory body, created
by the discretion of P1" arliament and, indeed, subject to
the control of Parliament. In this sense, it is an
instrument of policy and in no sense its master.
It has, however, been recognised by successive governments
that, though what I have said is constitutionally true,
it is important that, for international as well as
domestic purposes, the Tariff Board should possess a
high measure of independence, that the integrity of
its advice should be preserved, and that it should not
be subject to any form of" day-to-day political
instruction.
I accept and maintain these propositions. Yet the Tariff
Board, our principal adviser on import duties, cannot
sensibly be expected to operate in a completely detached
intellectual vacuum. It must have in its mind some
standards or policies by which to teat the cases
presented to it.
For a long time it has acted on the principle that it
should recommend tariff protection only to " economic and
efficient industries'. But that principle was, and is,
itself an expression of Government policy. Of late,
indications have been given on behalf of my own. Government
that the princi-,) e needs extension, and that the Tariff
Board should have in its mind thne national economic policy,
meaning by that the national economic objectivcs, as a
whole There are certain features of national economic policy,
which I do not regard as the subject of party controversy,
which cannot be ignored by any statutory body if the
nation is to achieve a dynamic progress, growing in
resources, population, employment, industry, and
international solvency. For a Tariff Board to ignore
their existence would be to detach its work from the
great stream of Australian development. ' This, I am sure,
it would not wish to do."
The tariff policy of the Government has been clearly
stated for a long time, and I reaffirm it to be that reasonable
and adequate protection will be given to economic and efficient
industry. The Government looks to the Tariff Board for advice
on whether an industry is economic and efficient. On a few
occasions they have been comparatively few the Governmen~ t 
has seen fit to say in the terms of reference to the Tariff
Board that its policy is to give assistance to a particular
industry, for example, copper production in remote areas,
crude oil production and production of penicillin. On these
occasions the 3oard is asked to recommend in its published
report its view of the best way to carry out the policy.
But outside of these, tariff protection has been
given to industry only following a finding by the Tariff Board
that the industry is economic and e ffici ent.
The policy does not include, as some peopl? pretend
it does, that every industry that seeks protection shall be
given protection. Industry is given protection if it measures
up as being economic and efficient.
There has been some talk of there being a " high
protection" policy. In truth, our overall level of tariffs
is moderate, and we do not use the quotas and other
administrative devices that so many other countries turn to.
And an important point is that tariff prot~ ction is not given
in excess of that recommended by thc Tariff Board after an
open public inquiry and report. The Government is bound to
this under the U. K.-/ Australia Trade Agreement.
Periodically there are claims that some definition
of the termns " econom-. ic and efficient" should be laid down.
This is a matter that has been carefully considered on a
number of occasions. ? ieteran industry is economic and efficient is a
matter of judgment, and it is a judgment that must take in
all the relevant circumstances of each particular case. There
is a wide range of isaes which can affenct such a judgment and
these can vary in emphasis depending on the circumstancc-s of
each case. The Government, rather than confine the Board to
thc limits of some definition which it may or may not be
possible to lay down, prefers to leave the question to the
independent judgment of the Board, taken in the lighlt of all
the circumstances. Finally, let me turn to the quite baseless charges
sometimes made about political pressure b , ing applied to the
Tariff Board and about its ind~ ependence being undermined. I
take it that the adherents of this line don't build their case
on the few occasions when the Government does not accept the
recommendations of the Board. Afterall, responsibility for
tariff policy and tariff-making rcsts with the Government and
the Government alone. The Tariff Board's role is advisory.
On the same grounds their case could hardly be based
on the Government's desire that the Board should, in offering
its advice, have regard to the general objectives of overall
Government policy. Nor could it rest on the few occasions when
the Government considers it necessary to tell the Board in a
reference that it has a particular line of policy.
The truth is that the ' 2ariff Board has complc: te
independence in conducting its inquiries. It is expected to
exercise its independent judgment in offering advice to the
Government. If the Government wants the Loard to take note of
a particular line of policy it says so in public, in the
reference. I know of no hidden instructions, no secret messages
and no surreptitious pressures. M~ y colleague the Mviriister for
Trade has confirmed this. If the people who harp on that line
believe they have knowledge to the contrary they should bring it
out into the open and it will be investigated and answvered. 



0
OPENING OF BUILDING CLENTRE
NEWCASTLE, N. S. d. 1st September, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Holt
Mr. Pinfold, President of' the Newcastle Master
Builders' Association,
YMy Lord M1, ayor,
1-r . President of' the Senate,
Parliamentary Colleagues, I see them around me, and
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I feel it a very happy coincidence that my visit
here for the opening of' your Festival should also have
enabled me to join with you in this very significant function
here this afternoon. It is typical of' the enterprise which
has brought Niew. castle to the position of' being sixth largest
urban area in Australia, only surpassed by five of the capital
cities of the Commonwealth, that you've again demonstrated a
sign of your enterprise in this fine building and the admirable
community purpose that it will assist in serving.
Home-building for Australia is, of course, one of'
our most vital activities, not only be:-cause we are a homeloving
people but there is no community in the world which
can point to a higher percentage of home ownership than is
to be found here in Australia. Seventy per cent of the
dwelling units occupied in Australia are occupied by people
who are either owners of them or are in process of acquiring
them as they pay off what is due on them. And that puts us
in the forefront of all the countries of the world in this
connection.
0 of accommodWNae tiaolsno ofe njanoyy tchoeu nthriyg hefsotr wshtiacnhd arrde coorf dsa vacialn abbielity
ascertained and we have a rather higher rate of population
growth than most of the other industrialised communities of
the world. Indeed, if the United Stateu or the United Kingdom
were to be required to build houses on the scale that our
population rate growth makes necessary, it would be found
necessary in the United States to build another half million
homes a year and in the United Kingdom another 180,000 homes
a year. This will be an indication, I am sure, to us all that
we do require a great proportion of our national resources,
our manpower, our skills in order to carry out our home-building
programme required by our growing population.
Currently homes are being built at an annual rate
of 115,000 homes. Jow it is not merely desirable that homes
should be built, it is no less desirable that they should be
built to serve those who occupy them with comfort and
convenience in pleasant surroundings at economic cost and with
good standards of materials and construction. This, of course,
is where your own Home-Building Information Centre can make
such an imp~ rtant contribution.
I am sure that many citizens of this growing city
of Newcastle, one of the most rapidly growing urban communities
of the C." ommonwealth, will take value and assistance from the
service which this Building Centre can provide. I hope that
the achievements of the building industry already well
exemplified in this city will be added to usefully by the
service that this centre can provide. In the knowledge
that it will bring an important amenity, an important 
additional information service to the people of this city I
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your colleagues on what
you are doing in the way of a public-spirited contribution
of this kind and I hope that for many years this information
centre on building will serve the citizens of Newcastle, as
indeed it serves the larger interest of the Australian nation.
And so, Sir, it is with pleasure that I have accepted
your invitation to be here formally to declare this building
open and I hope that I shall successfully execute my formal
undertaking of unveiling the plaque and of opening the door
to the building, opening the door to the centre.
I now formally declare the building centre of
Newcastle, New South Wales, officially open and congratulate
the Raster Builders' Association on its construction. 



OPENING OF MIATTARA FESTIVAL
NEW~ CASTLE, N. S. YI. 1st September, 1967
Speech by the Prime bMinister, Mr. Harold Holt
My Lord Mvayor,
Alderman Bell,
The Princess of Mattara, 1966, my greetings, and
ly congratulations in advance to Princess of Mattara, 1967,
1Vdy greetings to all the Distinguished Visitors present, and
To you, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Boys and Girls,
This is for me quite a unique occasion because although
it is your 7th Lattara Festival it is my first and I am delighted
to have the honour of being with you, ( I understand with the duty
of formally declaring the Festival open), and I hope I do not
forget to do so by speaking too long, but also to be with you on
what represents part of what has occurred to me to be a very
balanced diet of living as one finds it here in this rapidly
developing city of Newcastle. Because you now rank as the sixth
urban area in point of size in the Commonwealth of Australia,
only surpassed in size by five of the capital cities and I suspect
that you will catch up with one or two of those before you are
O much older. . Earlier today as I flew around the city with the Lord
1ilayor, I found him very knowledgeable, pointing out to me all
the important developments which were occurring here. I could
not fail to appreciate the significance which Newcastle occupies
in the life of this great Commonwealth of ours. Not only are
you ranking sixth in numbers but in industry, significant in the
diversity of your industries both of the engineering industrial
type and on the land with a wine industry which commands a
premium price around Australia. You have here one of the most
critically important areas of the whole of the Commonwealth of
Australia. But proving that men and women do not live by bread
alone or even wine alone you have developed this happy Festival,
this Mattara Festival, the Mattara I understand signifying the
hand of friendship, and if there is one characteristic which we
regard as typical of the Australian, it is his capacity for
mateship, for feeling at one and happy with his fellow citizen,
and your Festival here tonight appears to symbolize that spirit
which we prize so much in our national character.
Now it is not my purpose to dletain you at length when
you have such greater attractions in the young ladies I have
been seeing backstage to come before you and accept the judgment
of those who have been set that difficult task.
But I do ex -press the hope that just as the years which
have gone have marked a most remark~ able development in Newcastle
that here you have deve-boped a civic and community spirit which
I believe not only puts a stamp of individuality upon your
community but marks you out as one of the great thriving
enterprising areas of the nation as a whole.
Because with that you have also developed this festive
balance to the otherwise more sombre and serious aspects of life,
I hope that this 7th Mattara Festival will prove to be the most
distinguished, the most festive, the most happy of all those which
have made up the series. And it is with good wishes to you all,
the hope that you can go on as a community from strength to. strength
cihn rno soenrxianaf uan. 1ha~ rasl o thefthatSILpoytincots
an he same time orma y ec. areesi open. 


 4th September, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Federal President and Colleagues of the Liberal Party:I think I must first thank you, Mr Federal President, and indeed congratulate you for that splendid introductory speech which launched our proceedings here earlier today.
You have made my task a lot easier in that you have outlined the essence of our policy in relation to Viet Nam. You have spoken of what we as Liberals contributed to the growth and security of Australia and you have introduced, I think in a most valuable way, the important difference which~ exists between this organisation and that of our principal parliamentary opponent, the Australian Labor Party. I think it might be useful if I were to begin what 1 have to say to you all tonight by picking up what the President had to say in relation to this matter because, really, it is fundamental to political life in Australia.
For many years there has been a disposition on the part of the Press and quite a few other people to take the view that there is no effective opposition to the Government and therefore we are the opposition and we'll keep them on their toes and sharpen them up. But in more recent times, because there's been a change of leadership, they've been projecting our opponents as a viable alternative to the Government which I have the honour to lead as your parliamentary leader.
If that is the case, then 1 repeat tonight what I said when I spoke on the external affairs debate after my colleague the Minister for External Affairs had given us one of the most valuabl:) e and articulate presentations Of Australian foreign policy I believe has ever come before the National Parliament. I said that if people are seriously going to regard the Austral: ian Labor Party as a viable alternative to the Government I lead, then we all have an obligation, the Press, the Parliament and the public to probe the policies offered as alternative national policies as searchingly as they probe the policies of this Government and it is proper that our policies should be probed. After all, we have the destiny of a great nation in our hands and what we decide as a government affects the future course of the nation, and affects the well-being of the men, women and children of this country.
It is important not only to recognise that but to consider it when you are discussing alternatives because this is not a mere matter of an expression of resentment or pique or displeasure. When a party s voted out of office or a government is and I certainly don't expect to be if people understand the issues clearly enough before them but when a government is voted out of office and some other government replaces it, then that's more than just the changing of the guard, it's a changing of the whole course of the national life, the stream of the national life.
Arthur Calwell once said if he came into office, he would change the face of Australia and the present leader of the Australian Labor Party, although he's not quite so blunt about it, if you take the trouble to analyse his policies, has his own quite radical treatment for this country, quite different from the treatment that a Liberal-led Government has given to it. I say that, not because I feel we can't offer very much better but because I think it is vital that people realise that we offer very much better.
And so the first thing that I stress tonight is that we offersomething very much better in the way of a structure of political organisationand something very much better in the way of the principles which shouldguide a political organisation. You opened on this note, Mr President, veryproperly, and you mentioned that there had been the disposition on the partof some commentators to regard the Labor Party as being pretty much inthe same sort of organisational picture and status as ourselves at this time.Well, some of those who claim to be political analysts and even leaderwriters can err. It has become important and more significant when I amsure quite wittingly because he's much too intelligent a man to do itunwittingly the Leader of the Opposition presents the position in quite adifferent light from that which actually exists.In an interview on " Four Corners" on 5th August, Mr Whitlam,referring to and I quote his words " The first change in the Federal structureof the Labor Farty since 1915" said this: " It was a very great structuralchange and it puts us ahead in our structure of any of our competitors".Later in the same interview he said" It can never be said again that our party doesn't trust the parliamentaryleaders who have to express its policies to the people. All the leadersare now part of our Federal structure. There's no other politicalparty which supports them in this way. The Liberals, for instance,say that the Federal leader and the Senate leader can be on their topFederal body but we have four Federal leaders and the six Stateleaders. Thatand Mr Moore, interviewing him, interrupted at that point " And still the36 faceless men, Mr Whitlam?"" Well, whether they are faceless or not, the point is this that theparliamentary leaders are full partners in the process of makingpolicy on the Federal conference, and the four office bearers in theFederal Party are full partners in administering policy. This meanswe have completely removed the stumbling block. We're ahead of allAustralian parties and we are comparable to overseas parties.Well, let's just analyse that for a moment or two, Mr Chairman.Dr Cairns made a statement on 6th August at the Hiroshima Day Rally whichhe addressed " Conference decides policy not the Leader or Deputy Leaderor any other member. What makes up the Conference of the Labor Party?There's a fundamental difference between Liberal and Labor policy determination.There is a fundamental difference in approach. If you re-examine ourobjectives, you'll see set out in our official Federal platform that ourobjectives are for an Australian nation dedicated to political liberty andfreedom and dignity of man, with Parliament controlling the Executive andthe law controlling all and looking primarily to the encouragement ofindividual initiative and enterprise as the dynamic force of progress.Well, in those words you have the fundamental difference betweenthe Liberal Party approach and that of the Labor Party. After all, when youtalk about political liberty and the freedom and dignity of man, there's notmuch dignity nor political liberty about a situation in which the elected / 3
-3representatives of the people are told, most of them without having any saypersonally in the decisions taken, Just what they are to do. There' s notmuch elemnent of Parliament controlling the Executive and the law controllingall when the parliamentary representatives from the Australian Labor Partyare controlled by the Conference and It's true they've added 11 people to theso-called 36 faceless men. But it is that Conference which controls theParliament and this, of course, is where we part company in a fundamentalsense. The fundamental difference betwen the two parties is that theLiberal Party from its inception and I say this as one who has been a memberof it from the time of its foundation has recognised that the electedrepresentatives of the people decide policy. They accept responsibility forit and they are answerable to the electorate for it. That doesn't mean, ofcourse, that we don't give the weight you would wish us to give to what comesup to us through this Council or through the valuable committees of thisorganisation, our joint Committee on Policy, our Women's Committee, ourRural Committee and the other Committees which look at aspects of policy.But you have never claimed either the right nor have you eversought to impose the will of a non-elected body of people upon the electedrepresentatives of the people. And we must make this abundantly clear to thepeople of this country. It has a very practical application as I shall come totell you in a moment.in contrast, the Labor Party policy is not decided by the electedrepresentatives of the people but by a Federal Conference made up of the36 faceless men plus four ex officio members of the Federal Parliament plusthe six State parliamentary leaders and a delegate from the Northern Territory.This body has no responsibility to the electorate, it is not answerable to itand the rank and file of members of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Partyhave no direct say themselves in policy determination. But although theyhave no direct say, they are subject to expulsion if they do not accelt theConference decision as completely binding. We had an illustration of thisin the shape of Sam Benson.Sam Benson didn't defy them on policy but he wanted to belong to aDefend Australia Committee, and they didn't like this Committee because itbelieved we should be in Viet Nam, that we should have a stronger alliancewith the United States, and that we should be doing other things for thesecurity of Australia. So although he wasn't able to determine the policy ofthe party nor even have a say in it in the essence, they expelled him.Now I say this has a practical application for a significant part ofAustralia in that we have a critical by-election coming up shortly i~ nCapricornia. I had the pleasure last night of meeting our candidate, FrankRudd, and I would think I had hardly ever met a candidate who inspired meimmediately with more confidence than Frank Rudd. If there was ever a manfor the seat and a man for the job, 1 think Frank Rudd is that man and I wantthis party to know that despite all the by-election influences that operateI'm not going Into the Capricornia by-election to hold the same vote that wegot at the general election. Some people would think that was a good enoughgoal. We're going into Capricornia to win, and to win Capricornia with a manwho will give to that part of Central Queensland an effective voice not onlyon the outskirts, with no say in policy himself, but able to provide an effectivevoice himself inside our Government party. That's the kind of man I believeCapricornia needs and that's the kind of man we hope to elect in Capricornia. / 4
-4Now, his opponent Dr Everingham I have no knowledge of himand I make no comment about him other than this: That he can be no voicefor Capricornia in the sense of making policy inside the Labor Party becausehe's not one of the chosei I h., thar it', dt-td-hbr õ : andt are thesupreme masters of policy in the Australian Labor Party.Mr Piesident, you spoke today about the importance of theSenate elections and I'd like to dwell on that for a moment or two because 1,too, believe it to be a critical and important election. If the Australianpeople truly believe in democratic government and are prepared to give arecord majority to the Liberal Party and its coalition partners In the Hoqseof Representatives, then they could hardly have conceived that the will of theelectorate as so registered was going to be frustrated by the Senate. Well,you may say up until now it hasn't been frustrated. The fact of the matteris that we are in a minority in the Senate, partly and quite significantly fromthe ill-furtune of the death of former colleagues. But surely it runs againstthe common sense to give a record majority in the one House and then say," Yes, but we are going to tie your hands behind your back in the other one".And that is where this Senate election becomes of quite critical importancefor us. Now, you mentioned earlier today, Mr President, that in order tohave a working majority there, we must win five out of the six EA ates at thiscoming Senate election and I'm amazed at your moderation. We've got towin six out of six States at this coming Senate election because that is whatI believe represents the will of the Australian people on the issues for whichwe stand. The issues haven't changed since the last general election, as Ishall hope to show in a moment or two and if we are to carry out the will ofthe people as expressed to us less than a year ago, then we've got to have aneffective working majority in the Senate.I wonder how many speeches I've heard from Labor men on theother side of the House saying that the House of Representatives should bethe supreme Court of Appeal of the Australian people. They even wanted itto override the High Court in its decisions, and as for the Senate frustratingthe will of the popularly-elected majority in the House of Representatives,well, earlier Labor men that I've heard speak on the subject you'd havethought this would have poisoned them before they'd utter such a sentence.And their platform this rather handsomely produced version you'd find allyour old friends inside there if I had time to refer to them. This stillcontains a proposal for the abolition of the Senate and this presumablyremains a fundamental tenet of Labor belief.But could you, having regard to that, imagine a more cynicaluse of the Senate than is being made at the present time by the AustralianLabor Party? They're even seriously debating on Wednesday whether theSenate should virtually reject the Budget of this Government. They know theconstitutional position about the relations between the two Houses. But weget these despatches through the Press as to whether Mr Whitlam can carrythe day or not, he presumably resisting the pressure to have the Senatereject the legislation the postal legislation which is an integral partof our Budget. And it's not. ut on some great ground of principle that he'siesittng thfs:,-it's put on the grounds. that it may be a bit too early for theLacxor ' Prty to go to an election. I repeat, one could hardy imagirie ina Farty that is pledged because these men. areb all pledged to carry out theplatform of the F arty pledged -to abolish -the Senate, mrecynical disregardof principle in the use that -they are making of it. Well it's for us to
capture the Cenate and we are encouraged by the enthusiasm and thestrength of support which we have had illustrated to us here in the courseof these discussions. You have mentioned, Mr President, various pdicy items, thatwe've quickly given effect to our election undertakings and you spoke ofthe significance still of the Viet Nam issues. I'm not going to talk in anydetail tonight about the domestic items because if time permits I hope tospeak on the Budget tomorrow and I shall therefore be dealing with thedomestic economic situation in rather more particularity than is possibletonight. But ore of the difficulties as a party is that it is so long sincethere was a Labcr Government in office that a generation has grown up whichhas no mental picture of what the situation was like. '*. hen we're attackedon this aspect of policy or that aspect of policy, they don't stop and askthemselves, " But what did the Labor fellows do when they were there?"Well some of us have been there long enough to remember what happenedwith the Labor Party, and I'm only going to rattle off quite quickly to youa few figures because you're an intelligent enough audience and experiencedenough to apply these to the situations.One of the things thrown at us by our opponents is, of course,that we're a heartless bunch, concerned only with the wealthy supporters ofthe Liberal Party, and having no appealing warmth or sentiments towardsthe less privileged members of our community. So I just cite a few pertinentfacts about that. The last year of Labor Government to which I can direct yourattention is 1949 and their Budget for 1949-50. They provided in that yearfor national welfare $ 105. 6M. In our last Budget we provided 071M, roughlyto 6 times as much, and even allowing for movements in prices, a verysubstantial increase in real standards. And it's not only the amounts thatare being provided but again, because we're so often chided with neglectingthose less privileged members of the community, it's worth recalling theinnovations. Pharmaceutical benefits, well, it was hardly worth mentioningin 1949-5C. It was then an expenditure of $ 6IC, CCO, while this year it's2M. There was no provision for medical benefits in those days. Thisyear $ 45. CM. There were no pharmaceutical benefits for pensioners.WVe are often abused because vwe don't do enough fr the pensioners; theyhad no such scheme. V/ e s-ent ' 31. PM this year on pharmaceuticalbenefits for pensioners. Medical services for pensioners they had nosuch scheme. We provide $ 16.Now this is in a period when we've also had the tremendousobligation of building our defence forces and the security of this countryIn 1949-5' they provided $ 1C 4M; this year we are providing 112. _ 2M.And as another practical test, which I would just like to mention to you,although the proportion of our total Commonwealth expenditure on defence hassoared from 1949-5C from 3 per cent of the Budget to 17. 25 per cent of theBudget, the amount we provide for social welfare has not only increasedin the dimension I have mentioned, but it's a bigger percentage of a verymuch bigger Budget 18.7 per cent of the Budget in 1949-5C compared with2C. 55 per cent of the Budget this year. I will not dwell on these facts orgive an elaborate statement of our domestic policy. My colleague, the / 6
Treasurer has done that In a way which produced, I think, a more favourablereaction to the Budget than I can recall in my time in public life.At this stage of the Parliament, new policies are not expected.We announce at election time the sort of things we are proposing to do.WUe said we will do this and more and in the three years that we run ourfull term, as I expect us to do, We shall certainly be doing a great deal more.But you don't when you get. a good show running we've been thn~ re now fora considerable number of years you don't alter the basic pl ; zon whichyou have been elected and which you have gradually brought into eftect.You don't expect Broken Hill Pty. Ltd. or General Motors -Holden orColonial S11ugar or one of these big successful companies suddenly to throwout their board of directors, completely reverse their policies and hope toproduce the same satisfactory results for their shareholders. I ho'e thatthe Australian people have got enough sense to realise that this is not theway to better standards for themselves.V/! eli, Mr President, Tj did speak of the difference in fundamentalapproach to the relationship between elected representatives of a Parliamentin this organisation and in the Australian Labor Party. But since Mr Whitlammade such great claims about the outcome in Adelaide I think we might goon and look a little further as to what actually did occur there. I don'tblame the Press for giving a new leadership a favourable run. This is fairenough, but at least let's be realistic and factual about it. What is happeninginside the Labor Party and I pointed this out to you on earlier occasions isthat since the split in the party, it's been in the grip of the left wing, which inearlier periods of our political history was merely a rump of the LaborParty. Now they find Mr Thitlam a very convenient medium because he'sgot a personable front for them. But he's still in the grip of the Left Wilngof the party, as they have been at some pains to point out to us since theAdelaide Conference.I remind you that at that time they dealt with the Viet Nam situationand this, of course, for reasons which we all well understand, has tremendousimportance for this country. Tremendous importance first because Viet Namitself means so much to the kind of world in which Australia is to live, inwhich we are to co-operate, in which we are to trade. VWe are fighting toresist aggression against a small country but the issues Eke very much largerfor us in that we are fighting to preserve the security of LSouth East Asiaas a whole. And we sent troops away in two world wars to Europe notbecause we were directly threatened by the outcome there but because wekn ew that the kind of world which would exist unless we succeeded inresisting that aggression would be an unacceptable world to us.W,, e won the election virtually on the Viet Nam issue because peoplewere able to understand that not only was Viet Nam threatened but the wayof life we stand for is really threat ened by the outcome in that country.I have no doubt that we have successfully resisted the aggression and thatin the course of time we will be able to build in Viet Nam itself the sort ofco-operation that has been such a marked feature of the periphery of Asiaover recent years.These countries which formerly were in a state of economicdisability are now finding their feet. And in my last tour around thesecountries in Taiwan, Korea, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Malaysia, in allthese countries were seen the dividends that have flowed already out of theresistance to Communist expansion in South Viet Nam and we need toremember that. / 7
-7-But no less importantly for Australia is the significance of thisfor the strength of our alliance with the United States of America. And whileat some point of time Australia may hope to be completely self-reliant it'snot going to be in my lifetime and I doubt if it will be In the lifetime of anybodyin this room. For as long ahead as we can see our security is bound up withthe strength of the alliances we can make with like -minded people who havethe same view of the kindof world they want to live in as we do.Now, what does the Adelaide decision mean in this connection?Mr. Whitlam has been pretty subdued about this one because he knew the lastpolicy was an election loser and he's been trying to provide some sort of agloss to it. He was the moderate man, fighting against the forces of the leftand overcoming them successfully. That's if you haven't read what Mr. Calwellsaid about the outcome of the Adelaide conference. He claims it is completevindication for his own policy.If you read what Dr. Cairns says about it, he says that the positionwas ambiguous before the Adelaide conference but now they have a clear andconcise policy, and Dr. Cairns certainly believes it to be in principle identicalwith the policy they had at the last election. Well you may say that these arerather left-wing types but I came across an article by Allan Fraser, 23 yearsa Labor member of the Farliament and A llan wrote an article in the Sydney" Sun", 3Cth August in which he said this, " Many interpretations have beengiven of this revised version. In my view it does not differ in any essentialfrom the authorised 1966 version. What it succeeds in doing is to improvethe form of the statement to make it more explicit less easy to twist in meaningby quotation out of context. nd that's precisely also what Dr. Cairns said.He said it's now in a clear and concise form.Then we have the Victorian State Fresident of the A. L. Mr.Brown, commenting after the Adelaide conference ( Melbourne " Sun" of 14thAugust'. He says the Labor Farty throughout Australia is moving further tothe left. This had been shown at the Farty's Federal Conference at Adelaidetwo weeks ago. The trend of the Federal Conference was leftwards. Inspeaking on the 3KZ Labor hour, he said the conference had strengthenedpolicy on the Vietnam war. It had attached a meaningful set of objectives towhat basically was and remains a " troops out" policy. Possibly we could saynow that it is a policy of " troops out and the unless, of course,is in one sense even more offensive to our allies than the policy put forwardby Mr. Calwell at the last election. What the Labor Farty is now saying tothem is that unless you accept these conditions, and they are conditions whichour allies have made clear are unacceptable, then we are going to pull ourtroops out. And in the same breath they'll tell you that they believe in theAmerican alliance and this is fundamental to Australia's security.Well if you were in America. and you found that an AustralianGovernment had served you up with an ultimatum and had then pulled itstroops out while your troops were left to do the fighting you'd be scratchingyour head about this so-called ANZUS Treaty and wondering just how muchsignificance ought to be attached to that or to your obligation under it. Makeno mistake about it, fundamentally the foreign policy of the Australian LaborFarty in relation to Vietnam and the other matters we thrashed out at thelast election remains unchanged, and the gloss that the leader chooses to puton it doesn't conceal the fact that these hard-headed men I've quoted who arepillars of the Farty and have been with it for years, they've put theirinterpretation which can't be challenged as a statement of realism from theoutcome of what went on at Adelaide.
C) UI don't need to srneak at any length as to why we are in VWetnamI've already given you some of the reasons but T would like to say a word,because ' It's highly topical, about the elections in Vietnam and I'm not goingto pass judgment on the detail of the conduct of the elections.W~ e had four expert people there ourselves in addition to our ownvery capable Embassy staff who were closely watching this. The interestingthing to note from what has appeared so far and I make no commentabout the people who were elected and those who were not is theremarkable fact that in a country where, as I understand it, voting is voluntary,where they knew they were subject to threat and in personal danger, therehas been a better overall poll n these presidential elect~ ons than there waslast year in the constituent assembly elections.Last year the number registered to vote was 5, 2808, CO, thenumber who voted 4, 274, 3c0rl. G 8,7 . We thought that was a pretty remarkablevote in the circumstances. I think, Mr. President, I am correct in sayingthat it's a higher percentage of people voting than you would find in the UnitedKingdom or the United States of America and they haven't the same threats totheir person in those countries as they have in Vietnam. This time the numberregistered, 5, 853, 000 is nearly 6-00, 000 more than last year. The number whovoted. 4, 863, . again nearly 600, CUM more than last year, apercentage of 83. 7 against 0GJ0. in the last election. I think that's a veryremarkable performance.There were eleven sets of presidential candidates, and it wasn'tjust the military pair that stood for election. The civilian candidates got agood poll which doesn't suggest that the people were intimidated and unableto register their own opinions effectively. There were 4200 candidates for theSenate at the same time for 6C Senate positions. That again suggests thatthere hasn't been a bad effort in getting the basis of a democratic institutionestablished in that country despite the physical threats that were directedagainst them. I've mentioned that the number who actually voted had risen from3 to 83.7. The comment given to me is that this success is all the moreheartening in the face of the concerted Vietcong campaign of assassination,intimidation and sabotage to di-srupt the elections thus proving that they werea farce as Hanoi radio and the Front radio have been proclaiming. Now, youknow we tend to take rather too literally some of the propaganda that'sdirected to us on these matters because if you accepted what comes to youday by day in your reading through the press and the press are giving uswhat they believe to be a newsworthy comment you could get a very differentpicture of the realities.Look at the situation here in Australia. We have in the Liberaland Country Parties 109 members including the House of Representativesand the Senate members. We had 110 there were 11C0 at one stage whosupported our policy in Vietnam. There was one defection from the Senate.That left us with 109 who support our policy in Vietnam. And we retain 109who support our policy there on the Government side. If you were to takewhat you read in the press about the United States, Whitlam claimed thathal the members of the Senate were critical of the Government policy there.Well the real test of criticism is how you vote when you have to put the chipsdown, and in the United States Senate there was a proposal that they reducethe defence appropriation, which of course is very largely directed to Vietnam,by and 5% involves 34!' billion dollars. The vote was 03 to 6 against.Later the Senate voted for the total appropriation of 70 billion dollarsto 3 and I ask you to carry those figures in your mind when you read what/ 9
9-Senator Morse says or Senator Fuibright says or somebody else says. Afew vocal minority elements can make a lot of noise as we discovered inthis country. What really counts is a solid feeling of the Parliament andthe people as a whole.When I hear people say that there's been some waning of supporton the Vietnam issue I confess that since the election we perhaps have notbeen as vigorous in pressing this matter as we might have been because wethought the Australian people spoke in decisive terms. I believe they stillfeel in decisive terms but if they're fed a daily diet of the sort of stuff Ihave mentioned, well they scratch their heads and wonder really what'sgoing on. I think if we can give them the facts of the strength of supportas revealed in these Parliamentary figures in the Parliament of the UnitedStates, in the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in the strengthof electoral support given in Vietnam, war-battered Vietnam itself, thenpeople will have a fresh view of the importance and significance of what isgoing on in Vietnam. Now the final thing I comment on, Mr. President, because ithas some bearing on this, is the legislation we have been dealing withrecently about the National Liberation Front and proposals that money becollected to give aid to it. The Leader of the Opposition says that I'vebeen the best supporter of these proposals because of the publicity I gaveto these misguided people at the universities. The fact of the matter isthat I kept out of this discussion for a considerable time. I exercised greatrestraint on it because, apart from anything else, I didn't want to magnifyit and I knew this was the objective of these boys in the universities. Theywere looking for publicity, but when the Australian people indicated theirresentment and this got to the point where those young men fighting for usIn Vietnam felt that there was a strength of movement in Australia seekingto aid those against whom they were fighting, then we took a very differentview of the matter. And the first comment I made in the House was, " Idon't want to magnify this issue, but there are two factors which make itimportant. The first is and I haven't got time to elaborate on this tonightbut if you care to read what I said at the time in tho House you'll get somedetails on it I said, " The first is there is a campaign of psychologicalwarfare in this country directed against the Government's policies inVietnam. And all sorts of well-meaning people are manipulated for variouspurposes to provide a fund for these activities. I've given chapter and versein certain directions and perhaps there'll be more as time moves on. Andthe second thing is that our boys in Vietnam are entitled to know that theirGovernment is going to do whatever it can to prevent anybody giving materialaid to their enemies". Now our Labor opponents have sought to divert attention fromtwheisr eb yn oh odlidsitningc tuipo nt hbee tfwacete nth taht ew tew otr amdaet tweritsh. CTomhemreu'nsi sbt eCenh innoa asse cirfe tth eabreo* utour trade with Communist C. hina. We have made our reasons for it clearlyknown. Wle believe that it is to Australia's advantage more than the advantageof either the economy or the people of China to do so. We sincerely believethat at some point of time there has to be an accommodation with CommunistChina, and that trade is one of the most potent -elements in helping to bringabout a utuality of interest. My colleague the Minister for External Affairshas pointed out that growth in imports by China from non-communist countriesis up now I believe to of their total imports and the higher it gets the morereluctant they'll be to interfere with their own economy by adopting courseswhich run counter to the views of the non-communist countries. We havebeen entirely frank and consistent about this but it's a very different thing
to set off deliberately to give aid to those who are fighting your own peoplein the fields. And, of course, our Opposition chooses to ignore this vitaldifference. Now, we come to this by-election and the Senate election. Iapproach them with confidence because I believe that if we can get over tothe Australian people there can be no doubt about the outcome in any ofthese political contests. If we can get over to them what Liberal leadershiphas meant to Australia in terms of the survival of this nation, the freedomof our people, the opportunity for their enterprise, the national growth ofAustralia in the years since we took office in ' 49, and if we can explainclearly to them what the alternatives are as set out, not in some glossyexplanation offered by one spokesman or other, but in the platforms of theAustralian Labor Party, then the issue should be abundantly clear. It isbecause you people here from your respective States, you, Mr. President,to whose vigorous leadership the success of the last year has owed so much,my own able colleagues in the Cabinet and the rest of my Parliamentaryparty and all those branch workers who give us such loyal support in thefield, it is because we can all contribute to a better Australian understandingthat not only do I have confidence in the future of the Party but I believe wecan lead this nat ion to the greatness that we all believe to be within ourreach.


10 September, 1967
Your Excellency, Sir Irving Benson; My dear wife who has rightly been credited for doing so much to keep me in a proper state of body and soul; Ladies and gentlemen; and a special greeting if I may to Squadron-Leader Hicks and his men who met with me in Montreal and performed so notably for Australia on that occasion.
And while you, Sir Irving, were not able to single out all those faces you would like to shake hands with, may I be permitted to single out one very old and dear friend whom I am delighted to see in the audience here this afternoon in the person of Mrs. Tottie Embling, because before I had a wife Mrs. Embling used to do what she could to keep me on the path of rectitude and when I mentioned this to Sir Irving he said that she looked after him when he had his first charge in Toorak when he started in his service.
Now this is a very happy occasion for a variety of reasons, it's a birthday festival in several senses. It is, as I gather from the records, the 109th anniversary of -Wesley Church in this present building; it's the 74th anniversary of the Central Mission and we all join in wishing many happy returns on this auspicious occasion.
Sometimes happiness is alloyed with a little sadness and one could bring a note of sadness to this occasion if one were to think of Sir Irving's impending retirement as marking an end to that wonderful life of service and all that he has meant not only to this community of .Melbourne and of Victoria, but to Australia as a nation. It is a remarkable record. He has, I understand, had 40 years of association with Wesley, with the Mission, 37 years as its Superintendent. In other words his own life of service has extended over more than one third of the life of the Wesley Mission here in Victoria. I say there would be a touch of sadness if I were not convinced in my own mind, and looking at him today has confirmed this, that his active mind will go on through voice and through pen for many, many years, enriching our own thoughts by what he contributes to them. But I say on behalf of all of you here and indeed of the Australian people whom I am honoured to lead at this time, thank you to Sir Irving Benson for this wonderful life of service that he has given to our community.
He mentioned that at times he felt that it was his task to listen to everybody in trouble. I have sometimes, felt, Sir Irving, that that was my prerogative in my own post as Head of Government, but in our own way we each have a task to perform in relation to those who have a proper claim upon the services and goodwill of the community. It is a triteness to say-that we live in a restless age, an age in which the winds of change are blowing strongly about us as they are about the peoples in every other part of the world. In some countries we see this expressed in degrees of turbulence that lead to riot and revolution, a challenge to established concepts, and even we in this favoured island continent of Australia are not immune altogether from those influences although, fortunately for us, they do not take usually any violent forms. But around the world there has been the cry for improved conditions for a defeat of those age-old enemies of mankind illness, illiteracy, poverty, lack of nourishment, lack of adequate housing, and people who have suffered these things through the centuries have now decided that the world can give a better order for mankind.
And this in Australia which, of course, is much more favourably placed, represents a demand on the part of the electorate for more and better things in just about every imaginable direction. The electorate demands more by way of education, more by way of development, ' more adequate provision for the defence of the nation, more in the form of social welfare and a better deal for people of the aborigine race just to mention one other item. And they are impatient that these things shall be done and governments who must try to give expression to the will of the electorate go about as best they can this task of providing more of these things in the directions that are sought.
But we cannot ever afford to overlook the fact that it is you, the people, who provide these things.. Governments cannot conjure them up out of nothing. They provide them by producing if they can a greater output from the nation as a whole what we call our gross national product and out of that increased provision make more adequate provision for these things that people want. But in the final analysis it is the body of citizens who provide these things and even governments who are determined to do their best to supply them have to carry in their minds the fact that if they load on to the productive mechanism too many burdens then they will not in the long run be able to supply at the same level of advance that they would hope to make.
We, in Australia, have been singularly successful in encouraging greater productivity in our nation, an enlargement of our gross national product and out of that averaging 521, of growth a year over the last five years which included one dreadful drought year, we rank second only among the nations, the industrialised nations of the world, we rank second only to Japan. No other country exceeds the rate of improvement in the gross national product of Australia. N~ ow I mention these things because naturally each time that a government comes to the people with its Budget or with some other piece of legislation, there is a disposition to look at that against what is felt to be the need of the time. And we sometimes, I think, tend to overlook the tremendous advances that we have made as a people over this last generation and it is more comfort perhaps to those who feel the pressure of need immediately and whose need relatively to others more favoured than they seems a very great one to them. But we progress, Sir Irving says we have not got to the point yet where despite his earnest pleadings to me we have completely abolished the means test, but what we have done has been to make spectacular advance over the years since I have seen the achievements of a period of office which we have enjoyed. Could I just put a figure to that to illustrate it?
I have seen the total provision grow in our Budget for the aged and invalid on the pension payment from $88m. to $509m. this year. I have seen the proportion of people eligible for benefit grow from about 39% of those within the age group to 53%, I think the figure is at this time. I have seen innovations which were unheard of when we first had to face up to these responsibilities and I think I will be credited, Sir Irving, with having launched at least one of these major reforms as far back in 1941 with the introduction for the first time into the National Parliament of a child endowment programme. But in those days we had no scheme of pharmaceutical benefits worth mentioning actually there was a total expenditure of $0.6m. This year we budgeted $75m. There was no scheme at all of medical benefits; this year we provided $46m. There was no scheme of pharmaceutical benefits for pensioners; this year that will cost us $31.8m. There was no scheme of' medical services to pensioners and this, of course, is quite apart from the figure I mentioned earlier of total pension provision, but this year the medical services to pensioners are estimated to cost There was no such thing as an aged persons home scheme and you may be interested to know that the genesis of this is attributed by Sir Robert Menzies he brought it in in 1954 to Dame Pattie Menzies who told him what a wonderful thing it would be if the Government would work out a scheme whereby through its contribution, doubling those of others, we could steadily go ahead with the process of erecting homes for our aged people.
And I had myself a hand in arranging for two very senior, former members of the Public Service, Sir Giles Chippindall and Mr. Norman Watt Sir Giles had been Head of Postmaster-General's Department and Mr. Norman 41att Head of the Treasury to bring their good offices behind the work of the National Old People's Welfare Council because if we are to concern ourselves with the problem of the aged and we all know what a problem that can be then this is not a matter to be left simply to governments, simply to some cash payment by a government to the person concerned. They have a life to live as a human being and they want to feel that they are needed, that they are cared for, that people want to have company with them and there is much more to this than the main provision of a money payment. And through this National Old People's ' Welfare Council working in association with similar bodies around the rest of the Commonwealth and in various States, we felt that we could make a contribution not purely of a material kind but a psychological contribution, a social contribution to this need that is felt.
Now, in mentioning the provision that is now made some people might imagine that because we have found it necessary over recent years to engage on a very large programme of defence that the proportion of the Budget available for social welfare has been significantly reduced but on the contrary. When we came to office the defence provision was, of course, a very much smaller one both in money terms and as a percentage of the Budget. It was actually 8.3% o of the Budget of those days whereas in this last Budget it has occupied and is a very much bigger Budget of course than was the case in those earlier times it occupied 17% of the Budget. Social welfare which in those days occupied 18.7% of the Budget was 20.5% of the Budget on this last occasion. And so we have sustained, and indeed improved upon, the proportion of our total revenue allocations into social welfare compared with that which existed in these earlier years and I could sum up the social welfare provision by saying that I have seen it grow from .$185m. to $1,07m in this last Budget. Now, so much for social welfare but that, of course, is only part of the story of the actual financial provision which governments find themselves able to make.
I mention the demand the electorate makes upon us for education and this year, although when I first had to face these matters as a Minister in the Government in the period after 1949 there was virtually no provision, a very small provision for education in the Commonwealth Budget. This year it is  $194m. and that itself is an increase of 35% over what was provided in the previous year. When we look at the general state of the community, we can take, I think, some comfort from other stages we have reached.
We have maintained through all this period a fully employed society. No country in the world can point to a longer better-sustained level of employment than has been the case in Australia and that means quite apart from the well-being of those directly employed that they, too, are in a better position to make their contribution to the family needs, particularly the family needs of older members or disabled members of the family. As to the social problem of the future, I think we are going to see that quite transformed by the developments which have been occurring.
And when I say that, I have in mind that no country in the world had a higher percentage of home ownership than has Australia and that percentage of home ownership is rising year by year. As I think most of you know when we come to assess the limitations for pension we do not include the home as part of the means of the person concerned, and now the percentage of those who occupy homes, in process of acquiring them or actually owning them is in the neighbourhood of 70% and it is a rising percentage year by year. We do not take into account the car, and Australia, you will be perhaps rather surprised to learn, in terms of motor vehicles now rank second only to the United States of America. There is one motor vehicle to every 3.3 persons in the community as most of you who travel around our roads on the weekends no doubt will confirm.
Insurances………….. people have been making much more provision for their old age and for their family needs than they ever did in the past. I have seen the sum, the total sum, for which people in Australia are insured rise from a") 280m. to $ 2,700m.as the last figure which I have been able to check on.
Now I do not say these things in any spirit of complacency because the electorate rightly demands of us and good friends like Sir Irving keep prodding us that we have got to do more, and of course we want to do more. I only wanted to put this broad picture before you because so often it is assumed that little is being done or that we hard-headed old politicians in Canberra are also a hard-hearted lot who do not have much regard for the welfare of our fellow men. Well, I hope that what I have said will indicate that the spirit of this Church in a changing world, the old values of the good neighbour and of that good neighbour spirit which has made of our immigration programme the most successful constructive achievement of the Australian people, the spirit of the good neighbour, the spirit of fellowship which is such an essential mark of the Wesley Mission has been carried through, I hope you will agree, in the processes of national government over this last 20 years or more.
Now, Sir, when we speak of need we do not think only of the need that exists inside our own community, and indeed for others what wo would think of as poverty in our own community is to them a very relative term. If I mention India for example, which has 42 times our population, it has only double our gross national product. Pakistan and Indonesia have 9 times our population but they have only half, about half the gross national product of this small country of Australia. And so there is a deeper need in many other parts of the world than anything that we experience here and while our good work should very properly begin at home we have not been blind to the needs which are felt by others. And over these years I have seen our total contribution to external aid grow from $ 33m. to o .142m. in this last Budget. And it may interest you to know that that figure I have just given -$142m. -  represents .75% of the gross national product of the country and at that percentage it ranks second in the world. Although Australia is a developing country and a capital-importing country we have still found ourselves able to make a provision which ranks second only in terms of percentage of gross national product to France. So in many ways we are demonstrating that the good neighbour spirit still inspires us.
Now I would hope that as we in our larger national sphere have found ourselves able to do these things that we have merely been reflecting a spirit which has been kept shining brightly through the 109 years in which this Mission has existed. And because the spirit of Wesley and the Wesley Mission has radiated out through the community I hope Sir Irving you feel it has had some influence on one of your own friends your old friend who stands before you here today. M~ ay the good work that Sir Irving has exemplified through so many years be carried on by this ' vision and in congratulating you on this notable birthday and in paying this public tribute to the work of the man who has presided over its destinies for so many years, I wish you many more happy birthdays, and I wish Sir Irving in the retirement that comes to him a long, healthy, active membership of this Australian community which he has done so much to serve.


11 September 1967
The Chancellor ( Sir Robert Blackwood), Vice-Chancellor ( Dr. Matheson), the Dean of the Faculty of Economics ( Professor Cochrane), Members of Council, Distinguished Guests and Gentlemen:
Thank you very much for your welcome. I am happy to have this opportunity of launching the first of the Annual Economic Lectures at this University. The project is commendable and this series of lectures should add a great deal to the sum of knowledge on many aspects of the national economy.
In your short history as a university you have shown growth, in numbers, in buildings and in stature. You have the problems of growth you know your own better than I do but you cannot escape these in any forward-looking and forward-moving enterprise. Your years of growth are only at their beginning and I am sure you will meet them with the same energy, enthusiasm and vision that you put into your establishments. I wish Monash well for its future.
I have titled my address "Advance Australia" and it is on the subject of GROWTH, particularly, that I shall talk to you. Growth is our watchword as a government on behalf of the people of Australia. It is also the password for the sentry at the gate to our security and our prosperity.
 It would do us all good to take time out occasionally to look at the whole landscape of our national 2 development; to let our minds stir to the huge excitement of it all. For we have a fabulous prospect I use the word deliberately and we have great adventures to share. It is also tremendously important that we seek to understand the problems of growth that this prospect invites. It is important that we ponder how they can best be solved. Growth with all its benefits can be at times as we remember from our youth an uncomfortable and disturbing process. But what is easily won is seldom worthwhile. Usually the greatest rewards are those that flow from the honest industry of a nation and its people. We need faith in ourselves for success; without a readiness to roll up our sleeves and get on with the job we cannot prosper nor grow strong,
When commenting recently on our needs of defence and development, I spoke of a lotus land mentality found in some. There were critics who jeered at this as though it was beyond the franchise of a Prime Minister to jog a few dreamers from their dozing in the sun and urge them to get up and go, Most of us like to include some leisure and enjoyment in the balanced diet of a vigorous healthy life. But they should not be final goals nor can we at this stage of our history afford the luxury of over-indulgence in them. We are a well favoured people few outside ranks of our fighting services are called on for great sacrifices. But we all have an obligation of citizenship in this young democracy to play our part in the challenging tasks of growth so that we are not only secure at home, but secure abroad, and proud to speak, and be heard, as a nation with a voice of our own,
We have been accepted by the diverse communities of Asia among whom we live as a free people. They see our hands outstretched in friendship. We give aid in growing volume. We exchange trade increasingly. We have helped and are helping to preserve the freedom of independent nations. We must continue on these paths.
This past decade has seen a new dimension come to our progress. In that period we have discovered mineral wealth beyond our dreams and we have, for the first time in our history, tapped oil and gas in commercial quantities. No one imagines this to be the end, for what we have found is, I am certain, only a part of the hidden treasure that this old continent holds for this young nation if we have the initiative to go after it and the energy and will to exploit our discoveries.
There are new wonders of science and technology to serve us. The use of nuclear power for peaceful purposes is an intriguing prospect for the future and already we can see it coming within the range of economic possibility. I am confident too that we will in time be able to water thirsty land and take light, power, people and industry into areas that have slept undisturbed for centuries.
The challenge of growth is deep rooted and directly affects both our domestic and our foreign policies as well as your fortunes and my own as individuals in this community. It is national in character but it is also a highly personal matter.
I think of growth as having two tangible, measurable components PEOPLE and MATERIAL RESOURCES, operating in an environment of two intangible components SECURITY and INITIATIVE. These, to my mind, are four essential elements to "Advance Australia" and to give us the growth rate we need.
Let us look at PEOPLE and MATERIAL RESOURCES first. People are human capital and they make up our population which, small though it is, is our greatest asset. The very smallness of our population makes its quality the more important. Our human capital is increasing at the rate of nearly 2 per cent a year but we are even now only a nation of less than 12 million people, living in a continent of three million square miles. Our rate of increase is high by Western standards but it is maintained only by a steady net migration rate. At the- present time this is a little below 1 per cent a year Yet since the war migration has contributed more than half of our population increase when we take births to settler parents into account.,
Just on a million children have been born to migrants in this country in the twenty years that have elapsed since our post-war migration scheme. This was launched under the energetic direction of the then Minister for Immigration in the Labor Government of that day, Mr Arthur Calwell. It has been successfully and enthusiastically sustained by governments, of which I have been a member since the end of 1949. It has brought incalculable benefits to our nation. It has enriched it, diversified its industries and cultures, and strengthened its security.
Our population, by natural increase and migration, has increased by 50 per cent in twenty years. There is no other country in the world, except Canada, which has sustained such a high migrant intake. We have done so more consistently and successfully than any other country and this goes also for the successful absorption of the new settlers into our community life. This has been Australia's greatest and most constructive peace-time achievement. It is the more remarkable when you take into account the pressures on our national economy, and the calls made on us to do more in so many directions.
A corollary of rapid population building, through largescale immigration, is its effect on demographic structure. We are getting younger as a people. The median age of the population is being lowered.
In 1947, less than one-third of the population was under 20 years of age. Now the proportion is just on twofifths. Had there been no immigration after the war, the numbers in the 20-34 years age group would have dropped by some 132,000. But immigration changed a fall into a rise of 5 about twice as much.
This has many implications. Let me mention three. First, more people of working age means that the per capita cost of improved social services has not risen; second, the shortage of males of marriageable age immediately after the war became a surplus. This led to a marriage boom, and an increased demand for housing and consumer durables. And third, more in the younger age groups have been a source of strategic strength, and are now assisting us to play a more honourable and confident part in the defence commitments of the nation.
There are more than forty different nationalities being assimilated into the Australian community, and we have gained much from their industrious contribution to nation building.
The relentless demands for more skilled workers and higher level of skills are reflected in the work force. In the past five years the proportion of skilled male workers among settler arrivals has grown to 42 per cent. One in every three settler workers is a skilled person, compared with one in four of the locally-born work force. This is a noteworthy percentage to sustain when there is a world-wide shortage of skilled workers. It is an essential factor for broadening the base of our economy by enabling us to increase industrialisation.
The mobility of a large part of the work force drawn from migrants has already had a signal effect on industrial development. More than half the work force on the Snowy Mountains scheme is made up of workers born overseas and the same pattern exists in the motor vehicle industry and to a disproportionate extent in other key industries. We are depending heavily on the mobility of new settlers for the exploitation of our newly-discovered mineral resources. As new towns and new ports are built our population will spread to distant outposts on the continent.
This wide brown land of ours owes much already to the new Australian, I would sum it up this way. The economic advantage of a regular annual intake of migrants is a rapid population increase which
underwrites the future growth of consumption demand for a wide range of products and acts as an insurance against under-employment;
enlarges the domestic market by allowing economies of larger-scale production.
speeds up technical progress and an increased supply of skilled workers to manufacturing industry on which the onus rests to help bridge the gap between import spending and export income.
stimulates a high rate of capital formation and a widening capital base.
assists the supply of labour in areas and industries to which native born Australians are least attracted.
We depend more than we realise on migration. Our birth rate has fallen since 1961, because of a whole complex of social factors and this situation may remain with us for a little time to come. Take this comparison: In 1961 migration provided 29 per cent of our total population growth. Last year, because of the lower birth rate, it rose to a record 45 per cent.
There has been some tendency for the flow of new migrants to fall off, and the familiar sources are no longer yielding the same numbers. However, the Government has not been idle. The Minister for Immigration has recently travelled widely in Europe in search of new sources. From this visit and from our continued efforts, we think it may yet be possible to maintain a satisfactory balance.
Our long standing target has been to have a population growth round 21 per cent per year with natural increase providing about 11 per cent and net migration about 1 per cent. But at present the natural increase is only about 1.08 per cent and the average annual migrant intake over the last few years has been about 0.74 per cent.
Our population age structure is such that, except for the period in the early 1970' s when the post-war babies and early migrant children grow up, there is no indication in sight of any significant upward trend. But whatever rate of increase we achieve, we as a government will see it as our responsibility to ensure that satisfactory levels of demand are maintained. We will approach the problem not in any defeatist way, but recognising that different rates of population increase will provide different opportunities for productive effort. More children mean more expenditure on schools and home appliances. A slower rate of increase will mean that we can direct productive resources to other objectives perhaps the exploitation of new natural resources, or the development of new lines of production. Whatever the future may hold, we as a government will remain sensitive to the play of the many forces and will do what we can to keep them in productive balance.
One point is often overlooked when the role of migration in Australian development is under discussion. It is that when migrants are brought to adulthood in their home countries, we reap the value of their services throughout most of their working life without having to educate and train them,
If it costs, for example, an average of about $ 5,000 to rear a child to productive age then the arrival of every adult worker since the war represents a saving of that much per head to the Australian economy in terms of human capital.
On the other hand, while migrants do not need to be trained, they tend to come in at marriageable age, and therefore need to be housed. This means in the first place homes with all they imply of roads, water and electricity supplies, sewerage and so on. Before long schools and other social amenities also become necessary. Over the past three years our fixed capital expenditure on dwellings has increased by 35 per cent, while capital expenditure by all public authorities on education, health, power, water supply and sewerage and so on has increased by nearly 40 per cent. Our expenditure on dwellings and social capital facilities represents about 14 per cent of our gross national product a higher proportion than in either the United States or Britain. Yet many are the calls we hear that insufficient is being spent on these vital amenities!
Let me illustrate this by some references to the United States and Britain. Calculations made by the Treasury suggest that the annual investment needed in Australia to provide dwellings and social capital facilities for our migrants represents 3-4 per cent of gross national product. If the United States and Britain were to look for a similar rate of population increase from migration as Australia, they too would need to undertake additional investment. For example the United States would need to build perhaps 500,000 additional new dwellings each year, and Britain some 140,000 additional new dwellings a year. Taking schools as another example, the United States would need to provide some 400,000 new places annually for the children of migrants and Britain some 100,000 new places. We ourselves are providing about 25,000 additional school places for the children of our migrants.
This is not to complain. But it is to say that the sustaining of our long-term migration programme has a significant bearing on the direction of our own internal investment programmes private and public. People are, as I have said, our most valuable asset and we cannot afford to skimp in our provision for them. It is a necessary consequence that those who are wanting to increase the rate of growth in fields of particular concern to them will find that, with our economy fully employed as it is, they run up against the limits of our resources.
So much for human capital. Now let me say something about the other major component in our growth our material resources. Over the past five years our annual growth rate measured in terms of gross national product in constant prices has reached the notable average level of 51 per cent. We have also been ploughing back as investment a great deal of what we have earned as a nation. Something like 27 per cent of our national income is going into fixed capital development compared with figures of 16 per cent to 17 per cent for such countries as Britain and the United States. The only major country with a higher rate is Japan.
This high rate of investment is not less than we need if we are to meet the challenge of developing our natural resources. Let me mention some of them:
We continue to be the world's leading wool producer and one of the largest wheat producers.
We are the world's largest producer of lead and the third largest producer of zinc.
We have 35 per cent of the world's known reserves of bauxite and enough to support the free world's needs for more than 100 years.
We are the world's largest producer of strategic rutile and zircon
We have increased our known reserves of iron ore twelve-fold in less than a decade. There are 15,000 million tons of new iron ore discoveries in Western Australia alone.
We have doubled our known coal reserves since 1960 and trebled our coal exports. Our known resources of bitumen coal are around 20,000 million tons.
We have silver, copper, nickel, tin, manganese, tungsten and uranium.
We have oil and gas.
The total output of our mining and metal industries has a value now of $ 900 million and it should reach $ 1,700 million by 1975.
Some of the most spectacular developments are occurring in the west and north-west of Western Australia which has entered an era of unprecedented mineral production. The capital investment for planned developments and the expansion of major projects in northern and North-Western Australia exceeds $ 1,300 million. In Western Australia alone iron ore exports contracts could be worth more than $ 2,400 million over the next twenty years. These are tongue-twisting figures I know, but I give them to indicate to you the magnitude of what we now see at hand.
At this point I want to refer to the question of the extent of foreign capital coming into Australia and its influence over some of our major developing industries.
Despite the attention which has been directed towards the assistance we are receiving from outside capital, it is worth emphasising at the outset that 85-90 per cent of the capital we employ is generated internally. It is the final 10-15 per cent which comes from abroad. It is, of course, very welcome because it is this extra percentage which, spread particularly over the growth areas of our economy, gives that growth a cutting edge and at the same time gives us sources of overseas funds that prevent our balance of payments situation from exercising a restricting influence on our rate of development.
If we want to maintain anything like the rate of growth we have achieved in recent years we are likely to remain a net capital importer for many years to come. We need the finance and the technological knowledge that comes with it.
Our growth over the past decade has been unprecedented and there are indications that we are learning the technique of maintaining that ideal condition steady growth within a state of equilibrium.
Although continually widening, the base for our foreign earnings is still narrow. Three-quarters of our export earnings come from our primary industries, but they now contribute only 15 per cent of that national product and employ 11 per cent of the labour force. An encouraging feature of last year's trading results was the 25 per cent increase in the value of our exports to Asia.
One of the main new sources of foreign earnings opening up to us is coming from the export of our newly-found resources of minerals. These give at the same time both a lift to the forward movement of manufacturing industries in general and to our earnings of foreign exchange. Yet it is in minerals and large-scale manufacturing that foreign investment has played a most significant part.
There are now some fifty new mineral projects involving capital of over $ 2,400 million throughout the whole of Australia and there are about ninety foreign companies of substance searching for minerals in Australia. Half of them are from the United States, and about 65 per cent of the capital for the mining projects is from overseas, mainly America and Britain.
It would be foolish to say it would not be best if we owned them all, absolutely, but it would be much more foolish to suggest, that if we have not the money to do that, then the deposits should be left undeveloped.
At the same time, let us be realistic about the picture. $ 5,000 million of total foreign investment over the last twenty years sounds very large. But we see it in its proper setting when we remember that total domestic investment ( including that foreign investment) amounted to nearly $ 60,000 million over the same period.
There is another point to be remembered. Britain has provided us with just over half of our total capital inflow since the war. North American investments have over the same period provided something over 37 per cent with the proportion now not much less than half. In themselves, neither of these two countries can be regarded as anything but of friendly disposition and we have ample evidence for believing that, if there is any further concern on our part, it would be possible to achieve mutually acceptable solutions to any particular problems that might arise. It is in this context that we should take note of the Treasury estimate that about a quarter of the assets of corporations in Australia has come from foreign investment either directly or in the form of reinvested collateral, or in depreciation reserves. These have been concentrated mostly in the small group of industries which includes motor vehicles, chemical oil refining, petroleum distribution, metals and minerals.
One of the most encouraging features of contemporary development is that we are ourselves beginning to marshal our own capital to good effect. The idea of consortiums and partnerships to meet very heavy capital needs for development has taken root. It is also gratifying to see the interest that life offices and provident funds are taking in investment for development. There are examples of consortiums and partnerships in the Northern Territory, at Gove; in the Hamersley Ranges in Western Australia, and in the natural gas field in Bass Strait off the Victorian coast. But for obvious reasons not least of which is the fact that we are a few people in a big continent there are limits to what we can do.
There are also examples of the readiness of foreign capital to take risks when Australians cannot raise the money. You will have read recently of plans to open up a large pastoral area in the Northern Territory for intensive cultivation of grain sorghum. A well-known Australian ( Sir William Gunn) will be in charge and he says publicly that, after trying for 18 months without success to get Australian capital, American interests took the project up. Development of this kind, if carried out successfully, can be a big thing for that part of the north.
Can it be said realistically that this foreign participation in the development of our natural resources is a bad thing? Of course it is not a bad thing, and I am unimpressed by the argument that we are letting our assets fall into foreign hands.
How else are we to develop our discoveries rapidly, how else can we build new towns and ports to serve them if we do not import human capital and foreign money capital to add to our own? The foreign capitalist cannot take away the things he builds.
He can take his profits after the Government has gathered a large share of them for its general revenue purposes but he, like us, knows that growth is vital and he re-invests part of those profits here to that end. He also exports his products and earns foreign exchange for us. If he wants to repatriate his capital, of course he can and we impose no conditions in advance, but if there was ever a panic flight of foreign capital from this country in sight, then the Government through Exchange Control, has the capacity to take measures to protect the economy. The foreign capitalist cannot take our towns and ports and mines away. Nor can he " containerise" the men and women who work for him or the technical skills they have acquired and ship them off to the other side of the world.
Let me give you eight good reasons why we should not be shy about foreign capital:-
1. It gives us the margins we must have for growth and for the security in our balance of payments.
2. It fills the gap that our domestic capital raising cannot fill and on some occasions is prepared to take great risks which Australian investors are not willing to accept.
3. It ensures the importation of new technology and new management skills.
4. It creates employment and special attractions for migrants. It provides revenue by way of taxation and royalties.
6. It provides profits, some of which are re-invested and contribute to further growth
7. It gives us new towns, ports and sources of power
8. It helps us diversify our exports.
I have spoken in some detail on this because I believe it to be important and because we should not take for granted an inflow of foreign capital at anything like recent levels. The trend of our balance of payments has been down and capital inflow helps very much to keep the movement within acceptable limits.
There is more to foreign investment here than " Come on in, the water's fine". We are not "selling-out", and in any case are dealing with the 10 per cent plus segment of our total capital investment. But we must take care not to discourage the foreign investor who is sensitive enough to the hazards and uncertainties of enterprise beyond his national boundaries. We prefer to use "guide-lines" and get a response in a voluntary way. Not every investor wants to come here, and those with capital for export are finding it harder to venture and less rewarding when they do because of the recent restraints imposed by their own Governments. This may, or may not last, but the fact that it is happening has done two things. It has reduced our capital inflow, with the inevitable effect on our balance of payments, and it has injected question marks into our forward planning because we do not know how long it will last, or whether it will vary in degree. It makes good sense to me to keep on saying we want it and can make valuable use of it.
We have done a great deal to ensure that Australians are able to share in the new growth that is with us. They certainly participate largely in the benefits and activities generated by foreign enterprise. It is important, I think, not to build up a national resentment to the entry of foreign capital but rather to see how much more we can do ourselves and how we can develop the idea of partnership if we cannot " go it alone",
I do not believe we should limit our interest to the traditional capital sources America and Britain, I do not need to remind you that the big leap forward of our iron ore exports rests heavily with Japan where some contracts have been arranged for substantial quantities for 25 years ahead. You will also be aware that Japan, this past year, displaced Britain from her traditional position as our best customer. It would seem natural that we should develop a capital importing interest with Japan in the years ahead and also with Western Europe,
With the development of our trade with Asia will come a corresponding influence on the pattern of developments in this part of the world. From being a relatively small country supplying the needs of the industrial west, we are becoming an increasingly industrialised country with a growing trade with the countries of Asia.
Although our population is small beside those of our neighbours, our productive capacity is relatively high. There are difficulties in making comparisons between countries which differ greatly in terms of living standards and economic structure, but there is still some validity in comparing the gross national products of the various countries, and I think you will find the comparisons interesting.
Taking gross national product as a basis, we find that Pakistan and Indonesia, with nine times our population, have a GNP only half that of ours, India, a country with a population 42 times that of ours, has little more than twice our GNP. It is well known that we rank as the twelfth largest exporter in the world. What is not so often recognised is that our exports are greater than that of any Asian country except Japan with India in third place.
We recognise the responsibility which our position imposes upon us, both as a government and as a people. It is a continuing challenge to us all that we discharge those responsibilities with a proper sense of the rights and needs of our neighbours. We as a government have recognised our responsibility by our increasing activities in the aid field. As givers of aid, we now rank second in the world after France. By way of example, let me mention the initiative we took in the early 1950' s in the pioneering stages of the Colombo Plan; the major contribution we are making to the welfare and development of Papua and New Guinea; our participation in the Mekong River development project and other co-operative international ventures; and our recent provision of special emergency aid to Indonesia through the bonus export scheme. It is for all of us to see that this area of the world, at present facing such difficulties but with so much to look forward to, is the better for our membership.
The development of our material resources is, then, the other half of our growth table our human resources being the first. I believe that it is possible to achieve a high rate of development of our resources; to absorb in the process and to use effectively a substantial amount of foreign capital; and to maintain at the same time a proper balance between our monetary resources and the level of demand. It is the firm intention of the Government to maintain as far as is humanly possible this state of high activity, and to take action as appropriate where developments threaten it. Our increasingly close economic, financial and trade relations with not only the Western Countries, but with Japan and our other neighbours in Asia, and our membership of the relevant international agencies, provide further guarantees that we can face the future with confidence.
If we can maintain pretty much the same relative position on overseas investment and keep our population increase going, our order of growth will be both high and steady. The more we grow, the more our capacity to generate more capital grows. And this is as it should be,
May I now take the two intangible components of the growth proposition I have put before you tonight. I take them together STABILITY and INITIATIVE and they make up the environment in which PEOPLE and MATERIAL RESOURCES can flourish. And what comes out at the end, of course, is GROWTH.
We need security to have stability and that is why we have treaty arrangements with powerful friends and why we are expanding our defence forces and our strength to discharge our international obligations. The defence programme, in the context of this lecture, is costing us 5 per cent of our gross national product, and 17 per cent of the planned expenditure in this year's Budget. We are now paying more for defence, as a percentage of GNP, than any other Western European country except America, Britain and France. Ours is rising while others are steady or decreasing.
Our defence programme therefore looms large in our economy and this I do not want to minimise. Our defence spending has more than doubled in five years from $ 428 million to $ 1100 million This has put, and will continue to put, heavy strains on the economy, but it is a matter for real satisfaction that we have been able to digest this fast moving programme without fracturing the economy at any one point. The rate of increased spending is such, however, that it has to have some limits and this we are constantly watching.
It is what we have to pay abroad for defence that hits us hardest and at present this is taking about 12 per cent of our total export earnings, mainly because we have to buy large sophisticated items that we cannot manufacture economically or within a desired timetable here. These include guided-missile destroyers, aircraft and submarines. These purchases produce a balance of payments commitment for us from which, incidentally, America and to a large extent Britain, are free. In the past year, for instance, with our exports going at a good pace and a trade surplus of some $ 95 million, we finished up " in the red" because of a net deficit on invisible payments. The bogeymen were defence spending and restraints imposed by capital-exporting countries.
Perhaps I should add a reference to the external aid we are giving to needy countries. This year, our aid bill will amount to about 0.75 per cent of our national income. Other donor nations are either holding a level or are reducing it. We are still going up by 14 per cent above last year. So it, too, adds its measure of pressure to our foreign exchange reserves.
Our balance of payments, and all its ingredients are therefore critical and we can control only part of the forces at work. Over the whole range of a nation's economy we, as a government, cannot finally determine the course of events, but we can influence pace and direction and help to create the right climate. We can also, to a certain extent, cushion the severity of the seasons.
The Government has so to order its fiscal policy that it helps to establish a reasonable balance between the demands of the public and private sectors of the economy. Supply and demand have to be on an approximate level and this has to be accepted as a habit of our national life, like bringing in the milk or having a birthday once a year. If we attempt too much, so that total spending exceeds the value at steady prices of domestic outputs, plus the resources available from abroad, then we have internal inflation, a balance of payments deficit, or both.
For stable growth, therefore, the level of demand is important. This is a problem of resources allocation. The Treasurer dealt with this in his Budget speech last month and I will not retrace the ground, Public spending is bound to continue rising because it represents the foundations of so much of our economic growth, but we have to give full recognition and proper weight to the private sector, which provides three-fourths of our employment, nearly all our export income, and is the other half of the national economic contract. And we must constantly watch the balance. This calls for fine tuning and not for spectacular adventures into " Stop" and " Go."
There is ample scope for initiative in a free enterprise economy such as ours, I take at random a few examples of Government initiative. Education is primarily a responsibility of the States and it is the State systems that have to provide the geologists, the engineers, the administrators, for our surging mineral industries and all the other fields of human endeavour in this country. Yet the Commonwealth has entered the field of higher education to the tune of $ 194 mil] lion this year an increase of 35 per cent on last year and about four times the figure of a few years ago, It has given a tremendous stimulus to tertiary education and research and over the years the feed-back of this into the economy will be considerable.
It has taken a lead in the development of export markets, sponsoring missions to new areas, telling the Australian story through its publicity channels, giving insurance protection to exporters in uncertain markets and providing taxation concessions.
On the home front, through its banking systems, it is giving help to primary and secondary industries needing capital for development. It is also co-operating with the private banks in the formation of a Bankers' Re-finance Corporation to help in the mobilisation of Australian capital for large-scale developmental enterprises. It has recently made provision for grants to companies to assist in research and the improvement of their technological skills. The Government seeks to open gates, but not to provide a free ride from the cradle to the grave for private enterprise, or to substitute public for private enterprise.
The Vice-Chancellor suggested to me that I might discuss the future trends of the economy. Prophecy is a dangerous exercise for the politician,
But there are some predictions I can make with a full measure of confidence:-
I see Australia as a nation with an assured future if we are given peace and a continuing partnership between Government and industry in a free enterprise system.
I see us as a nation of 15 million people in 10 to 12 years' time, with a growth rate and a productivity level ranking among the best of the developed nations of the Western world.
I see a nation without too many eggs in the one basket a nation with a much broader economic base, a greater variety of exports and more diversified markets.
I see quite spectacular rural development, with vast additional acreage responding to the application of the results of scientific research and improved pastures, water supply, and availability of greatly increased fertilizer production.
I see a spectacular development of our mineral industries, with new communities and new factories arising around them and I sense the thrill of new discoveries yet to be made.
I see a broader energy base for power in the continent. This will flow from our recent discoveries of oil and natural gas and the possibility of nuclear power for peaceful purposes on an economic basis.
I see Australia as a continent of stability in Asia, demonstrating to the emerging nations the happiness and practical virtues to be found by a fiee people in a Parliamentary democracy stimulated by incentives matching their energies and enterprise.
 I see a new intimacy developing with Japan and Indonesia and the other free nations of Asia and a still closer relationship with New Zealand as we share common tasks in this area.
 I see growth at work as something that cannot be guaranteed by edict or by magic formula but by the efforts of all our people.
The challenge and opportunities rest squarely on us. No man is an island and we cannot live in splendid isolation on our island continent any more than can man himself.
 



3 COCT 1967
CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES AND CHAMBER OF
COMMl~ ERCE JOINT LUNCHEON, PERTH, W. A.
13th SEPTEMBER, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Hughes; Mr. Henderson; Mr. Premier; Ministerial
and Parliamentary Colleagues of the Commonwealth and State
2arliaments; Members of the Chambers of Commerce and of
Manufactures; Distinguished Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am glad to learn from you, Mr. ' Hughes, that such is
the relative state of prosperity of the members of the two
Chambers, that you have been inundated with requests to attend
this function. That is a symptom of the buoyancy of this State
and of the remarkable development which is occurring here and
indeed occurring in abundant degrees through the Commonwealth
as a whole and I want to say something to you, Sir, on the
subject of growth today. But before doing so may I thank you
for your welcome, the kind things you have said about my
election to office. It is one thing to be greeted with a
resounding win at your first election. It is a more satisfying
thing to be able to repeat the performance,. and we hope that we
will give you satisfaction in what we attempt over the period
which lies ahead before we come to our accounting with you
again. And I think we can claim that at least in the state of
Australia-and in particular the condition of the state of
' ivestern Australia we can point with some satisfaction to
effective organisation of what are the principle elements of
growth. Our human resources, our material resources, functioning
in an atmosphere of stability, economic stability and political
stability in a state of national security and with an environment,
an economic climate which is encouraging to incentive to
enterprise and to initiative. And if the results which you are
manifesting in this state of W; estern Australia can be taken as
reflecting the effectiveness of governments, Commonwealth and
State, and their partners in these enterprises, those who
hazard their skills and their fortunes, the entrepreneurs so
strongly represented here today then, Sir, that partnership I
believe has demonstrated its effectiveness and it is our goal
to see that it continues effectively over the period ahead.
I had the pleasure of making wvhat I understand is a
little State and Australian history today by attending a meeting
with the Premier and mem'bers of his Cabinet. I learned that
this was the first time an Australian Prime Minister had performed
this function and it only stressed to me the need for a closer
relationship than perhaps we have had in the past, if we are to
make the Federation function effectively and if we are to secure
the degree of partnership with each other as Governments and
with you who contribute so much to our resources, our revenues
and to the advancement of the nation by your own efforts. I
hope that at least our meeting here today where we have been
able to go over some mutual items of interest is a symptom of
the desire we have for that closer co-operation in the future.
Sir, I mentioned that we had in a country of some
3,000 square miles and with less than 12 million people that we
had no, I am sorry it is 3 million square miles that is a
pretty big percentage of error, I thought there was a catch to
it still there are less than 12 million of people and so my
point stands in that direction. qVe have, if wie take a comparisonand
I do not employ this critically of the countries concerned
but as a mark of what we have ourselves achieved the gross
national product of this country of less than 12 million people,
and compare it with some of our neighbours, we find that India 
with a population 42 times our size generates in money value
just on double our gross national product. Pakistan and
Indonesia with populations 9 times our size that can point to
only one half the value of gross national product and so we
have been at least making advances ourselves in the way in which
we have managed our affairs inside this country. And we are
looking to greater things ahead for us, and in order to achieve
these greater things we have to build up our resources, our
human resources, which we are trying to do through an active
programme of immigration and the material resources largely
generated inside our own country. Eighty-five to 90% of our
fixed capital investment in Australia is generated from our
own resources but it is the remaining 10 to 15'/ which has been
so helpful in stimulating growth over these recent years. We
must do what we can to encourage that at the same time taking
such action as we can to make it possible for our fellow
Australians to participate appropriately in the development of
the resources of this country.
Thanks to this programme of population building we
have added 50% to our population over the last 20 years. Canada
is probably the only country that can point to a similar volume
of growth although I do not overlook the quite phenomenal
performance in a smaller population which Israel has carried
out but comparably Australia and Canada would rank outstandingly
amongst the industrialised countries of the world in the degree
of population growth they have attained through immigration.
And what th'is has meant to us is that whereas without
immigration we would have had about one-third of our population
under the age of 20, we have been able to lower the median age
of the population with all that that means in terms of work
force effort, the addition to the consumer requirements of the
community and the other advantages that a smaller average age
of the community brings to us. This has, as a result of
immigration, moved now from less than one-third under 20 to
something of the order of 407o under 20. If we had not had this
programme there would have been a drop in the number of people
in the 20 to 34 age group of about 132,000. Thanks to it we
have an increase more than double that dimension rather than a
fall of that size. 9hen we look to the skills which have been
brought to us as a consequence of this process, 42% 14 of those,
the males, coming to settle with us are skilled, against about
one in three of our own proportion of the work force. And so
the reliance we have come to place and I stress it to
members of two Chambers which have given us strong support in
this programme, I stress it to emphasise its importance for our
growth as a nation is that whereas even as recently as 1961,
immigration contributed 29% of our population growth, last year
it actually contributed because of our own declining birthrate
for a variety of social factors, it contributed 4%%
Now looking at this from another aspect, if it costs
about 5,000 to rear a child to productive age, then each
migrant who comes to us represents a considerable financial
asset. But as my friend, the Premier, realises only too well,
while you have that advantage of a saving in the cost of
bringing a child up to working capacity, you have the claims
on the community in the social and capital facilities of the
community which bear very heavily on governments and require
about 3 to 4% for migrants alone of our gross national product.
But with all this we have managed to succeed over the past five
years in maintaining a growth rate in Australia of an average
of 5-and this is only exceededso far as we can ascertain, by
one industrialised country, Japan and that high average growth
rate has been achieved despite a year of very serious drought
just a few years ago, serious, ccrtdinly, in relation to
Queensland and New South viales. doe are doing much to help 
ourselves although we have turned to foreign investment to a
degree as I mentioned earlier but no country with the exception
of Japan ploughs more of its national income back into investment
than Australia roughly 27% of our gross national product
compared with 16 to 17% in the United Kingdom and in the United
States. Now all this has been a background to what have been
the quite spectacular and remarkable developments of recent
years, notably in the mineral field and no State has shown up
more spectacularly in this connection than has your State of
Western Australia. I am informed that the value of output from
our mining industries currently is of' the order of $ 900M. and
this should reach about " W1,700M. by 1975. Mr. Court would be
more familiar with these figures that I now mention than I am,
but my colleague, the Minister for National Development who is
with us, will have advised me that we have in sight iron ore
contracts, I think for this State alone, of an order of $ 39000M.
over the next 20 years. Somie 50 new mineral projects involving
a capital of 42,400M. are currently in progress in Australia,
and of course prospecting is going on actively for a great many
more. Now having mentioned something of what is occurring
inside the country, those of you who are here as representatives
of commerce will be well aware of the notable increase which is
occurring in our trade with Asia. In the early ' 50' s 15% of our
exports went East of Suez. Now more than 30% of our exports are
going East of Suez and with the percentage tending to rise.
Japan has, of course, become our largest customer, outstripping
the United Kingdom, and again, the trade there is on a rising
curve. As I went recently through some of the countries of Asia
I was struck with the potentialities which exist for the trade
of this country in the future, particularly in places such as
Taiwan and Korea. In both of those, Mr. Premier, they were
talking to me of the steel industries that they were setting up
there with a consortium already established in each of the two
countries and both said that they would be looking to Australia
for the iron ore they would be needing for that industry. And
this is just typical of the sort of growth which lies ahead for
us. Now if I may move from that broad economic picture to
a topic which may at first seem a little remote but does bear
quite intimately on our future prospects, the kind of stability,
security, the economic climate to which I referred in general
terms a little earlier, and that is the issue which has faced
us in Vietnam. I stress this because in recent times there has
been perhaps a disposition either to allow to recede into the
background the vital considerations which moved us to accept an
involvement in Vietnam and which at the ti; ne persuaded us that
not only was security involved but the kind of future of the
area in which we live that we want to see developed.
Now, of course, there are various important reasons
why we took the decision to participate. We have fought in two
world wars very far from Australian shores to support those who
were trying to resist aggression, small countries, themselves
under attack by larger powers and in this instance, of course,
the geographical factor is a very much more proximate one than
was the case in thnose two world wars. Darwin is closer to Saigon
than Perth is to Brisbane and so there is a security factor
involved there which was not apparent to us even in the same
degree in the two world wars. But in principle we were resisting
much the same thing a small nation under aggression from
others and we joined in the task of resisting it.
Secondly, of course, we ourselves being a small nation,
if we regard others as expendable and not worthy of support when
they come under attack can have no real assurance that we, should 
4.
that situation ever arise, be ourselves able to rely on others
to come to our aid. In this connection, the realities of' our
present circumstances are that the most important pillar of
security for the Australian nation is the alliance we have with
the United States of' America and we are joined in the ANZLJS
Treaty, and for our part we have seen in the American action,
first in resisting aggression in Korea, secondly in coming to
the aid of South Vietnam, the same sort of principle of aid to
a weaker country that is wrapped up in the American obligation
in ANZUS there set out in more precise terms and perhaps more
reliably stated, but nonetheless the willingness of the United
States to join in resisting aggression there has been a matter
which we have had to properly take into account in our own
decision in relation to our participation in Vietnam.
And I mentioned the bearing it has on the kind of
world in which we wish to live, to trade, to co-operate and to
join in the activities of the region and what is far too often
overlooked, is the benefit that we have received and the countries
of the area have received. While we are conscious of all the
problems and agonies that are going on in Vietnam itself, there
is far less disposition on the part of the critics to look at
what has been achieved on the positive side in such countries
as Korea, and Taiwan, around the whole periphery of Asia in
Thailand, the Philippines, in South Vietnam itself' with some
prospect that this thing can be sorted out, of a secure and
prospering life in the future, and Australia and New Zealand
themselves made the more secure because of' the guarantees we
have against aggression if' that were ever to be directed against
us. So there have been these benefits immediately discernible,
currently discernible as a result of the resistance to aggression
in this area. Now, I lead from that to the query which I know arises
in the minds of many people, " Well why if' you feel this way
about Vietnam do you continue to trade with China?" And,
properly understood, there is no inconsistency in these two
courses of action.
We demonstrated in the case of Indonesia, when the
confrontation policy was in force there, that it was possible
on the one hand to resist the processes of confrontation but at
the same time maintain a channel which enabled a relationship
of friendship and of mutual interest to build up when circumstances
made this propitious. And we all know that there must come a
time when the free world will, with China, have to find an
accommodation, a process of' peaceful co-existence.
' te are not at war with China. We are engaging in
international trade on items which can be procured by that
country from a vaiiety of' countries. The products we sell,
wheat, wool, even steel, are readily procurable by China from
other parts of' the world. The steel sales, about which so much
of' public criticism was directed against us, represent less than
one-third of' 1% of' the steel availability from sources which
China has either internally or which it produces from overseas.
So, what we sell is itself marginal. Our total trade with China
represents less than 2% of the imports of that country from
other parts of' the world. And so they can dispense with their
trade with us far more with far less inconvenience and damage
to their economy than Australia can. Vie can put to better and
more effective use nationally what we secure from our trade than
the effect would be if it were to be cut off by China altogether,
and the bearing it would have on their trade.
But on the other hand just as trade does build up some
mutuality of' interest, some prospect of a capacity to live more
securely and in greater friendship with a country so we find that 
this trade that China has with the free world has more than
doubled over the past five yeara. It has moved from 35-/ 0 of
total imports to 70% of total imports and that, one would
imagine, would in the long run have a bearing upon the policies
which finally emerge from China in relation to the rest of the
free world. Now, Sir, I know that you like to keep to a fairly
tight schedule in functions such as this, so could I just by
way of conclusion offer a few broad predictions as I, Head of
Australian Government, see the future course unfolding over the
years ahead. Surely if we can maintain a situation of peace
and peace is relative these days, we regard ourselves as being
at peace in one sense even when we have military forces engaged
as they are in Vietnam but the effect on the national economy
as a whole is still that of a peacetime economy, and providing
that a situation of' peace can be continued, Australia must be
able to look to an assured future and a continuance of effective
pcrtnership in a free enterprise system with Governments
co-operating in our Federation.
We can foresee a nation of 15 million people in 10 to
12 years' time with a growth rate and a productivity level
ranking among the best of the developed nations of the Western
world. As a nation with a diversification of our industry we
should be able to carry on without putting too many eggs into
one basket a nation with a much broader economic base a
greater variety of exports and more diversified markets. We
can look, with the application of methods of science and increased
fertiliser production, to spectacular rural development with
very large additional acreages responding to this scientific
knowledge and the application of scientific methods. We have
already witnessed a spectacular development of our mineral
industries with new communities, new factories arising around
them, and no-one imagines that we are at the end of discoveries
in this direction. We have a broader energy base for power
developing in the continent. This will flow from our recent
discoveries of oil and natural gas and the possibility of nuclear
power for peaceful purposes on an economic basis. We see our
own country as a continent of stability in Asia demonstrating
to the emerging nations there the happiness and practical virtues
to be found by a free people in a parliamentary democracy
stimulated by incentives matching their energies and enterprise.
WVe find a new intimacy developing with Japan, with Indonesia,
and the other free nations of Asia and a still closer relationship
likely to develop with New Zealand as we share some common
tasks in the area.
So we find in all these directions growth at work not
as something that can be guaranteed by edict but growth which
responds to the efforts of governments and peoples co-operating
freely together. And in that process I pay a tribute to the
Government of this State which itself has given so much by way
of leadership and effort to the prosperous growth of the State.
I hope I can be pardoned for including my able colleagues from
destern Australia, of my own MVinistry and of my own Parliament,
Senators and M~ embers from this State. They are of a high calibre
and I am indebted to them for all the assistance they bring to
the processes of Government.
Finally, it is through the work of responsible bodies
like your two Chambers that the partnership which the Premier and
I, and the Mlembers of our Governments so fervently desire, can be
given the most valuable practical expression by having responsible
voices with responsible membership conferring with us and able
to work out with us the policies which serve the national interest
best. It is in that spirit that I look confidently to a continuation
of the progress which in Western Australia and in Queensland, 
6.
another great State of tremendous potential now stirring perhaps
for the first time in its long history into great activity. It
is through developments such as these that we look confidently
to the greater Australia of the future and to see ahead a
stronger, more prosperous and happier nation to which we can
all usefully contribute. 



ORLNING OF THE U. S. NAVAL COM.-UNICATION
STATION AT NORTH-.' BST CAP:, W2ETLSTZRN AUSTRLIA
16th SEPTEMBER, 1967
Speech by the Prime Yinister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. Premier; Your Excellencies; Admiral Johnson and
other distinguished United States Naval servicemen; the
distinguished servicemen of Australian Forces present here;
my Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues and the representative
of the Opposition in the Federal and State Parliaments; and
the very many distinguished guests, much too numerous for me
to single out although no doubt the contribution which so many
of you have made woul. d justify that; and you, Ladies and
Gentlemen and Boys and Girls:
This is a notable and indeed a historic day in the
history of our young nation. The station itself is located in
an area which has already made some contribution to Australian
history because not only do we stand at the most north-westerly
point of our continent but Learmonth in the Second World War
saw a happy comradeship of Australian and United States
servicemen as our aircraft moved in and out into action from
the Learmonth airport.
And we recall here in Australia still with gratitude
indeed we commemorate that notable occasion annually the
critical Battle of the Coral Sea which virtually spared our
country from a hostile invasion, thanks to the assistance and
the might of the forces of the United States. And from the
comradeship and partnership of that ' World * 4r pa-rticularly
in this area of the world, although of course there had been
a comradeship cemented in the First Wdorld Wdar, but it was in
the Second World bbar that we came so close to each other as
nati-ons. And we learned to value the more fully the friendship
and the help that one could bring to the other. Flowing from
this came the ANZUS treaty that alliance between the United
States, Australia and New Zealand which, in my judgment, ranks
as the greatest single contributing factor to the long-term
security of this nation in the history of the Australian Federation.
I welcomed Admiral Johnson the comment you made your first
comment when you came here showing your own realisation of
the need for us to keep closely together in matters of security
through the future history of this region of the world.
And that happy community partnership which we now
find here in Exmouth itself flowing from this project is not
of course a surprising thing because we have in both our
countries a common heritage of British freedom and of British
democratic institutions. These have influenced our own national
growth although the composition of our countries in time becomes
affected, and affected richly to our advantage we have discovered,
by the influx into our respective country yours in very much
greater numbers than ours in the United States but we in turn
with 40 nationalities now making their contribution to Australian
growth and Australian strength. But we are finding that in this
richer community we still have a basic reliance upon the principles
of freedom and the democratic institutions which were part of
our common heritage.
Now, Sir, this ' Centre is, I may clearly say, a
sensible, practical, logical extension of the ANZUS spirit,
an application of the ANZUS spirit to a particular project.
In a sense it made history, because for the first time we
found here on Australian soil a project in which there were
established on a continuing basis the forces of another
country. But we do not think in terms of a foreign country 
2.
with the United States. le have a basis of friendship, a
closeness of co-operation, an interdependence of interest
which has drawn both our countries very closely together.
Earlier this week and I say this in particular
to you, Mr. Premier I have been visiting some of the more
notable development projects in your State. It makes a rather
striking contrast to contemplate that here we have been seeing
great economic developments arising, from our extraction and
processing of minerals which have stood undisturbed through
the aeons of time and to come, as I did only yesterday, to
this project which is the modern, technical expression in
its most recent form, a matter for wonderment to laymen like
myself. Now Australians, although small in number and remote
geographically from other parts of the world, or those parts
where scientific development has proceeded most extensively,
have perhaps it may appear rather curiously to some shown
a very real interest in matters of radio physics, in astronomy,
in outer space research and items of that kind. There may be
some who think that because so many of us have experience of
vast lonely spaces and clear blue skies and more opportunity
of contemplating the constellations, the 1' ilky day than other
nationalities, that this has some bearing on it. There may
be a feeling that the very fact that we incorporate the Southern
Cross in our national flag is an expression of our interest
in these matters astronomical. Another cause, of course, which
has a very real bearing on this is that, geographically placed
as we are, Australia is able to make a contribution to space
research and to the study of the heavens which supplements
what is done in the Northern Hemisphere.
But be that as it may, we have developed our own
expertise in the tracking stations, in such places as Parkes
with a radio-telescope there and at 1doomera, where at the
present time we have a joint project with the United States,
the Sparta Project which is adding to our knowledge of matters
in which we have a mutual interest. And whether there is some
special significance in this or not, well I leave to others to
fathom. The fact is that it does exist and this, I think it
will be agreed, makes us worthy partners in this enterprise.
Perhaps it also would be not inappropriate to use in this
context the torin " wavelengths" because Australians and Americans
do seem to find it possible to get on a wavelength with each
other with far less crackling static than is usually found in
relations between one country and another.
Now the purpose of this station is to improve the
efficiency of our efforts to maintain security and peace not
only in this area of the world but as a contribution to peace
throughout the world as a whole. And I wonder how many people
pause to realise just what is the magnitude of thc American
contribution to the peace of the world at this time. Certainly
those of us who live in South-E~ ast Asia or the Asian region
have very good cause to know the magnitude of that contribution.
I wonder how many of my fellow countrymen know that if you
take the periphery of Asia running round from South Korea,
Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines, South Vietnam itself, Thailand,
Australia and New Zealand, just to mention those in particular,
there has virtually been underwritten by this mighty power the
security of free p., eoples in those countries. , e realise it in
relation to ANZUS but I wonder how many of us recognise that
this is the order of dimension of the American undertaking and
the American contribution to the peace of the area. And we
honour you, Admiral Johnson, and all associated with you in
the contribution that you and your servicemen are making to
underwrite this guarantee of freedom. 
3.
Now, here in this centre we are able by our joint
efforts to make a contribution. Frankly, I had not even through
all that I had read been led to prepare my mind for the v'qstness
of the enterprise. To think that there are those 13 towers
out there, all higher than the Eiffel Tower in Paris, all
constructed to withstand the cyclonic gales which occasionally
assail this part of the coast, and even the sight of them
leaves one unprepared for what one sees when you come close and
get inside the structures. It's almost bewildering and dazzling
to see the complexity and scale of equipment that goes into
the task that this centre will serve.
And so we express today as Australians, and I as
Head of an Australian Government, our appreciation to the
contribution this enterprise will bring to our s' uarity and
the security of other free peoples. Re also kn-. and we
will be saying perhaps something more on this at the ceremony
which follows later in -the township itself what this has
meant to this particular relatively isolated part of Australia
in terms of community development, and the happy partnership
which has been revealed under the stress of war is again
exemplified in the happy community spirit which you have
developed in this township.
I spoke earlier of the power of the United States
and we do well to reflect that this power is used for the
purposes of peace. I know of no action or policy decision
of a Government of the United States which is directed to
its own aggrandisement or the acquisition of additional
territory under its own control. It is there as a force for
freedom and peace in the world, and we in our dav and generation
have cause, as we go about our own task of developing our
nation and building up our security, to be grateful for the
security which is underwritten virtually for us by this great
power which has used its strength with so much restraint and
with such a high principle as its purpose.
This, the first United States' station on Australian
soil will, I hope, long continue as a symbol of the continuing
partnership between our two countries and al". tñ.. at this
partnership stands for in terms of happiness, security and
interdependence of free peoples in the life of the world as
it develops ahead of us. And so to me it is a particular
pleasure, as the Head of the Australian Government and people,
to be personally associated here today with a ceremony which
is both historic in itself and important in its symbolism. 



44 OCT 1967 -4
OF'NING OF E: UvIOUTH TO--INSHIP,
r-' S AUTSETPRLANL IA G) RA
16th S1"* EPTEMBER, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Colonel Murdochi Mr. Premier and Mrs. Brand; Mr. Ambassador;
Fellow M. 1inisters of the Commonwealth Government and State
lvinisters; Eembers of the Par-.-liaments of the Commonwealth
and of the 6tate.; Distinguished Forces representatives of
the Australian and United States Forces and so very many
Distinguished Guests around me; Ladies and Gentlemen; Boys
and Girls: I really, despite that rather imposing introduction,
have a relatively minor part to play in this particular ceremony,
because very properly this is the occasion in which the 1Premier
of the State is the star both attraction and personality.
But having come so many miles and speaking for so many of our
fellow Australians, I know the Premier will allow me to indulge
myself for a few minutes with you, the more particularly as I
think that what I feel or have to say is not without some
continuing advantage for the State which he so ably represents.
It is not very often that I have the opportunity to
come to an official opening in the North WJest of Australia.
This is only my second visit in a long public lifetime. I
hope that thanks to the facilities which an improving V. I. P.
fleet provide for me I'll be here more often. But it has been
several years in between visits and in ' 60 or ' 61 I made my
first, and there was nothing, of course, of this development
here then, nothing of the development which I have been witnessing
in the last few days at Xambalda, at 14' ount Tom Price, at Dampier,
even Port Hedland was in those days not a very exciting port
for one to visit. Eut over these few days of this week I have
developed a new feeling of encouragement and inspiration about
the future of this country, and it is to people like yourselves,
to a Government such as that led by Mr. Brand with his team of
able Ministers, that the rest of Australia which depends so
largely upon the efforts of people who live more remotely from
the great capital cities, who accept their remoteness cheerfully,
who put up with hardships and conditions which would not be
accepted in many instances by those in the capital cities, that
so much of our prosperity and growing national strength have
become due. And so I say first a word of appreciation to you
all. There is a disposition, perhaps, to think of Australia's
pioneering stage as an era of the past. But anybody who has
been around the areas of this State that I have visited in
recent days, is made very conscious that there is a new pioneering
spirit abroad and one which is enriching the nation, strengthening
its capacity to grow in so many different directions. I only
wish that those who are critical of the participation of people
from other countries and after all when you dwell on it
most of that participation comes from the United Kingdom and
the United States, two countries with which we have a great
feeling, of warmth, of kinship and a friendship and whose
ability to merge successfully with us has become a matter of
experience beyond challenge. But if they could sense, as I
have sensed, the growing national strength arising from these
developments, the way in which Australian industry, Australian
enterprise, the technical skills of our country have been
promoted as a result of this process of development, stimulated
by people with, in some instances, a larger vision and a larger
courage in the developmental field thian we have shown ourselves
and contributing from their knowledge and experience to what
we can put to good advantage here in Australia. 
2.
Now, in this particular tow,, n of Exmouth, you have a
quite unusual combination. I have been speaking of development
whera we are dealing in matters that come to us from a primaeval
past, the mineral resources which have been down for untold
centuries of time but here in Lxmouth you are reaching out to
the modernity of an outer space era and yet combining it in
circumstances in which you have had to do a pioneering job in
this township itself. For 1Vr. Premier it is no novel experience
to attend an opening of some new area of significance in his
State. To me it is a quite exciting and comparatively rare
event, and I rejoice to be with you here today and take part
in these celebrations because dotted around the State, particularly
the northern part of this State of W.* estern Australia, are names
which were formerly unknown or non-existent but which have now
become part of Australia's story of development and from which
Australia, and an increasingly large body of admiring observers
outside this country, can derive some interest and some satisfaction.
I understand, Mr. *." remier, that my principal task
today is to plant a time capsule. Somebody gave me a list of
the items contained in this capsule. I hasten to add that I
did not make the selection myself but I've no doubt it is of
a discriminating kind ana' for those who are able to open the
capsule at some future point of time, I hope they will derive
both inspiration and interest from our quite energetic endeavours
that have been made to bring this fine township into existence.
It will spell out the history oZf the towln and of the communications
station, the plans of the town and station, it will contain a
letter of good-will from ths Commanding Offficer and from the Civil
Commissioner and to Captain Friedman and to Colonel Iiurdoch
Colonel Murdoch being of course so directly responsible for
the welfare of the town itself. We are delighted to know that
they are going to be immortalized in this way. There will be
the names of the residents I hope they have all earned a
place and will behave themselves in the future to merit it
including the schoolchildren, although we would not want to
curb their normal ebullience or exuberance. There will be
copies of today's newspapers. I suspect that mostly they
will contain leading articles criticising the Commonwealth
Government for not doing enough in one direction or another.
There will be a copy of the WVestern Australian telephone
directory and by the time this capsule is opened, we, will
probably need a battery of telephone books like they have in
New York. There will be private letters from residents to
descendants, seeds of local plants with planting directions
and some shells which will probably be rare in 100 hundred
years' time. So altogether those who open up this capsule
should find much to interest them.
But the final comment I wish to make is that here in
this township we have an embodiment of the partnership between
our two democracies the greatest democracy in size, in power
and economic strength the world has aver known, the United States,
and our own young, thrusting, thriving democracy which we in
our confidence and in our ambition believe will have a major
role to play in this area of the world and perhaps by a force
of our own example with the kind of life we can build together
as a people, provide some encouragement and example for others
who are struggling to achieve the standards which it has been
our good fortune already in Australia to attain.
This is a symbol of a friendship between two peoples
of common heritage of similar ideas in so many aspocts of life,
particularly in the great principles of human freedom, of justice
under the law, of democratic institutions, and of a desire to
live peacefully with our neii-hb ours, thrive and prosper together,
and a willingness to contribute from our own good fortune to 
3.
assist others to better standards in the future. And this
quite small township measured in terms of the capital cities
of the nation, embodies that partnership, it maintains a
spirit which I hope in times of difficulty and they will
arise even between two friendly nations will remind us that
here is a part of Australia where our countrymen have shown
they can live together in happiness and to mutual advantage.
May Exmouth long continue to symbolize the Australian/
American alliance and all that our friendship the one with the
other can stand for in relation to the peace, progress and
prosperity of the world. 



4 OCT 1967
EXTRACT FROM PRIME MINISTER'S LUNCH-TIME
STREET MEETING AT GLADSTONE,( QLD.)
21st September, ,167
Now before I conclude, I will turn quite briefly to those other
aspects I mentioned, because while we do concentrate our attention upon
our own forward progress, at the same time, we cannot ignore the hazards
that we face as a nation or the state of the world around us.
That is why the central issue in the last general election
campaign was the issue of the security of the nation and our attitudes
towards our participation in Vietnam and towards the alliance we have with
the United States of America.
No matter in my lifetime has meant more to the future
security of Austral'a than the negotiation of the ANZUS treaty. That treaty
between Australia, New Zealand and the United States, under which the
security of the other was virtually guaranteed f we came under attack at
any time nothing means more to us today for our security in a country of
this size with so few people than the knowledge that should we be threatened
at any time, the mightiest power in the world is there to come to our defence.
I am glad to say that I found no wavering at any time in the attitude of the
public men of the United States, successive Fresidents, their spokesmen,
and others. Cnly in the last few days, Admiral Johnson, Chief of the
United States Pacific Fleet, who came out for the opening of the North-V. iest
Cape Communications Station where I performed the official ceremony last
Saturday morning, reiterated their determination to remain in this area of
the world to contribute to security.
Ncw our involvement in Vietnam is wrapped up in this as it
is in other things. In the first place, we don't believe in small countries being
attacked by more powerful countries or more : owerful influences. have
gone to war twice in two world wars to resist aggression against small powers.
Secondly, we believe that if Vietnam were to go under, then the security of the
whole of South-East Aeia would come under threat, and finally the security of
Australia itself. Thirdly, as I have just pointed out to you, we believe that
unless we are willing to join with our allies in the time of need of others,
then we can place little reliance on them coming to our aid should we ever
be in that state of need.
It is not so long ago that we were troubled by what was going
on in Indonesia. There are 1CC million people there and they were pursuing
a policy of confrontation against Malaysia and Singapore. Well, matters have
quietened down there, and I hope we shall always be able to live in peace and
co-operation with the people of Indonesia.
But we cannot take any of these things for granted. And as
we build up our own defences, and we have more than doubled expenditure on
them in the last four as we build up the strength of our
services and they have never been at a higher levelof efficiency nor strength
at any period in which we have not been involved in total as we do
these things, so also must we keep our alliance strong. 
-2-
Now, does anybody in their senses imagine that you can
keep that alliance strong if the policy of the Labor Party on this matter
were ever to be given effect? And the present policy and in substance
it is the same as the policy that the Austral. an people rejected in the last
election the present policy is that unless the Americans accept conditions
which the Labor Party must know to be unacceptable to them, then we will
be pulling our troops out of Vietnam. V. e will be deserting as was the
policy put forward by Mr Calwell at the last election we will be deserting
our allies in a time of military operation. Well, I know the Australian
people would never agree to that. They did not agree to it last November
and I don't believe you are going to agree to that in the vote that you cast
this time. 



VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY THE PRESIDENT OF
ITALY, SIGNOR GIUSEPFPE SARAGAT
SPEECH OF WELCOME BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR HAROLD
HOLT AT PARLIAMENTARY LUNCHEON,
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 26TH SEPTEMBER, 1 67
President Saragat, the President of the Senate, the Speaker, Ministerial
Colleagues, Your Excellencies, Leader of the Opposition, Senators, Members
and other Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen
It gives me very great pleasure, as I am sure it does all of
you, to be able to join in this welcome here today to the President of the
Republic of Italy. This is a notable occasion in the life of this Parliament and
indeed it is an historic occasion for the Australian people. This is the first
time that we have been visited by a European Head of State. I don't, of
course, exclude Her Majesty The Queen because I ustralia is part of her
home, and so we don't regard that as an official visit of this sort. But this
is, I repeat, the first time that the Head of State of a European country has
visited us, and it is particularly felicitous that this visit should be made by
the Head of State of a country with which Australia has such warm, friendly
relations and which is of so much significance to us in relation to the building
of our nation and in the trade from the Commonwealth to the rest of the world.
President Saragat is one of the great figures of post-war Europe.
Being President of the Republic of Italy is a signif. cant and eminent
achievement in itself, but we honour him because as we study his record over
the years we find an outstanding degree of courage and of wisdom, of tolerance
and of adherence to democraic principles. Whoever holds the office of
President of the Republic of Italy has a considerable influence extending beyond
the formal limits of his political power, and the President's political record
suggests that he will use his undoubted influence for the benefit of Italian
democracy, for the cause of international co-operation, for peace and
international co-operation for economic progress.
V. e welcome also Signor Fanfani who would have achieved
distinction in his own right if he had not done anything else in the world
but be an outstanding scholar. But in the company of Parliamentarians,
perhaps what will strike us as even more impressive is that on no less than
four occasions he has held the office of Prime Minister of his country.
I question whether we could match that in the life of our Federation here in
Australia. I may say, Mr Fresident, that studying the arrangements which
apply in your Parliament, I found many things to envy, although one or two
which I am glad we have avoided. I envy the fact that you have in your
Parliament a five-year term for Members. The Australian electorate will
not give us this period of grace, and I notice in New Zealand there has
recently been a referendum which has destroyed any prospect of an extended
term in that country. But they also have a provision in Italy that you are not eligible to
/ 2 
enter the Parliament until you have attained the age of twenty-five years.
I pointed this disability out to Andrew Jones a little earlier in the day'
On the other hand I gather that the Mfiister of the Government doesn', t
merely have to explain his bills to one House of the Parliament he must
explain it in person to both Houses of the Parliament, and that is an
amendment -which we wouldn't adopt in a hurry in this country.
Our welcome extends also. Senator Oliva and other members
of the President's party.
Italy has for this country a very special significance in a
variety of directions. There is the contribution made through the
centuries to civilisation by the peoples of Italy. Eternal Rome means
eternal Rome not only in Italy itself Rome the Eternal City is Rome the
Eternal City all around the world where men and women are sufficiently
educated to know something of its significance. A~ nd it has a great
significance for us.
There were C'C people last year who visited Italy from
Australia. They weren't all Italians who had settled here returning home
for a visit to the land of their birth. Many of them were Australians,
attracted by the beauty, the cultural feritage, the richness of Rome and
of Italy itself, and we are in your debt for the contribution you have made to
civilisation, Viestern civilisation in particular and to the way of life we enjoy
in our country. But we don't speak of these things in terms of the grandeur
of the past because over modern times the people of Italy have demonstrated
vigorously a lively, inventive, enterprising, innovating spirit which still
burns brightly within them. And you have contributed in these ways in
modern times what we eat, what we wear, what we look at, what we
drive in, what we fly in so many of the asi~ ects of modern, civilised
existence. Perhaps in a parliamentary setting we should acknowledge
the very early recognition given by the Italian people to the importance of
Parliament. I think that the initial SPQR oSenatus Populus Que Romanus
the Senate and the Roman p~ eople which dates right back to the earliest
roeriod of Roman and Italian history, suggests the recognition of the
importance of democratic institutions and the place that the people played
in the life of the government.
The President will be welcome to all Australians because we
feel out own sense of gratitude for the arrival here of some 30C, CCC settlers
from your country since 1'&gt; 45, and I am glad to say that they have produced,
Mr President, between them some 16G, CA" C children since that time!
After the British inflow, Italian migration is actually the
largest migratory movement in the history of this country. It didn't begin
just after the war. It began abott 120 years ago, and many of the Italian
people came to us from the Southern part of Italy and from Sicily. They
found Australia as do the migrant settlers of today a land of opportunity,
with political and economic stability conducive to rapid national development.
They find an envIronment in which they can breathe freely, where their
freedom is assured to them and where there is ample scope for their own
initiative. 
-3-
Australia's Italian settlers and their children now number
and this may interest our Italian visitors about the same as the citizens of
Florence, Bologna or Venice, which range from Italy's seventh to ninth
cities. The Italians who have come here have settled, prospered and become
part of our way of life. They are making valuable contributions across the
entire continent to industry, trade and development the food we eat, the
clothes we wear, and to our community and cultural life.
It is evident, as you will have gathered from the warmt: h of
the welcome you received yesterday that they preserve a deep affection for
Italy, a pride in Australia and its achievements. They love the land of their
birth and they have an affection for the land of their adoption, and it is
fortunate and certainly felicitous that the new Agreement on Migration will
be announced in the course of your visit, and we are able to report the
establishment, as evidence of our growing relationship of a new consulate
in Milan. But it is not only because of the personal ties that I refer to that
we have warm links with Italy. Both countries rank high among the trading
nations of the world. You in Italy rank eighth, we in Australia twelfth.
Our exports to your country have increased rapidly over recent years. Our
purchases from Italy have trebled over the past ten years from $ 18 million
to $ 53 million. And I have already mentioned the number of Australians who
have visited you in the course of the year and who find Italy a strongly
attractive country from the point of view of their interests.
Our Governments consult at the United Nations on matters of
common interest to the free world. You are a member of the European
Launcher Development Organisation for which we have the privilege of
conducting the operations at our own range at W7oomera.
Your journey, Mr President, has taken you to three countries
already which have derived their democratic institutions from British
Parliamentary democracy, countries which nourish the principles of national
liberty and personal freedom. You will be able to assess for yourself the
value of the contribution which Canada, the United States and Australia are
making to a better world order, the cause of peace and the growth of
international trade. Our people, you will have observed, are primarily of European
extraction, but we have in A; ustralia a special significance for the free world
from our geographical position, and our growing relationships with the countries
of Acia. Even putting it in the material terms of trade, this has grown since
the 1550' s from 15 to 4L per cent. of our total trade.
But the success of our immigration programme is not to be
measured by numbers alone or the additions that are made to our country's
work force. We measure it, as I think you would wish us to measure it, by
the happiness, the prosperity, the progress that our migrants find here in
Australia, and in this as in other ways, we believe Italian settlement has
been among the most successful of all the nationalities to whom we have
given a welcome to this country, and there are more than forty countries
represented in Australia.
Your stay, Mr President, will be brief in Australia. You will
be visiting Melbourne and Sydney before you leave us on Sunday, and as you fly
over much of the country during your journey, you will be able to appreciate for
yourself the vastness of the country, the sparse population and the desirability
on our part of encouraging continuing settlement from good people such as 
those that we welcome from your own country.
It is not possible, unfortunately, for anything more than a
fraction of Australia's Italian settlers to see you for themselves, excect
on the television screen, but on behalf of them, and all Australians, all
here wish you a happy and not too strenuous visit and a safe return home.
Your visit will focus an interest on Australia amongst your
countrymen which we believe will be of mutual benefit, of value to the
relationship between us. It cannot fail to add warmth and interest to that
relationship and your presence here itself is a contribution to a deepening
of the warmth and friendliness of the ties that link our two countries.
We hope that italian/ A. ustralian friendship will long endure, and
as it persists, it will go on i. n warmth and strength to the growing mutual
benefit of our two countries.
And now I am going to ask the Leader of Her Majesty's Opposition,
Mr 7,' hitlam, to support me in these words of welcome to you, and this is
one matter at least on which we can find no room for disagreement and can
join in a common vote of sulport and applause.
i, 



6 OCT 1967
LUNCHEON IN HCNOUR OF THE PRIME MINISTER
OF NEW ZEALAND, THE RT. HCN. KEITH HOL. YOAI
AT FARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA 3RD OCTOBER, 1.67
Speech by the Prime Minister: Mr Harold Holt
Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen
WVe have become accustomed ' n Australia to an invasion
at this time of year from New Zealand to the detr'ment of our overseas
balances, and I understand that yesterday's sporting event in Sydney saw
this fulfilled in the order of 1, 2, 3. I don't quite know what the cost will
be to Australia from the visit here the very opportune. timely and happy
visit of the Prime Minister, but at least ths is something we brought upon
our own heads because he is here by invitation of the Commonwealth
Government and we welcome him very warmly indeed.
He has brought with him his Minister for Defence, Mr
Thomson, Mr Laking, the Head of his Department of External Affairs and
General Thornton, and we welcome all of these to the discussions which have
already commenced with them.
By a happy coincidence we have with us today a group of
distinguished members of the Lok Sabha, the Parliament of India, and to
you, Mr Speaker Sanjiva Reddy and your colleagues of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association, you are amongst your fellow CPA members and
it has added to the felicity of this occasion to have you here with us. nd I
am sure you welcome this opportunity of seeing the Prime Minister of New
Zealand in person. Keith Holyoake has been with us before, but he wears a
couple of hats, and he came on earlier occasions as Foreign Minister.
This is the first time, : n my recollection of him that he has made an official
visit as Prime Minister of New Zealand, and indeed, I think this is about the
second visit of an official kind by a Prime Minister of New Zealand in our
history. Mr Holland was here at one point of time it may be this is the
second time subject to Mr Holland.
Keith Holyoake has been Frime Minister of New Zealand
since December, 1967. .' hen I was over there earlier this year. and this
was the first official visit by an Australian Prime Minister for just on twelve
years he and I were described as the Anzac twins. Now you will be able to
judge for yourselves how far he has got to carry that particular label. There
are quite a few people in Australia who would feel there is an injustice being
done to you, Keith. I don't know whether it is because you and I both'
smile too often. I am often accused of doing that. Certainly we have both
been in the Parliament of our country for the same period of time. You got
away to an earlier start in 1i-32 but you hit one hurdle which kept you out for
three years, and this has enabled me to match you in length of service in the
Parliament our thirtysecond :) er in the National Parliament of our country.
W. e were both Deputy Leaders of our parties for eight years
and that is a very chastening apprenticeship, I can assure you. You have come
through that to lead your Government since 1S6C, some six years before I
came to office, and there are one or two people in this room who anticipate / 2 
r: I,
that I won't be able to match your longevity in that particular role.
In point of fact, you have now become, subject to the
length of service as head of his government of Fresident Ayub Khan, the
doyen amongst the Frime Ministers of the Commonwealth. This again is
a rather sobering thought. Our occupational hazards don't apparently lead
us to a long tenure and you are to be congratulated on being as long as you
have in your particular office.
Again there is a point of kinship in that you were returned
at the general election your held on the same day last year as we held ours
in Australia so that we can claim these points of similarity, but I believe our
thinking goes more closely In line than that. And I have been very glad in
my own discussions with you always to find an . dentify of view from you as
the Head of your Government with that held by the Head of the Australian
Government on many of the problems with which we have to deal together.
.' i. th so many things In common, and with so many common
interests, it is natural that we should communicate frequently, and now
on this occasion, consult directly with each other to the advantage, I hore,
of our two countries. Australia and New Zealand have a common cultural and
historical heritage. have a common language, a common belief in
democratic tradition, in the rule of law. differ to a degree as to the
form of our Parliamentary ' nstitutions you have the misfortune to be without
the benefit of guidance from an Upper Chamber, but we have a common
interest in our two countries in the peace, stab'lity and economic rrogress
in this area of the world.
I said a little earlier that this was your first official visit
in your capacity as Prime Iv. inister, and unfortunately in a sense it is
very brief visit and a vworking visit in which much has to be concentrated here
in Canberra in the time we have available to us. And I do hope that you will
and please accept this as a formal invitation from me on behalf of the
Government and people of Australia I do hose you will take an opportunity
to spend a longer time vw. th us on an official visit in which you can get beyond
the National Capital itsel and see sonrething of the fascination and interest of
the three million square miles of territory that we can open up for you.
You country and ours have been close toget her thrcugh
many of the crises of our times. V. e fought together in two World 7! ars to
resist aggression and to preserve the freedom of small countries, and stablished
together what we both proudly acclaim as the A. NAC tradition. . Ve are both
active members of the United Nations, and despite the smallness of your
population, you have achieved there an influence and a significance out of
all proportion to your numbers. You were recently a member of the Cecur'ty
Cbuncil. You have had one of your countrymen a Fresident of the Assemrnbly
of the United Nations. We are both active inside the Commonwealth of Nations,
and in this area of the world, by geography we are faced together with
similar problems and a similar outlook. H. e are Pacific by geography but
we are also Pacific by national intent and we share a common desire for
stability and progress in the countries of Asia and the Facif; c, V: e share a
significant treaty relationship with the United Ttates through A NZUS and ; with
our allies in the South East Asia Treaty Organisation. Vie participate in / 3 
-3-
efforts for wider regional endeavours through such institutions as ASPAC,
the Economic Commission for Aia and the Far East, the Asian Develorment
Bank, and in our work together in the Colombo Flan. And we stand together
with our allies in Vietnam.
The Frime Minister's visit reflects our desire for
continuing friendly consultation in all matters of common concern. A visit
by the Head of Government of his country would be an event of significance
at any time, certainly it is most welcome and timely now, because our main
purpose is to discuss together our shared defence policies in relation to
Scuth-East Asia and the rrplication for both our countries of the changes in
the British defence posture as outlined in the British White Faper. ' ie have
forces working together in Vietnam and we contribute together to the
Commonwealth Strategic Reserve in Malaysia and Singapore.
We have been reviewing our situation there. V'e are
not attempting to reach final decisions at this point, but the talks with you
and your Defence Minister and members of your official party are part of
continuing close consultat'ons which we have with you and with other mutually
interested governments over foreign policy and defence matters. Australia
is neither at the commencement nor the ccnclusion of that process. In come
respects there is time ahead of us. but planning is important now and we need
to know what is going on in the mind of each other.
Already '. ve have found our exchanges last night and earlier
today, and those to be continued through the day, of value to our own thinking
as we hope they will be to yours. There wil' bs naturally other matters on
which you will wish to consult with us, and I know you have had talks vith
my colleague, the Deputy Frime Minister and Minister for Trade, and this
visit is, I hope, not just a rare event to be thought back on as something which
happened in the history of our two countries. I hope it will be the beginning
of a much more frequent process of consultation which I was able to touch
off myself in January, and which I hope you, w'th your own further visits and
those of your Ministerial colleagues here will be able to promote as time
go-s on. I think I did mention to you in Newv Zealand that we had
adopted a rather enlightened policy of enabling Members of this Parliament
to travel at public e: xense to your country as they saw the necessity, so that
we should get to know each other better. are working together on our
Anzac Scholarships which I hope will also lead to a warmer and deeper
understanding of each other's problems. In these ways we hope to manifest
our conviction that so far ahead as our destiny lies, we see Australia and New
Zealand going closely hand in hand together.
I am now going to ask the Leader of the Opposition to
support me before I invite all present to join me in drinking your very good
health. 


OPENING OF CUSTOMS HOUSE. 131, AMELBOURNE 6th October, 1967Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold HoltMr. Minister, Ministerial colleagues, representative ofthe Opposition, representative of the State Premier and of theLord Mayor, other distinguished gentlemen all of whom I am glad tosee here with us today.Indeed, as I look around I see not only many of myParliamentary colleagues and some of the former administratorsof this significant Department of State, but a good many of thelarger customers of the organisation perhaps customer is hardlythe word. Contributor would ' be more practical in our expressionof it, but in a sense of course we are all contributors throughthe Commonwealth to this valuable, revenue collecting Department.I am glad to say that its revenues are collected ratter lesspainfully, at least to the victim, than some other form of actionthat we have had to devise, and it has been the more popular onthat a'ccount. It is for me a pleasure to open a Commonwealth building whichis by the testimony of our own vision at the same time functional,decorative and aesthetically satisfying, and which will itselfbe an addition to the grace and dignity of this fine city ofMelbourne. I have opened quite a number of different buildingssince I took office but it so happens that this is the firstadministrative building I have opened in the capacity of PrimeMinister. Most of the other Commonw~ ealth buildings have beenassociated with an outreach of Commonwealth activity of onekind or another the Murray I ' Cower Project, the Space Stationat Honeysuckle Creek, our Army Barracks at Townsville and theCommunications Centre at the North. West Cape.I mention these by item because it helps to illustrate theramifications of Commonwealth administration in thes3 modern times.But the Customs administration is of ancient lineage and providedone of the earliest revenue levies in Australia long before therewas such an item as income tax.The Victorian Customs came into existence in 1836 and therecord shows that tobacco and spirits were at that time runningrather contrary to the form one would have expected in thesematters. They were being smuggled into New South Wales and not fromthat area and into Van Diemen's Land, also via the Port Phillipdistrict. An Officer of Customs was appointed at an annualsalary of œ 200 and a Tide Waiter at œ, 100. I saw this referencein the notes supplied to me I though t there was a misprint for a" tired waiter", but he would get just about that much in tipsin a reasonable quarter these times. In their first quarter ofoperation they collected œ, 329. Two years later ther collectionswere œ 12,000 a quarter, so -they must have been covering theirexpenses and salaries at that point of time.Today Customs and Excise revenues are running about ~ OMa quarter so at least this is one direction in which the Governmenthas shown no lack of progress, ge.-ntlemen. I sometimes ponderwhat would hap;,-en to our revenues for Commonwealth purposes, andthat includes of course State purposes, if people stopped drinkingspirituous liquor and gave up the smoking of cigarettes. 2/.
Rhatever the moralities of the matter mi;:' ht beg it is thesort of prospect which haunts a Commonwealth Treasurer. There isno sign however of any diminition in our expenditures in thesedirections and so we can rate the Customs and Excise administrationas one of the largest revenue gatherers for the Commonwealth. Ithink you get in, Senator, about 24% through this organisation ofthe total revenue of the Commonwealth.This is the 4th Customs House which has been established inMelbourne in 1837 it was a weatherboard cabin; in 1839 the firstCustoms House which could be fairly described as such was constructed,and in 1876 the old Customs House opp-site, a very graceful,historic and dignified building was established. While over theyears age may have withered them, Customs have not staled in thevariety of their exactions.And so we come to the present building of which I havespoken in such appreciative terms, and I ask you Senator to acceptand to convey to all associated with this, to you Mr. Carmody, thecongratulations of the Government for a fine building which is awelcome addition to the Commonwealth range.It's widely recognised throughout the community that theCustoms Department is a unit which operates in a very efficientway. ie often read of spectacular finds by Custons officers Ithink most members of the public get the message that there is anefficient body of investigators at work. I'm told, although Idon't have time normally to enjoy these amenities myself, thatthe television serial " Contrabandits" has given us some insightinto the exciting ways of Customs investigators, and I amadvised Mr. Carmody that you carry yourself a badge of thisparticular organisation.What is not so often recognised is that as well assafeguarding the revenue, the Customs Department plays a largepart in the welfare of the community. And I am not thinking hereso much of that area of its activities which results in theexclusion of certain forms of literature from the geneyalconsumption I think there we have a part to play with the Statesas well but it does play a major part in preventing the entryof noxious plants and animal products into Australia. We havebeen fortunat ly spared the degradation of some of' the exoticdiseases and some of the weeds which would otherwise hamperagriculture in this country. The entry of some of these couldprejudice the wellbeing of our primary industries or thce healthof our citizens.Another important aspect somewhat in this field of theDepartment's work is in prOventing the illegal introduction ofnarcotic drugs. Here is one Department where LSD really meanshard cash, but not loosely in the sky with the diamonds Ithink the popular song is running at the present time. It cameto my ears that in their desire to avoid making any souvenirpresentation to me which would involve the expenditure ofCommonwealth funds, the Minister and his Department had in mindto present me with a confiscated opiuci pipe. Well, I felt that inthe current circumstances this micht be misunderstood. It wJouldcertainly have leant itself to the cartoonist, I have no doubt, butit might have been taken as some encouragement on my part in thisunfortunate direction.But we do read much in the papers these days of the sad andharmful effects of these drugs, and the Department makes animportant contribution in ensuring that these and otherpotentially harmful drugs are kept in the hands of responsiblepeople.
3.Despite all these activities the cost of collecting Customsand Excise I've already mentione' that this amounts to 24 ofthe Commonwealth's total revenue is surprisingly small. Overthe past 5 years, at least, the total cost of operating theDepartment of Customs and Excise is well under 2% of totalCustoms and Excise collections9 and this is a tribute to theefficiency of the Departmcnt.I can personally testify to that efficiency from an experienceof my own just on nearly 30 years ago when I was for six weeksActing Minister for Customs. When Robert Menzies, es he then was,told me I was to take on t1ais task while he was looking aroundfor a permanent Minister, I must confess that my heart sank. Ihad seen all these schedules and all this esoteric languageassociated with the Customs administration, and I wondered how Icould handle this Depa: tment without exposing my ignorance in theParliament to my discredit. But I then found and I'm sure thiswould have been the experience of those of my colleagues on thisplatform who had their own period of administration of theDepartment that this, as one of the oldest CommonwealthDepartments, had built up a body of experience and know,. lede inrelation to almost every conceivable situation which could occur toharass the Ninister-in-Charge. They were able to give sound,detailed advice which made the task of administration relativelyeasy. I'm not implying, Senator, nor to you my colleague, the Leaderof the Government in the Senate who occupied this post for morethan 7 years, that you have had a cushy time, because when thingsare slack here, there's always a certain amount of activity in theSenate to keep you occupied if all else fails! But certainly onecan look to a most efficient body of men and women in thisDepartment to ease the task of the 1' inister. I think it is alsoa tribute to the co-operation which the community gives, even ifsometimes a little reluctantly, to those who have laid upon themthe duty of collecting the nation's tax revenue from thisparticular area.It may interest some of you to know that taking allCommonwealth tax revenues together, less than is spent on theircollection, which the businessmen in the audience, I am sure, wouldregard as a remarkably low figure. Although the community generallyco-operates very well in the broad with our tax collectors this hasnot always been the case as my researches into the records forthis occasion have led me to discover. The report of the BorderTariff Abolition League of 1866 a Lea-ue formed to fight againstthe Customs duties imposed on goods moving between New South Walesand the rest of Australia contained this passage " Familieshave been searched, children detained an. interrogated upon familyaffairs; the vehicles and goods seized and then restored again.It's no wonder that a spirit of resistance has sprung up amongstthe people of Moama and your Committee regrets to find thatchildren are being trained to tell falsehoods when questioned byCustoms officers".~ ell those were the bad old days we have improved on thatsince. But as the flow of goods and people into and out ofAustralia increases, so does the work of the Customs Depaitment.It is a product of this increased flow that has led to theconstruction of this large and modern building. In it, as theMinister has told you, all the administration of Customs inVictoria will be housed the first time that this has beenpossible for many years.I mention one particular matter because we are becoming 4/.
increasingly tourist-minded these days I am speaking not so muchof our own journeys abroad but in relation to the potentialitiesof revenue and stimulus to the economy from a growing touristindustry. e have set up, recently a Tourist Commission, and welook to increasingly successful promotion of our attractivecapacity abroad. But one of the problems of travellers is, as wehave discovered in our own journeying, the Customs officer. Webelieve that our own Department is not only efficient in thisdirection but has taken a realistic view of the needs oftravellers, particularly those who come to us from other countries.And one way in which the Department has contributed to our welcometo tourists has been to abolish declaration forms and by doing so,we have in this arm of Government supported the efforts of thosewho are concerned in encouraging tourists to visit us.I am glad to be able to report another measure which I donot think the Minister has yet given publicity so I have thatpleasure here today. It concerns passengers and crews of overseasvessels travelling around the Australian coast. I am happy toannounce, and I assure Senator Cohen it has no connection withimpending events in relation to the Senate, that from 1st Januarynext there will be no Customs duties or sales taxes levied ongoods consumed between Australian ports. Miost of you have been onboard a vessel at some time or another and you know what a shockto the system it is when you strike the Australian coast and findthat the prices of the commodities consumed on board these shipsreceive the full weight of sales tax and excise levies. And thisstep has been taken as a contribution to the attraction S'rttind4Ssto Australia, by making their movement to this country the moreconvenient and agreeable. It is also a recognition of the largedistances covered by overseas vessels as they move from oneAustralian port to the other, and I am sure it will be welcomedby all travellers.Before I declare this building open, and unveil thecommemorative plaque, let me recall again a piece of history. In1876 the old Customs house was completed. And the Melbourne" Argus" of the day reported on this event as follows" The people of Melbourne have for some months past become soaccustomed to the sight of unfinished public buildings, that whenone is at last completed it is looked upon almost as a new erection.Those who were unaccustomed to the dark and winding labyrinths tobe found in the interior of the building frequently lost an hourin wandering . bout the cold and dreary passages before they foundthe room they had been searching. This has all changed now, andwhere there were formerly cold damp passages and rooms ofuninviting interior there are now to be found bright and warmlookingcorridors end cosy rooms in which business can betransacted with both pleasure and comfort".I am sure you will agree that that kind of description canvery aptly be applied to the fin,. building in which we findourselves at this time. There have been no unreasonable delaysin the construction of this building, and this has been due to theeffective planning and provision of the Department of , orks and theefficient operation of the builders. I am sure that with itsmodern style, its air-conditionin throughout and attentionto the needs of efficiency in the circumstances of today, thisbuilding will represent an advance just as great over the oldhouse as was that house in its turn over the first permanentCustoms house.It is with great pleasure I now formally declare thisbuilding open and unveil the plaque.


_ rC17 OCT 1961718 RA OLUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF MR EISAKU SATOPRIME MINISTER OF JAPANPARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA 12TH OCTOBER, 1967Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt.Mr Prime Minister, Your Excellen cies, Gentlemen:It's a great pleasure on behalf of the Australian Governmentand people to welcome our distinguished visitor, and shortly I shall beproposing a toast to him. We welcome the Prime Minister and the verydistinguished official party which has accompanied him, and perhaps sincewe are eating in a parliamentary dining-room, I can be permitted to give aspecial welcome to Mr Nishimura, who leads the Prime Minister's partyin the Diet, and as a Prime Minister myself, I recognise the importanceof paying tribute to those who support us, Prime Minister. There are othermembers of the Diet, members of the House of Representatives andCouncillors as well as the official party. They are all very welcome indeed.This is the third visit to Australia by a Prime Minister fromJapan, and each of thEse visits has been a notable, and indeed historicoccasion. The first was by Mr Kishi who, appropriately and aptly enoughwas the Pk~ ime Minister's brother, and I am glad to see the family traditionmaintained by him. He came in 1957. We welcomed Mr Ikeda in 1963, andnow we. have Prime Minister Sato.He has been Prime Minister since 1964 but before then, he hada very distinguished public career in a variety of capacities. Both he and Ihad the dubious pleasure of being Ministers of Finance in our respectiVecountries which estaliishes a bond of sorts between us. He was Ministerin Charge of Olympic Affairs, just to show how widely his activities haveranged, and he has, of course, held many other high offices.We speak to him on this occasion which is for us another notableand historic occasion, because his visit comes at a very sigrdficant period inthe relations between our two countries. The past istbhind us; the presentis a period of mutually beneficial trade and growing co-operation in theinstitutions of Southi-East Asia and the Pacific, and the future is an excitingprospect of growing co-operation with a significant role for each of us inthe affairs of what is becoming an increasingly important and significantarea of the world. There has been almost daily awareness between our countriesof the increasing range of contacts. They range over matters of internationalaffairs, of trade, of aid, of sports, and in the cultural field, and so we dofind it especially pleasing, Prime Minister, to have another visit from theHead of Government of your country after a four-year gap. 1 hope that asthe years go on, the intervals will become briefer. I look hopefully to a timewhen it may be possible for me to return this visit, and I acknowledgepublicly with great appreciation the invitation you extended earlier to me todayand in which you indicated that the Emperor of Japan had personally joined.It is a compliment which I value and I hope to find an occasion when it willbe mutually convenient for you to receive me.I was in Tokyo myself for the International Bank and Monetary / 2
2-Fund Meetings in 1964 and I recall then the impression of great growth andactivity which was so evident in your capital city at that time.There are, of course, many reasons for the increasingly closelinks between our two countries. We have broadly similar political systemsmuch closer, when I study them than I had earlier realised.: We have aconcern that we share together for the wellbeing of the region and its economicprogress. We have ourselves increasingly important and economic trade links.We co-operate in the field of aid, particularly in this area of the world. Wehave cultural links; we are drawing increasingly ourselves upon the traditionaland distinctive cultures of Japan. Our economies are, to a remarkable. degree,complementary. We do compete in certain fields perhaps, but the notablething about the economies of our two countries is the way in which we can eachhelp the other. We are both democracies. You have an hereditary Emxperor wean hereditary monarchy. We both have written Constitutions. There are twoHouses in both the Japanese Diet and the Australian Parliament, and I haveno doubt, Prime Minister, you have your problems with each of them.Our Cabinets are formed of members from the Parliament. We share aconcern, as I have said, for the region. You lie at the north of it Australiaand New Zealand lie at the south of the Pacific Region.Inevitably, and naturally, and most desirably, we are both, as prospering andrapidly-developing countries, concerned with the wellbeing of our neighbours.By 197C you may rank as the third industrial power in the world.You are certainly on the ascendant all the time. You have, I think, the highestrate of growth of national product of any industrialised country in the world.We, for the time being at any rate, enjoy a higher per capita income and one ofthe world's highest living standards. You apply a hig her proportion of yourgross national income to investment, but we rank, we understand, about secondto you, and we are at this time devoting a higher proportion of our grossnational product to international aid an~ d to the services of defence.So all these similarities I have mentioned and our common int erestsin the past decade have brought our two countries increasingly close togetherin many ways, We are co-operating in the Asian and Pacific Council. Wefrequently discuss together in the United Nations matters in which we find weshare attitudes on many of the significant issues. We are both greatlyconcerned with the stability of Asia because for us peace in Asia is aprerequisite for our own wellbeing as indeed it is for the wellbeing of thosecountries with which we are in neighbourly condition. Any State in Asiathat regards a high degree of instability and political chaos either in the restof the world or in any of the neighbouring countries around us as advantageousto its inte rests represents a common problem for our two countries.We, like you, hope most ardently for a peaceful settlement ofthe conflict in Viet Nam, and we, like you, have regretted that a series ofpeace initiatives has not been successful. More than forty in number havebeen attempted from many and varied sources, and for our part, as I knowfrom yours, we will do what we can to promote a successful peace negotiationfor a just and enduring peace in the area. It is in the national interests of eachof our countries as it is in the interest of the wellbeing and security of thepeople most directly concerned.When the Government of North Viet Nam appreciates thedetermination of the Allied effort and understands the price to be paid from / 3
-3aggression, perhaps there will be real hope of successful negotiationsguaranteeing the independence of South Viet Nam.You can claim-to rank at this time as the world's sixth tradingnation and you are on the move up in the ladder of international trade.Last year you were Australia's best customer in terms of the value ofgoods imported from us, and as you pointed out in our discussions inCabinet this morning, if you had not been, you would soon be in that positionbecause of the incmasing part that Australian production will be playing inyour own economy.You are the largest buyer of our wool and our coal, of our ironore and concentrates, of our non-ferrous ores and concentrates, of ourunwrought copper, and our second largest market for sugar, mutton andlamb and butter. You are the largest supplier of yarns and textile fabricsto this country, cf-our iron and ste4 of fish products, and a major supplierof motor vehicles and electrical machinery.The ten-year-old trade agreement with your country, to which mycolleague, the Deputy Prime Minister made such a notable contribution, wasone of the earliest of our post-war agreements and surely the mostsuccessful. Apart from facilitating important flows of trade in eachdirection, the agreement provides for regular, and in our view, mostvaluable discussions and consultations between traders and our governments,and it is a happy circumstance that here with us today we have so manymembers of the Japan/ Australian Business Co-operation Committee who aremaking their contribution to this success.Our countries are clearly bound to continue to have close economicrelationships, and by 1970, we confidently expect you to have the thirdlargest economy in the world.Our many co-operative links in the aid field include sharedmembership of the Development Assi stance Committee, shared membershipof the International Bank and Monetary Fund, shared membership of theForeign Exchange Operations Fund for Laos; we are members of theInternational Bank's Co-ordinating Group for Aid to Malaysia and Thailandand of its Consultative Group on Ceylon. Vle both have a very considerableinterest in the wellbeing of Indonesia which you visited so recently. Weare both members of the Colombo Plan organisation, both members ofECAFE and both members of the Asian Development Bank. Your contributionwas extremely generous $ 20 million. We ferl that while this ranked withthat of the United States, Australia with a commitment of $ 85 million hasshown its goodwill with a contribution out of all proportion to our populationand national wealth.It is important that the countries in our region should evolveco-operatively. Aid is an important way of co-operating. We give aid,in the words of the late President Kennedy " because it is right not becausewe are looking for repayment or because we are looking solely to thematerial benefits that can come to our countries". It is a gesture ofinternational -goodwill, and we believe it is accepted on that basis.One of our great problems in making effective contact with you isour language. You have done much better in that respect than we have, PrimeMinister. I have been somewhat humbled to find that you can communicatewith me in my language certainly to a very much greater degree than I could
-4ever hope to communicate with you in yours. But increasingly Japaneseis being learned at Australian schools and universities, and I hope thisprocess will continue. Only today two new scholarships for Australiansto go to Japan are being announced one, the Australian/ Japan BusinessCo-operation Scholarship is being sponsored by the Business Co-operationCommittee to which I have referred, and will permit a scholar at aJapanese university to study there for one year. The Salonju-HamersleyScholarship will also provide a year's study for an Australian graduate.And I hope this process will expand and increase because It is by havingwell-trained, well-educated people from our two countries come to knowclosely the circumstances of the other that our understanding will beenriched and mellowed.We appreciate your cultural contributions in Japanese films;Japanese art and Japanese backgrounds are being used increasingly in.cultural settings in this country. Increasingly we are becoming aware ofthe richness of Japan's cultural heritage. The 1970 World Exposition isto be held in Osakca and it is a matter of particular pleasure for Australiato be represented there. We are sure that you will be able to draw onmany countries to support you, and this will be one of the notable eventsin the cultural and economic development of our region of the world.Your theme will be progress and harmony for mankind. We look forwardto participating in the exposition and we feel that the expositbn theme isa fitting statement of our common purposes.It is our firm object, and youars also, I am sure, to work togetherwith all men of goodwill towards the pr ogress and harmony of mankind.We have a special contribution, each of us, to make in this region of theworld, and let us hope our friendship, our co-operation and our collaborationwill make a notable advance in the history of mankind in the countries aroundus who are looking for the kind of leadership and assistance that we areable to contribute to them. We could work for no better aim and we couldleave ourselves no better heritage.And it is in that spirit, Mr Prime Minister that we welcome youhere. I ask my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister, who has, as youwill be so well aware personally, done so much to promote good relationsbetween our two countries, to support me in the toast I am shortly topropose, and then we will call upon the Leader of Her Majesty's Oppositionto demonstrate to you that in the sentiments that we express, we are unitedin the Parliament of this nation.


O~ ATER's o6-,ANNUAL DINNER OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN Q. 17 NOVCHAJVMER OF MANUFACTUESADELAIDE, S. A. i:;14TH OCTOBER, 1967Speech by the Prime6 Minister, Mr. Harold Holt
Mr. President, Mr. Premier, Mr. Leader of' the Opposition, Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, so many distinguished guests whose names appear in this fine print in this very elaborate programme, and the six hundred odd remaining members of this assembly: In any other State 698 would have been rounded off to 700 but such is the innate honesty of South Australia that they state the matter pra~ cisely to us.
You have made me feel a little weary, Mr. President, with your recital of what has gone on over the last twenty-one months and this week has been running quite true to form but lest anybody reading the public print should imagine that I am a compulsive air journeyer, let me assure you that the most enjoyable part of any flight that I make is the walk down the steps from the aircraft as we land. I think that's the experience of most of us.I am honoured to be your guest tonight in my capacityas Prime Minister, and I have listened with very great interestto what the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition and you havehad to say, Mr. President. Before I make some comment myself,may I be permitted a few personal references.
First I would wish to join with you in the good wisheByou have conveyed to your Governor, who I may say, we are indebtedto from the Commonwealth for the very able way and ready mannerin which he acted as Administrator for us during the absenceoverseas of our own Governor-General. W7e join with you in wishinghim a speedy recovery.
M~ ay I also say how much I have regretted to learn todayof the passing of a very distinguished South Australian in SirGeorge Ligertwood. He was not only a very distinguished memberof your own judiciary but he servod the Commonwealth in a publicspiritedmanner on at least three occasions that I can personallyrecall as a RI'oyal Commissioner, as the Chairman of a Committeelooking into the situation of the Members of the Parliament and,more recently, in a very much more onerous role as Chairman of aCommittee on Taxation in a very complex field. We join with youin mourning him and I pay this public tribute for the service hehas rendered not only your State but the nation.
Then may I single out, if I ccn, from the many distinguishedguests here tonight one man to whom the Premier andothers have rightly paid tribute. I thought that when Tom Playfordceased to be Premier he would cease to occupy the centre of thestage. I find I was mistaken, he has stolen the show again tonight,but he has done that as he has at so many Premiers' Conferencesand Loan Council meetings without saying very much himself. Hemanages, or did manage to get the results, but I am delighted tosee him again and see him obviously in such good form. He is notonly a citizen of South Australia but an honoured citizen of theCommonwealth of Australia who has meant so much to the developmentof your State. And looking at your State, I sometimes feel thatnever has more been done by people with less to do it with, becauseyou have not enjoyed some of the rather fortuitous advantages ofother States, the rich natural resources, the great mineral discoveries and matters of that sort. But to come to this wellordered,prospering city is to realise how wall the SouthAustralian has done with the resources available to him and theprosperity, the efficiency, the success of Australian manufacturingindustry is nowhere better exemplified than it is in your Stateof South Australia and I will say a little on that in a moment ortwo. The Premier did make a reference to the absence ofladies, and like himself, I always feel a little lighter in heartif the ladies are present to give a decorative contribution to thegathering and to keep us in reasonable order in our own behaviour.But I would like to point out to him that not only have I recognisedthis in my own Ministry by having a woman in my Ministry,I think an advantage I possess over him at this point of time,but the woman happens to be a Dame and as you know there isnothing better than a Dame. Perhaps he may be encouraged bythis example. But, Mr. President, since the Second W~ orld V/, ar therehas been a tremendous surge of development in this country whichhas completely transformed the Australian economy and, as youhave said yourself, we no longer ride on the sheep's back. W~ ehave developed diversified industries, industries of strengthand variety which are capable of not merely meeting the requirementsof the home market, but in a growing number of instances,capable of going out and finding a market for themselves in otherparts of the world. There was a time when " imported" meantsomething superior. ' de have abandoned, I hope, that psychologyin this country for all time, because while we are capable ofmeeting and matching, as you have done in so many instances, themarkets of the rest of the world then there is nothing inferiorabout Australian production. And while in the early years itwas mainly the supply of the needs of the consumer foodprocessing and matters of that sort we have now got to thestage where we can produce highly sophisticated items of manufactureand where we can look to an increasing proportion of ourexport income derived from the products of our manufacturingindustries. It has become fashionable at this time for some of theacademics and theorists to address the argument that we ought tomodify quite radically the general policy which I bclieve has beensupported on both sides of politics in Australia now for many years,and that is reasonable and adequate protection for economic andefficient Australian industry. ' ve hear people arguing that nowwe are building up such a big export income with the aid of ourmineral discoveries that we could be a little more choosy, moreselective as to those industries for which we provide withreasonable tariff protection. Iell I go on public record againas saying that for as far ahead as I can see, Australia is notonly going to need its manufacturing industries, it's going toneed a steady expansion of its manufacturing industries and thatis because apart from other considerations and I will mentiontwo or three of them our industrial development is linked withone of the most important aspects of national policy and thatis population growth.We have got three million square miles of country herewith less than twelve million people in en area of the world wherethey count their population in tens or hundreds of millions, andwe have a responsibility to develop this country and to populateit, and in these modern times wvith the degree of industrialdevelopment that we have achieved and the organisational technicalefficiency we have achieved, we don't find industries throwingup, as they did in the past, the great opportunities for employment. 
Certainly our primary industries can't in an area in which more mechanisation is occurring in the primary industryfield. Even these great developments that I've been seeing inWestern Australia and Queensland in recent months, although theymean tens and hundreds of millions in their aggregate to ourexport income, they employ modern equipment, modern mechanisation,as you see in Hamersley, where in one township you will find,Dampier, the products being brought from Mt. Tom Price where ashovel will pick up twenty-five tons at one pull and load it intoa truck costing a quarter of a million dollars that will carryaway a hundred tons of material. In that situation numbers arenot great in relation to the capital expenditure, but in themanufacturing industries this is where we have found in thispost-war era that we have been able to absorb so much of theemployment which has come to us from overseas and so much of thegrowing work-force inside Australia itself. So there is in termsof national policy one powerful reason why we should be encouragingexpansion of the manufacturing industry in this country. Andthere is another. You mentioned our sister countryr of New Zealand, Mr.President. I don't think New Zealand would have been in asdifficult an economic position as it is had it been able toestablish, ( and this is no criticism of the New Zealanders becausethey haven't got the domestic market to do this), industry of avariety and scale that we have here. Then they would have beenthe better able as we have been in the past, and shall be in thefuture, to meet the fluctuations which inevitably occur for aprimary-producing country, both of price for what it can securefor its product on international markets and the production itcan secure from chancy seasonal conditions. We are the strongerand the better able to meet these variations of fortune becausewe hav.-a wider dispersed and diversified nanufacturing industryin this country. Now I would hope that these considerations will notonly be in your minds but in the minds of many of those who speakof radical reform of our policy in relation to the protection ofeconomic and efficient Australian industry. There has been nochange in the basic policy, nor the philosophy of my own Governmenton this matter, which follows closely that of my predecessor andwhich I believe represents the view of all sections of the NationalParliament on this particular topic.Now, I wanted to speak tonight not merely on manufacturingindustry in any narrow sense because you are here not merely asmanufacturers, but in this highly representative gathering asfellow citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia, and we havebefore us by our geographical situation and by the circumstanceof the growth of the economy of Asia at this time, not only greatproblems but great opportunities. I think it was Henry Kaiserwho very aptly said that problems are really opportunities in theirwork clothes. Well, Australia sees many problems around us, situatedas we are with less than twelve million people in this areawhere so many difficulties exist but where for the first time incenturies of history our countries are emerging with an independentidentity and searching for the development of their own nationalresources, and this opens up for Australia a great opportunity ofinfluence of growth in trade.In the 1950' s 15 per cent approximately of our exportincome was earned in the countries east of Suez. Currently weare earning just on 40 per cent of our export income from thatarea of the world which includes just on three-fifths of humankindand where the age-old evils, the age-old weaknesses are beingovercome in modern terms and with modern technology. / 4
-4Now that cairvt is a steadily rising wurvt,. You mentionedthe visit here this week of the Prime DMinister of' Japan. Thegrowth of' Australia's trade with Japan is itself' a matter of'historical noteworthiness and remarkable in its degree, but eventhat, we believe, is only at the threshold of' the kind of' collaborationin trade between the two countries that we can see ahead forus. The Prime Minister of' Japan told us first at our Cabinetdiscussion and I would not have voiced it here had he notrepeated it at his press conf'erence but in a matter of' a fewyears he can see Japan taking two-thirds of' its iron ore importsfor a growing steel industry from Australia and two-thirds of' itscoal imports, and that would be, I think, more than double theproportion that we are currently contracting to send to thatcountry. As Japan itself' and the growing economies which Ihave seen myself' in person in the course of' this year in Koreaand Taiwan, in Cambodia and to a lesser degree because it stillhas to face the presence of' 40,000 North Vietnam troops in itsterritory of' Laos, but as these countries can shake off themenaces which have afflicted them in recent times, then theirown economies will f'orge ahead and they are looking to Australiaas one of the principal suppliers of' their raw materials, theirfoodstuffs and even some of our manufactured items.Now this, I repeat, opens up great opportunities forthis country of ours. I know that the Prime Minister of' Japandid make some reference to the gap which exists at the presenttime between the volume of purchase or value of purchase andvolume of goods from Australia contrasted with what we take fromJapan, but you must remember, as I am sure he realises, that wearc less than twelve million people. They are closer to a hundredmillion people and per capita we take far more in value from Japanthan Japan takes from us. In any event, of course, this is hardlythe realist's view on international trade.Countries look to an overall balance if they can secureit in their international trade, but they don't, if they arerealists, attempt to balance their trade with every trade partnerwith whom they deal and this is true of Japan with us as it istrue with our trade relationship with several of the countries ofEurope who are big purchasers of our wool and some of our foodstuffs.We have a very favourable balance with them; they don't buy fromus because they love Australia and Australians. Each countrywatches its own national interest in the purchases that it makesand in these European countries they may purchase our wool theydo so because they either require it for the needs of' theirdomestic market or because they are going to process it intotextiles and clothing and export it to some other part of theworld. And so with much of' what we send to Japan.We have a very favourable balance with New Zealand butNew Zealand does not produce in the sort of quantities that wouldenable the balance, the goods that we require. They, as we, lookto an improvement in the trading position, but as realists we facethe fact that our goal is both a balance overall in our internationaltrade and a growth overall of international trade for allinternational traders. As we expand international trade, so weall have the prospect of' some improvement in our own tradingposition. We have a very unfavourable balance with the UnitedStates of America but we are able to offset that with the favourablebalance we obtain in some other direction with some othercountries. Now one other matter on which I would like to commentquite briefly is that from time to time we hear fears expressedabout the extent of overseas investment in this country and I,both as a Minister and as a Treasurer and more recently, of course,
as Prime Minister, have kept my eye closely on this matter overa great many years and I have alw"-ys been conscious of this factin my mind thvct the United States became the greatest economicpower and military power in the world through a process of importingpeople and importing capital. There were periods in whichtheir rate of immigration flow far exceeded anything that we haveattained and I don't know of any point in the history of theUnited States when they have placed any restraint upon any investmentin their country from any other part of the world, and Idon't find America dominated by foreign capital or foreigncapitalists because, as we have discovered in this country, oneinvestment stimulates another.A foreign investment stimulates a great deal of domesticinvestment. People can point to General Motors-Holden, and youare very well aware of the activities of General Motors-Holden.What I am aware of is these two or three principal factors. Firstof all that the sub-contractors and suppliers to General Motors-Holden, are in the main Australian-owned and -based industriesand they provide a great deal of employment for a great many people,and Australian industry has been able to grow because of thisstimulus, not only through General Motors-Holden I am notpromoting them tonight but Chrysler, Ford, the rest, theBritish Motor industries all these automotive industriesVolkswagen any that you care to name that have establishedthemselves here have given their own stimulus to Australianproduction. The second point I make is that Australia has a verysubstantial equity in all foreign-owned enterprise because wedrag our 42J per cent from profits anyhow by way of company taxapart from what we derive from the individual who works for theorganisation, and if they do remit dividends overseas there isnormally a 15 per cent withholding tax on the dividends remitted.Most of them plough back a fair share of the profits earned intofurther development which means more employment, and incidentally,more national revenue for the tax gatherer from their activities.Over recent years that particular company has, if my recollectionis correct, kept its overserns remittances well inside the earningsit has made of foreign exchange for Australia from the sale of itsproducts overseas. So I am not one of those who lose sleep aboutthe activities of foreign investors in tAstralia. I believe theyhave benefitted this country very greatly.Going round these mineral developments, you only haveto look at them on the spot to realise the secondary effectsgenerated from them which benefit Australian industry generally.Take the show I saw recently up at Port Hedland, the Mount Newmanproject just getting under way. It is going to put in its ownrailway line of 270 miles at its own cost. I saw one area cleared,of a mile length, which was to accommodate the sleepers and therails for the railway line. Now the sleepers came from the South-Wiest of Western Australia and I could just imagine the stimulusit had given to the timber industry of that State. The railswere to come from B. H. P. and one could imagine the valuable effectthis would have on the order books of that company and the usefulinfluence on employment and general economic effect throughoutthe community. And that is just to pick out two aspects as onelooks at all these projects together in Western Australia andyou hear the talk about you mustn't make this country just aquarry for overseas interests.I predict that within a foreseeable period of yearsthere will be a great industrial complex reaching down throughthose industries linking one up with the other, because as theydevelop and they generate income they touch off further development. / 6
-6You need engineering shops to service them, you need a varietyof' other undertakings. There is even salt works going down thereto take advantage of the proximity of' power and energy and theother facilities which these industries bring with them. Andthis is the way a country develops. This is how it gets a reallyeffective decentralisation of national activity, and we arefortunate that when the rest of' the world, the under-developedworld, is scram~ bling to attract the foreign investor thatAustralia has built up so successfully an environment of politicaland economic stability that we readily attract investment andresources and techanical know-how to this country.Now, the final thing I would like to say to you andthis is well away from the issue perhaps of industry, but we archere tonight as fellow Australians and the greatest matter whichconcerns us in external terms for this country currently iswhat is going on in Vietnam. Associated with that as part of ourgeneral security problem is the situation we face with the Britishannouncement of intention to withdraw its forces East of Suez an~ dthis creates for Australia this total complex, a situation we havenever had to face before in our national history.He are being made to stand on our own two feet to anextent that we have never known before but we are not entirelyon our own feet, and indeed at this stage of our national growthand with our limited population, it would be almost visionary toexpect a time that I can see ahead of me when we would be able tostand entirely on our own two feet in defence terms. And so wehave, and I believe it to have been a major Australian diplomaticachievement, linked ourselves for our security with the UnitedStates of America in the ANZUS pact and in the SEATO arrangement.But as a good ally, as a country which has gone out in two worldwars much further from our own shores than the situation in Vietnamto resist aggression and try to preserve -the freedom and independenceof small countries, so we have gone again as has been our historicaltradition into Vietnam.In Korea we were the first country after the UnitedStates to take up the United Nations resolution of support againstthe aggression to South Korea which was coming from the North andjoin in resisting that aggression, and as one who has been in Korearecently, I can say that this was not only right in terms of moralprinciple it was right in the results which it produced of anindependent country capable of forging ahead economically once itsindependence had become reasonably assured. Had we not moved into Korea we certainly would not have moved into Vietnam and Iquestion whether we would have held Taiwan. I question whetherIndonesia would have been held secure from Communist influenceand so we are in Vietnam at this time consistently with theprinciples we followed in the two world wars and in our interventionin Korea. Wle are there consistently with the alliance we havewith the mightiest national power in the world in the UnitedStates it has underwritten our security in the ANZUS treatyand we are there as one of the free countries of the South EastAsian and Pacific region looking to the time which has beenemerging quite realistically over recent years in which there canbe greater co-operation, and greater friendliness between thecountries of this region. What is often lost sight of by thosewho concentrate on the day-by-day episodic events in Vietnam hasbeen the achievement of economic growth, of diplomatic collaborationbetween the free countries around the periphery of Asia. Throughthe Asian and South Pacific Council, through the Asian DevelopmentBank, through various other institutions we have been able in a waynever before known in centuries to work together and to bring ourpolicies more closely in line. */ 7
-7And so, gentlemen, in the Knowledge of this, your ownGovornment has been quite firm in its policy attitudes, unwaveringin its own resolution to see this matter through. WNe have notedwhat our allies are prepared to do in order to bring as speedilyas they can this matter to a peaceful and honourable conclusionand we bow to nobody in our desire to see this matter speedilyand honourably resolved. ' 1* aer e more to be served by peace thanmost other countries of the world because with peace we can goahead with the development of this great country and the resourceswhich lie open to us and in that development I know that the manufacturingindustries of Australia have a growing and increasinglyimportant part to play and it is in that recognition that I amdelighted to be here with you tonight, Mr. Preasident, to saluteyo. u as the man of industry for the year and to salute the efficientSouth Australian industry which makes its own valuable contributionto the national effort.Thank you, gentlemen, for having me as your guesttonight and rmy best wishes to your continuing prosperity andgrowing success.



Speech by the Prime Minister of Laos,
His Highness Prince Souvanna oua
at a Government Luncheon,
Parliament House, Canberra. 2nd November, 1967.
Ladics, Gentlemen, Mr. Prime Minister, I am touched to speak today
before this gathering of people from the Australian Parliament
people who have such a deep knowledge of international politics.
I am really touchod by the praise which has been
made by the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition,
Mr. Whitlam. All my actions in the present and the-past have
been uniquely aimed at letting my country survive in its
independence and its neutrality. As I have said on several
occasions Laos has been at war for more than 20 years. As I
have said before for Laos a greatly under-populated country,
this is a great thing. We are three million inside and there
are more than 16 million outside.
All that is in the past; the present means to us
that we have to make available more than half of our annual
budget for our defence. That's why we have more than a hundred
thousand Laotians under arms. 
2-
in the recent history of our relationship, this
is the first time that a Laotian Prime Linister has paid a
visit to your country. I feel this honour very deeply,
and so does our nation. Therefore, ladies and gentlemen,
the warm regards I addresj you in the name of my people are
full of Zrat: itde and friendship.
How could it be else? The relationship between
our jovernoents is excellent. You know our difficulties, and
as friends you. help us to solve them, taking as friends your
share of our troubles. In Laos, Australia is rightly ! aro-, m as
a dynamic, prosperous country, in a stage of full economic
development. Ye are also pleased to low that today she has
the feeling of belonging to that great entity of South East
Asia, where changes, nutations ana dangers retain har
attention particularly. In these conditions, the understanding
and collaboration between our t, o countries are natural..
But, in all truth, I have to say that in our exchanges your
share is by far the =: ore important and generous.
Howevei, Ladies and Gentlemnen, Laos does not find
the same understanding everywhere. i. ant to speak of our
' forgotten war, and of its consequences. ! any think that the
situation is not so drastic that we axaZg rate our troubles.
In fact we are tho victims of a certain literary romanticism.
The country .,! here it is good to live, one calls our old
kingdom a country w here time flows slowly, in a quiet and
musical nonchalance. Maybe Laos was so, in some periods of
our history, when we were not under attack by our neighbours.
But for at least twenty-two years, it has not been so at all. 
-3
L.~ iesa~ d(~ nt~ meL.) allo7w. ime to illutstrate
this period by so-me Gest'Gimony, fLor hose so-.; eti,, raes personal
nature I as~ c youi e::, calse rie. -' Tht thiis test') imony belongs
in effect -to -th-e history of our country, and therefore -to
the his-tory of 3out-. h ZJ7ast Asia wh. iJch is niow. at sta'Le.
Let u~ s -o bach to 1:* 45 Joan ended th-e status
of the French Protectora. te, r stablis.* ed in La,? os f-or more
tbhan-half a ce-ntury. e suddenly -faced orryi-n-ch-v. age
and a n-reat void. Ho-.-. evor. tie Liao -i-, triots seized th'e
-to recover thin dependence omd to reunifyr
their country. s you lrno%-, Laos w-as artificially divided
into twjo 1r. nteone hand, in th not he Kin-dom
of Luzang ifrabemi-and its f rovince, w:, hore -the Court edthe
IRoyal ministries are located,, on the other the rest of t'he
countnj w: as under the administration of th Frnc gvenos
.3o that the tro united int'o the indepnendernce
move.-aent. the Lao issara (% hi'_ ch 7ree . J S CCoiLsiC, , 71y
c r oat ed a Go va e: t DTheU --imemibers 7were. including :_ yiself and
o t h er L. ao ' Fationalirsts, Frrice 1Fhotsarath : wi eider1 brother,
ovur leader, axid Frne2ouu-Panouvoag, 2.: Y yoLUIIger brother, at
present loader of" the 17co Lao ' Aaksat, a F--arty* of coi-im,, uist
persuasion. Ti~ vr the rench ca.,, e back in strenth! in 1' q46.
and -ie q! e re obliged to take rocfa-e in Thailmid .:, here w: e
continued our struagl-e with alas, alotno mleans. Our only
streng; th asour hepe, adthe ipossilmility of a reasonable
solution at Gf3 hiands of our 1 or: mor coloniz-ers.
.3~ hnaogdid not vic-. i -the eveats thL'e seine w. a y
w--e did. Hie w.-as veyinfluenced by hIis 7Vietm-ih fIriends.
-: loly hie fell co-mpletely be-neath tercontrol. Kesar their
idea of a erciless.) arm--ed srgl. In fact th-e dis s emsion
beca such that our Governmi; ent, i. eary of the servitu de accepted
by ' ioLlphan,: Javong-decided to eust hi-m in na, 1r349. I i~ s destn
washenefoth eald ie beca-i. 2 a creature of the iorth
Vietnariese. 
-4
During that troub) lcd yre-r, '. ie h-d been t old
th' at the French C-eve: nmu'm-it th L-LI , ing of' L rolitical
chem~ i,, e 1for the-. foricr Protoctorate. T7ferelace . Jas matrde to
special atooy. okoiectyvhtaas envio~ gd our
Govern:. 2ort eat rae to ? ais Ivas notified Uf tile
Frcnch proposals, iich beccuime the sL'bject of the Fraanco-Lao
Treaty, sirmedJYn. 1aris in J 194g T2e contents of th~ at
ireaty,. ex-ramined by our ' Iovernr_ ent -, Then I returned to Dmn-ijkok,~
so ems d honouarabl.. ard acceptable in the e.-is tine:: Circtis to. Lc s.
Our objcectives being ach-ieved-', th1e LA1O0
movemient had n-, o ft: hrreason to exist. it ;, i-ac dissolved.
~ ot o f it-U-s iiemib e rs r ot urn -d t o Ljao s. -" or rersonaal Loa. ors
IPri :-ce 1 1citsarath stayed in ' hailmid. As for y brother
SouT)! m' 2~ rCL! VO., y-, a s' 12-Ve to his convictions and to th1e
organisation to ;-. hicli ' fe had adhered, ho 2resur-. Ied th1e frh
a-ainst ud his countr
4oweiver, -the follo;., in. yar in 15, a new and
impot~ t olitical fact a--c-ared. TPw-o Pr3iltisof the
Lao _ Issara oeetincluclilng m.-, yself , erc .: icmbo_ 7rs ofL the
Royal I! to v.; rans indetc ide-d thU.' at Seineral ele ctionis
should taker-p~ lacc in 1 ) 51. .; ere loy ally aj?.-lyin-t1.. e
~ Dri~ lccof ocr l 1' beral deimocrc. cy, , h.' ich ao~ sall oT -inions.
21bo vote bein.-favourable t'Uo our -party, tha
Lao Cao ( v : hich1, ei h " 1ro-res , arty) I 1ra a'e
lead th',' e 2' sv rnfeoitr ' Jou---_' anoulvo1n:, ad hi-s f_-riends,
helpned by th-1e Viet., ainh, the. y kept)' U _ fir-! tin-tIL :!, rench and
the Lao. 7, ti~ h eao our coanti'ry7 s_, riously r
three years. In 10/ 53, Lu=. 2 I'rabmir, th2 % oyal cnd r: eliriols
capital 1. Ias iyn danger. Thalkhel: in the south, seized bthe
Victmi-nh. In Prance. at the sa~ no timec the volitical
conce-tio-n of thec ' Fren-ch Union vas u-ndor-loin-a notable ch-an-e.
The independence of the Associated 2ts Jas conceived on
anoth., er basis. Timus, in 19,, 53, byr thel F_ r L co-L:_ o TratyFnc 
decided to Ziv Laos complete inadcende-nce. This Treaty
is notable for neveDr havmnr:' ! been tif. ied by the Dronch
~ ar i ament -cause of its conflict vt' the rech
Constitutio-i. 1i~ ovaer, so far as La os is concerne.,. d, o-l1
the special lincs w.. ith rcaac disx-peared. Trd jnce
vias complete, as co-cmplete as tLhe lmost infraz igont of our
natijonalistUs could hope.
HTow.-ever, av, n~ ts icre oving--to a criLsis. In 19' 4,
the battle of Dien Dien Tuended f in-ally-the7 1In1dochina war.
In Gaiieva, the bellic~ ren tUhaec ,, utris colcerned in
this -trage,--: dY iut in confere~ c,, nce. 0 Lao, L _ Yd I -ooint
it OLIt 15o i. 1, icato its servi tade -to the Victr-ainh, wa
represented by iTorth Tiotnam, which con: Lfirmed what . we had
alw-ys miaintaincd th. at, ' theiit it'Us ]_ 4orth1-Vicetrna.-e se Callies.
thec Pathot -ao) ': Tould be nothing.
Y ow i e 1e re o n th t h res hol1d o f i. eac. -HOvqTevcr, I
could only conceive of ne. ace in TLaos on tnc-, baskr of national
r ec o nc ili a t ion-. i. should not r~ taea ci* vil -iiar, for
the -profit only of ozi er* srac2. rds; t-' e Vuturc olicy
of our yrourn:, naion the , ilea of i~ itaiysec;', od to i-e -the
best formula. C'ontuitly 1 tri,-. ed to bring, y comp triots
Go acce. ct -this conce:,-t, heor; ct -Ti. several. ob-tacles.
1evrth-oless~ , Li 10,57 e sacc Oeded -L. a creatlia.', a"
Govermient of 1hatienal Union whi~ ich could kceep on oylly
with the greatest1 difficulty. " Pie~ Covorm. en of th1-e U'nitoed
! Dta te ofL . iaerica not inclinod to Inavour the -mersence
of the Pat! hoit TLao inside thie Toyal Govornmerit. Pressulro
reached the mt where I hrad to-, re: eign in-, 13 158, leavinfg a
OitLuation Ghat detcrior,-: tcd ra-pidly, as+ a; s easy to forecast.
In the event, after U-_-cular failures, th-Ie -w-ay
I had so: nhad t'o be roer7ui., Ed. ILjx-, poriJc-1co provos riore am. d.
maore that. for such a .? ra--ilc ~ igio:~ lyinj: whera it does
bocause of roo:--ra7, hy ornd the, history of its porle, -the only
w. ay. is the ado tion of a v: lol icy of strict neutralityT an.' d
non-coi tMont. 
6
lh-arefore, in 19360, after thec tragic events
that you -my remlemfbei-, I ca. P back: int-'. o rzowcr. lThc followiinrg
year, a secon. d Conference as _ 1ieol Jn Genoeva, for the
i-robleo of Lao2 alone. ' Lourtecn nations voere prosen'G.
Finally in juily, 1962 the jtatut of " ou'rality for the
Kingclom~ was agreed ai uaned by the. thirteen othor
nations narticipoatin in th1e or-, ferencc.
-were fuallyN satisfiod -v.-ith the Geneva A1ccords.
eh o.-hat the ni-Jht-mare of? int-ornal subve: rsion anLd
forei arerssion -, ae over. &gt; ialas, ou~ r people iwere
,-rievously deceived. The,. 2Xcccrds v. rc i,.: uediately d
shianelossly violateod. The Lao Hasat ( the political par'ty
cruslied by the 1' athet uao after -the for: aation of -the
Govcrnma-ent o' ' Thtional Uniuin in 1957, valet of theo H,-. noi
Gov-. rn.:_ Icnt.. co-ntinucd its sabot-aL-c. -0-11 war., instead of
sto--iinvg, ngrey) aore intonse. Today five years after the
signaturc of the Gencva 1* ccorie, wie canr cow-it about 40,000
_: orth Victnaiic soldiors On ou~ r territory. : hyarc fi-b. tirtc.
besd5e, 00 9tht paid, trainocd mid encailred
byT, o rth Vietnan. The devolopm.. e-n-1 of ouU conryi arlyzed.
Thousaands of" refuvsecs strea;-i into thei Govern.. vaintal zones.
UuandrcOs ofC vill.-c-a aLdeo iiod. Onlyv half of tho soil is
cult-ivatLLed. ' The IHo--Ch-Iin trail b-oo-rie a-n actcive
tra:-sit routo for 1 ort. h Viotnau_-es: e forces.
This Tadios end Gentuile. on, is the real 1v-icturo of
ou~ r country. It be admiltted tGhat it does n.. ot c; 7actly
corres-.. ond with~ tho 1cturc :) ain-God byv -writers of a quie-t
care-free country, pjreooc e d b2 festv1l and asc h
acountry of three uillion inh) itants wit C US~. aeu
thiis is thie : sroatest tc': d of its history
LU, thec most dcrsi. aspect ' tGo th a'uh-t
this vueeloss, blood, , tragedyr could not occurre If o
i dcoo ci c al z: e dy-P ~ a-UJ 0 o s1-dh -; io ' U 00: 10 2d d intorfered
directly indire., ctly ini our in-Genal affa-irs. 73y vatriight,
i. hat i:; eral, do thei--tsuaco t~ e iji to liberat-e Lis? 
Truly,: n are still subject -to the reijn_ 7 of
force ir: rela-tionshlirs bet. ico:. nat-Jos. So rmh~ ch tIh0.-Iworse
for the ;' orak. The deception of the o-rv1l 1 nations is growillclay
by day,. 7-or ou~ r rtbitternaess is do-nor people,
wh-o onlyv dociro, -pace and tr -Cl~ ciil it-, -the-re-, p-Zct of
theiir front-iers anI&amp; o-f their sovercignty.
Laldies and. C, ci tle:; icn, I zA~ s orry -to lhave been.-
so long. for theo ouw'Usi. de 1 willl ropoat outr
plraint wI-ith, out end, for.; t'o pU it brely thi role
Of _ 00aCC MI-d .72. r conIcerns1 US all.
IPinally, 1 iould lito say agan hat otir
pcorile are apy tGo be able to coun-t oan solid, scin~ cre
frienidshipli. c. th of AiSJtr7,' liG. I-se. ct for liborty,
respect for are, solidarity betvien peoples, th'I'eso arc the
"' 11i ' i ieS '-ie0 lik in vo u, fLo r thy arc o inc er a, r ien.-dly jand 
-8
We count on you and your assistance to help us
survive. You must remember that Laos is in the vanguard of
the free world, de are neutrals; we ojant friendly relations
with all countries in spite of their philosophies and political
systems. ie have our old religion, our monarchy, our traditionsd
' vie want friendly relations with the socialist countries and all
other countries but we don't want communism in our home.
We hope to see perpetual peace in this world, and
friendly co-existence become a reality between all nations.
We want to see all men brothers in spite of their differences
of ideologies and cultures and everything else. This is our
most hopeful wish, and in this spirit I'd ask you, gentlemen,
to drink with me to the health of your Prime Minister, Mr. Holt. 



LU C 0-Bi1 IN H1C 1 1-OF F77. INC3 SCV. i' 3-ICUMIA / 11-11
FRINVU ii'JR~ T OF LACEGS0 2nd Novemb er, 167
Speech by tie 1-rime Mv~ inister, Mr. rodol
Your :_-Ti; Jhnes ses, Your 3xcell-1encies, F arliamentary, hivinisterial Colleermes,
Distin~ uiched Guests, Ladiec and Oentlemen:
In recent wee_-ks we have had the pleasure of welcoming in
this Fvrllamentary dining-rom notabilities from other countries, Heado
of Gover-nment, Heads of s1tate, and now we have the leasure of welcominv
the !-Yead of Government of Laos.
This giver, us a very particular pleasure because we have
admired greatly the dogged courage with w,. hich he and ais countrymen
have faced the threats to their Inde-p: endent e,, istence over the years. 1
am very glad, Prime Minister, that you have been n1J e to respond co
readily and co soon to tie -nvitation I extended to you when I haad the
1-Jes ure of visiting your = xuntry last P pril. " hile wie deeply regret tha
it was not possible because of the singular service She-wlas rendering in
relaticn to the Food and Agricultural Crganisation that th Pines, your
gracious wife, was not Cole to accompany you, vwe are delighted that you
did thinI'k fit to bring Princess Moune, wiho adds her Own distinction to
the cratirhering. ve are glad to welcome also the "" ecretary of . State for Social
V.' elfare, Mr. Keo Viphakcne, and other members of your party. And it
Is a verconal pleasure for me to wielcome again your Con, Captain . S1ouvaenlc
P hourna, who you very kI.-ndly made available as my r: ersonal aid when I
was in your country and he now serves in that ca,-; acity with you.
Cur relations with the countries of Asia are growing closer
steadily and indeed one :. Irhtamost say rapidly. I. nd") ecause of this,
we welcome your visit as the c-rlme Minister of one ofi thle free Statee of
izst 1 cia as we also wielcorned the visit only three weeks-ago of the Prime
Minister of Japan. It vwar, my own special privilege to 1) e the first A ustralian
Prime Minister to visit your country and I had the honour of being I thinilk
I may claim to say the first foreign politician to sit in your C. abinet with' you
and your Cabinet collea27uec. 7 use the word rollticlan *. uecause modesty
inhibited me from descri inyseff as a State.-rnan for this purpose. But
wihen 7 come to you, Sir, 7 am--' nder no such restraint either of langua! 7e
or indeed of cause. You, by your own record the record of a man whlo
on six, ce-;: arate occasions has been Frime Minister of 1his country and G&amp;
Prime 1.4inistershir, whic'h has ex--tended over about 14-years.
P nd desrite ell the threats, despite afy~ zession, desnite
actual . nvasion, you have found ft -ossible to si. Itain tine identity of your
cou-ntri' -nd the cur;-ort of yc--7 eorle and that isa tribu?. te to your own
Statesmanship. ' Y; e have rev--ected the way in which in this difficult
situation you have tried to ad:--ere scrupulously to th--e neutrality of Lacs
as irovided in the Geneva 1. greement Of now, and I have h-ad
first Lhand observation ofL tlis., somethinc of the difficulies you and your
peoy-1e ex-perience in settino2 about those urgent tacks of social and econoinic
develov; rnent which you are -o eager to pursue -rn your own country. / 2 
-2-
' Ve know in our much more favoured circumstances here in
A ustralia, with the application we have to make to the needs of security
and the requirements of a growing people, how difficult it is to apply ourselves
as we would hope and to the degree we would desire to the tasks of development
of the resources of our country and the enhancement of the social welfare
of the country. But I wonder how many of us realise that such is your problem
with IL CCC of something less than three million people under arms at
this ti-e, and because of the other demands on your limited resources
you are able to apply only about 17 of your Budget to capital construction.
How difficult these problems are for you and for your people. You have,
I hope, our sympathetic understanding of these problems and our admiration
for the manner in which you are facing up to your own difficulties.
You told me when I was with you there earlier in April that
there were some 4C, CC Horth Vietnamese troops on your own soil and
you were speaking not of those who pass down through your territory in
order to infiltrate into Couth Vietnam but those who were there as a regular
hostile force on your cv. n soil. The Fathet Lao, which is the Communist
military force is roughly only of the order of 2C, C nd you told us then
that but for the assistance which was coming from iorth Vietnam you would
be quite capable of coping with this problem and that there was no grass-root
support for the Pathet Lao. Indeed I remember the very picturesque
expression you used that you are able to contend with the Fathet Lao but the
North Vietnamese came in and established their positions and then down came
the Fathet Lao like a flock of crows. This is a cont'ning problem with you,
and we, with all our difficulties, who have never had to contend with an
invader on our own soil, can have little real appreciation of what it means
to a country of your limited size, a country in area only approximately
that of the State of Victoria. Although you have made it clear to us you
have resources which, given , peace, you would be able to develop for the
well-being of your people.
' e share vi'th you a desire for this peace because we too
can do better things with our own country if we can apply our resources in
greater measure to the pur oses of peace. But you are facing this in very
much more difficult circumstances and with very much more limited
oprportunity. VWell, we have tried to help in various ways and modest as
our contribution has necessarily been, we have extended it gladly and in
the hope that it will help your people to develop for themselves a better
way of life. It is with this same object in view that we have for two
years now been engaged in assisting you in various projects, such as the
beef cattle experimental project not far from Vientiane, and we have had
some of your people come here for training. have assisted you to
stabilise the strength of your currency and we are glad to learn real success
has attended our efforts in that direction.
Now, Sir, I shall be joined in prorosing this toast to you by
the Leader of Her Majesty's Crposition in this country and I am sure that
he shares, and his colleagues share, the admiration of all of us for you
and your people. You come to us as a people with ancient cultures, and you
have established a distinctive national entity and identity. I know that
there were many more millions of Laotians formerly forming part of your
country. Now many of them are scattered through vearious other parts as
a result of invasion or ag2ression in the past. Pnd yet, with less than
three million people in this limited area and inhibited from developing your
own natural resources because of the need to keep up your resistance to
aggression, you have never surrendered to a vassalage which might have
enabled you to go alon~ more calmly and peacefully with the development / 3 
of these resources. You have zealously preserved your ovin independent
identity. These are things which we applaud. These are things which
this country has been willing to fight for in two world wars and are fighting
for at this time. V! e see in you and in your enlightened Statesmanship a
ray of hope for the. future in this area of the world. You have been able to
rpreserve your entity, your culture, your independence nd, given the
support of willing friends, not only will you be able to continue this but
you will gladly join as you have evidenced in various institutions in the
region in the co-operative work for peaceful purposes that we believe can
make for a better and more secure life for all people in this region. Co
we welcome you as a symbol of the Asia not only of today but more hopefully
of the I. sia of a brighter tomorrow.
V/ e ask you to carry back to your people the warm good wishes
of the ustralian people and to assure them of cur sympathetic support, and
our ho e that through your difficulties you will retain the identity of your
nation and continue to make your valuable contribution to a peaceful,
procsercus and better world.
Now I ask the Leader of the Opposition if he will join with me
in the toast which I will shortly submit to our distinguished visitor and the
party which accompany him. 



0. INAUGURATION OF LONSDALE PLANT OF CHRYSLER.
AUSTRALIA LIMITED
71 % FRCa ? a LONSDALE, SOUThi AUSTRALIA
., 1967oy 3RD NOVEMBER, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt
Mr and Mrs Brown, Mr and Mrs Boyd, Mr Premier and Mrs Dunstan,
Ministers , Members of Parliament, Leader of the, Qpposition, Mr Mayor,
and the very many other Distinguished Guests around me, and those
associated with the Chrysler Plant, Ladies and Gentlemen ( if I haven ' t
already covered you, and good afternoon to you all:
I don't know that I can classify what I am about to say, in
the terms of Mr Greig, as an inaugural address, but I assure you it does
givye me a very special pleasure to be here and to welcome the formal.
addition tb the armoury of Australian industrial assets, represented by.
these amazingly fine plants that we have visited at the Chrysler Lonsdale
establishment. Before I comment in a little detail on one or two aspects of
today's ceremony, could I just make a few personal references perso~ al
references not of a parliamentary kind, I assure you, but of a friendly:
kind because this must be a very proud day in the life of Mr David Brown.
And we are sharing his sense of pride and pleasure and achievement whtch
must represent for him the result of a great deal of painstaking work, a
great deal of courage and a great deal of applied effort and skill.
We welcome Mr and Mrs Boyd. We were told that this Ip the
first time that a President of Chrysler had visited Australia. Australia s
having an increasing run of visits from Presidents, whether they be hea~ s
of state or heads of great corporations In various parts of the world.
I think this, too, is an indication of the growing significance our country
possesses in the eyes of the rest of the world. So we particularly welcome
the head of this great motor organisation, one of the bigthree of the United
States of America, and now one of the big three in our own country's
automotive industry. I should not pass from personal references without saying
how pleased I have been as I am sure so many of you are in this room
to see with us, rather heavily disguised, our old friend, Fergy. When
I first caught a glimpse of him this afternoon, I thought he was Australia's
answer to the late Ernest Hemingway, but still, one can't mistake him, as
you see those gleaming, sparkling eyes, and those of us who have knowrq
over the years the contribution he has made to the pioneering efforts of
Chrysler Dodge in Australia applaud him and welcome him here on this
occasion. I did learn that the Chrysler Corporation had here with
us a public relations counsel by the name of Ford. Well, now, I don't
know whether that shows how big-hearted or how confident they are perhaps
I should say how valiant they are, but If Mr Ford has any spare time over
the next few weeks, I would be very glad to consult with him. I think I may
need him. I confess I was rather prompted to develop this thought because
as I looked across here, I saw a handsome vehicle which was marked
" VIP Safari". I hasten to assure you it was no addition to the Commonwealth
fleet. / 2 
2-
But, ladies and gentlemen, this Is a great moment In the
history of this State, and It is a very welcome occasion in the history of
the economic and Industrial growth of Australia. It Is, I assure you, for
me a stirring experience to go around this country as your Prime Minister
and see In all parts of Australia In one form or another, whether It Is
some vast mineral project, whether It Is a new water project, whether It
Is a great Industrial development, whatever form it takes, this addition to
Australia's developmental strength and our industrial growth. I hope that
we can all take an Australian view of these developments, wherever they
occur, because I emphasise that wherever they occur, they benefit fellow
Australians wherever those fellow Australians may be.
If there is prosperity through Hamersley, or through the
Ord or through the alumina plant at Gladstone, or from whatever other
cause, then tkhis Is a prosperity which will tend to spread through to
organisations such as this. If people have the means, they will be looking
for the amenities, and already in Australia we have shown our appreciation
and the value we place upon our automotive industry by the fact that we
rank now, I am assured by those who study these things closely, second
only to the United States of America in the availability of motor vehicles per
head of the popu lation. And the automotive industry has become the largest
employer of labour In the nation. It particularly typifies the po st-war
industrial growth of Australia because It contains those elements of growth
which are a peculiar feature of the post-war period.
First of all, it is a new Industry for this country. Secondly,
It absorbs a very considerable proportion of the labour of migrants who come
to Australia, more, I think, than any other industry in the Commonwealth.
And thirdly, it has brought us the benefit of capital, of technological skill,
of experience, from those who have developed these things abroad. Mr Boyd
has spoken of the many millions of dollars of Investment from his company
here, but they have also brought skills here and the value to Australia Is.
almost incalculable from what has developed out of the automotive industry
In this country. Now I know there Is always a disposition on the part of some
to cast a critical eye over foreign Investment in Australia. I have never had
that critical view myself because the advantages have always seemed to me
to so vastly outweigh any disadvantages that in a young, developing country
we had to welcome the capital, just as we had to welcome people to develop
our population, and we had to welcome the technical skills which would help
to make this country strong. And even where these enterprises have been
completely owned from overseas, I have recognised an Australian equity
existing In them, because if they are profitable, we take 421 per cent of
profits by way of tax. From what is left, a great deal of it Is ploughed back
Into further development and therefore further Australian emnp loyment, a~ nd
If some sums are remitted overseas, then we take a further tax, usually
of the order of 15 per cent on whatever is remitted overseas. We derive
revenues from the employment that is given, just as Australians derive
welfare from the fact of this employment and the incomes that come Into
Australian households. Then, In addition to this, has anybody ever tired to calculate
the secondary effects generated through the economy by a vast organisation
such as this, the demands upon other suppliers, the sub-contractors, the
orders for steel, for cement, for a whole variety of components that go into
the making first of the factory establishment, and then of the car itself.
And so we have been particularly well served by this particular foarm of
I 4b P. O./ 3 
-3
investment here in Australia. But Chrysler, In the words of Mr Boyd, has gone one
better. It has assured us thait quite apart from any general Australian
equity we may derive from these activities, special arrangements are being
made so that there shall be a direct Australian participation in the shareholding
of the organisation. And we welcome that.
He has also told us two other things which are very
welcome to me. One Is that there is a growing export trade from the
products ot this company, thereby helping to earn valuable foreign exchange
for Australia, I was here, as Mr Brown will recall, when you celebrated
the production of your 50, 000th Valiant and the 5, 000th export at that time.
Now you have swollen the volume of export very considerably and we are
told today of the arrangements which have been made by the American
principals to see that Australia Is to have an export opportunity outside this
country, and through the rest of Oceania, through Asia, through Africa,
and through what Mr Boyd describes as our Far EFast, but which will be known
to m ost of us as our Near North. I am afraid if we were exporting to the
Far East, we would be invading his market In the United States, and that
wouldn't do. But we in Australia have had to come to the realisation over
recent years that what has in the past familiarly been regarded by others,
and even here, as the Far East, is for us our very Near North, and he
opens up for us great opportunities therefore for an expanding export trade.
It Is a matter for pride for all of us that Australian workmanship, that
Australian skills and the finish to the car itself, can obtain for it a place
in markets beyond this country.
Now, Mr Premier, you in this State have a disadvantage
compared with some of the other States of the Commonwealth. The resources
you have been able to turn up of a natural kind tend to be rather more limited
than In some of the more favoured States. But South Australia has done*
well in this important respect. You have attracted Industry here because
of the quality of your work-force, the industrial stability which this workforce
has demonstrated, by the stability generally and good sense which
have been displayed by the people of this State. I know this has made a
particular impression upon Mr Boyd and I have heard other visiting
industrialists comment on it. While South Australia can go on contributing
that special quality to Its attrectiveness, I do not question that Its own
industrial development will grow apace.
In speaking of the work-force, what has struck me,
as a former Minister for Labour several years ago, Is the improvement
made in foundry production compared with the darker and less satisfactory
days of an earlier time. The working conditions here are a matter for
congratulation. They demonstrate that not only have we made technical
progress and achieved greater efficiency, but in that progress we have
greatly improved the working conditions of those wiho take part in the
enterprise. For all these things, Mr Boyd and MW Brown, you are
to be congratulated. In formally declaring this Lonsdale Plant open, I convey
to you on behalf of my colleagues of the Government my own personal good
wishes, every wish that you w1, ill continue to pros per and that you will be a
permanent element in a growing and increasingly prosperous Australian
automotive industry. Good luck to Chrysler. May the Valiants be a symbol
of your courage, your farsightedness and the speed of your progress in the
future. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE 8.30 PM
ON 9TH NOVEMBER, 1967
S EN A TE E LE C TIO0N 1 96 7
OPENING ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR HAROLD
HOLT, PRESENTED ON TELEVISION AND RADIO ON
9TH NOVEMBER, 1967
Twelve months ago, you returned my Government
with a record majority in the house of Representatives. You
gave us warm and powerful support for reasons which seemed to
you to be vitally important important for Australia's securityimportant
for its economic welfare important for the security
and welfare of yourselves and your families.
The greatest issue before you was whether we
should desert our allies in time of conflict and this is what
we would be doing if we withdrew our forces from Viet Nam. This,
in effect, was what the Australian Labor Party proposed to you.
This, in basic English, is what it still proposes under its
new leadership. Wrapped up in this question last November
and now is what reliance would Australia be able to place on
its treaty arrangements with the United States arrangements
which mean so much to our security if we were to walk out
on the Americans in Viet Nam,~ That danger of a weakening of
our treaty arrangements remains while Labor persists with
its policy of withdrawal. At issue also last November and now is our
growing relationship with the free countries of Asia.
Several of these are contributing as we are to the
resistance in Viet Nam to communist aggression. They are
fearful that this expansion could imperil their security,
So are others not actively engaged, such as Malaysia,
Singapore, Laos and Taiwan. Not only is the security of all
these countries threatened, but also at risk are the bright
prospects revealing themselves for us all by increased trade
and growning co-operation for mutually helpful peaceful
purposes. These were aspects of Australia's external
position before you last November.
They are still before you, but importance has
been heightened. It has been heightened by the British
announcement, made since the last election of plans for a
phased withdrawal of forces from the Malasia/ Singapore area,
But external policy was only one issue,
vital though you rightly believed it to be. You were also 
-2
conscious that under the sound and stable government we had
given, Australia was making remarkable economic progress.
Indeed, only one industrialised country Japan can point
to a higher rate of increase in its national product over
the last five years. That progress, and the prosperity
which accompanies it continue. You had good reason to believe
then as you have now that the fanciful doctrinaire
economic and social policies put forward by the Labor Party would
endanger this steady progress. They would certainly involve
an astronomic increase in government expenditures.
In the coming Senate election, many less
important issues will be argued before you by our opponents.
Attempts will be made by them to distract you from issues
fundamental to the nation's welbi But you refused to be
diverted last November. Since then, the Labor Party has gone
through a process of face-lifting. It has tried to project
a more attractive image under a new and younger leadership.
But all the evidence proves that the basic policies remain
unchanged. The gulf between the views of the Government
and those of the Opposition on external and domestic matters
remains as wide as ever.
This particular campaign produces another major
issue, Although the Government enjoys a record
majority in the House of Representatives, it is in a minority
in the Senate, You may wonder why this is so. The immediate
reason is the death last year of two Liberal Senators, but
the Senate is always close to an even division, because its
members are elected by proportional representation, while
the Members of the House of Representatives are elected as
a direct consequence of the choice of individual electors..
In the coming election, therefore, you are not
electing a government, you are electing thirty Senators
five from each of the six States. I hope you will see to it
that the majority of them will be government Senators!
I say this for the plain reason, which you will
readily understand, that if government is to be effective, the
Government of the day should be able to count on majority
support in both Houses of Parliament,
You rejected the policies of those Labor Senators
who oppose us in the Senate today.
Are we to be able to get on with the country's
business and carry out the mandate you gave us twelve months
ago, or are we to continue a situation where a combination
of Senators whose policies you have I repeat rejected,
whether from the ALP, the DLP or as Independents, can take
the business out of the Government's hands whenever they
choose? To give the final say to those you rejected
so decisively twelve months ago, would be, I think you will
agree, both absurd and an abandonment of democratic principle.
The official platform of the ALP says it will
abolish the Senate. But, under its new leadership, the ALP 
-3
has used its representation there, regimented by the vote of
the full Caucus, to thwart the democratically elected majority
in the House of Representatives. A typical instance was its
action in holding up for six months the improvements proposed
by the Government to the Aged Persons Homes Scheme.
The Government has two years of its three-year
term to run, but the numbers remain against us in the Senate.
Unless you resolve this situation favourably for the Government,
Australia faces a period of political uncertainty and confusion.
Effective government is impossible unless we can carry out the
policies and programmes you have endorsed. And this becomes
the more necessary in what is clearly a very difficult period
ahead when you consider the international scene.
The broad question you have to decide is whether
you give the Government the means to do its job in the firm,
speedy, decisive way you would wish it to perform.
In the course of the campaign, I shall be telling
you in more detail what we have done at home and abroad since
you elected us for a three-year term last November. I said then
that what we promised we would perform and, indeed, that we would
be doing more than we promised.
This has been done, and more than we promised
has been done and we shall continue to do more as opportunity
offers. We set speedily about the task of giving effect
to our policy undertakings. As soon as the new parliament met,
we busied ourselves putting our promises on to the Statute Book,
We went a stage further in liberalising the means
test. We gave further help to the disabled by the Sheltered
Employment Assistance Bill. We doubled the amount annually
available for science facilities in independent schools. We
established a Commonwealth Ministry of Education and Science.
We made it possible for more young people to
benefit from the Homes Savings Grants Scheme. At the time of
this further liberalisation, some 77,000 young couples had
received home savings grants totalling over thirty-four-and-ahalf
million dollars to assist them to own and establish a
home. We have given effect to our promise to provide an
additional $ 50 million for beef roads.
We have broken new ground in a number of directions
not mentioned last November.
Here is the picture, without going into detail:
In the area of Social Welfare: we have extended
child endowment; we have given social service benefits to the
mentally retarded; we have moved to assist deserted wives; we
have done more to lift the tax burden on elderly people; and
we have worked out a scheme to assist pensioners who need
hearing aids. These may seem small in the national picture, 
-4
but each of them meets a special need.
I should add that, following the referendum,
I have set up an Office of Aboriginal Affairs in my own
Department. In the area of National Development, since
last November's election, we have introduced legislation to
cover the new discovery of off-shore oil, which will encourage
investment and iron out problems between the Commonwealth and
the States. In this field of development just to show you
what constantly goes on we have helped Tasmania with the
Gordon River Project and assisted the South Australian gas
pipeline project. We have announced substantial financial
help for the Ord River project in Western Australia and the
Nogoa Dam project in Queensland,
Emergency assistance is constant five States
have been helped with their drought, bushfire and flood
emergencies. I emphasise, however, that I shall not be
outlining a new three-year programme when we still have two
years to run under our presend mandate, We should all be quite
clear about this. The Labor Party may tell you what it would
do if it were in government. But it is not in government, and
is not making a bid for government at this time. You will
remember its spokesmen saying recently that this was not the
time to challenge the Government decisively not even in the
Senate, We were told then that the Labor Party is not yet
ready, but that it will be ready in 1969. We shall be ready
also'.. But what you are to resolve at this moment is whether
the Government you have chosen is to have a majority support
in the Senate in the interests of effective government.
You have much to preserve,. Through the long
period of Liberal leadership, the progress of the Australian
economy has been sure and steady-Our political and economic
stability have greatly promoted our development and our standing
in the eyes of others. We enjoy one of the highest standards
of living in the world. No free industrialised country can
point to as high a level of employment, so consistently
sustained, over a long period of years.
A bigger percentage of Australians own, or are
in process of acquiring, their own homes than exists in any
other part of the world. In the availability of motor vehicles
to the population, we rank second only to the United States.
We are devoting a bigger proportion of our Gross National
Product to investment than any country other than Japan. Over
our period of office, we have increased the provision in the
Butget for social welfare from $ 185 million to $ 1,071 million,
We have increased the provision for defence from $ 108 million
to $ 1,118 million. Even when allowance is made for the increase
in population and changes in the value of money, these facts
confirm spectacular progress. Just think of the diversity of
this great continent, the nature and tempo of its development. __ 7 
5
You would need to travel thousands of miles to understand fully
what is happening. The growth of new towns and new ports in
response to the exploitation of fantastic mineral discoveries
is one exciting part of the picture.
Changes in the past have not only been remarkable
in themselves. They are pointers to the kind of future we want
and for which we plan. We can be confident of this future if
we are given peace, and if we can maintain a continuing
partnership between Government and Industry in a free enterprise
system. We must also think in terms of priorities.
Defence ranks high in our national priorities. This year we are
provising $ 1,118 million, an increase of eighteen per cent over
last year. Five years ago our defence bill was $ 428 million,
nearly $ 700 million less than the estimate for this year. We
have achieved this expansion without serious distortion or
disruption of the domestic economy. It is a high price to pay,
but security is never bought cheaply. And we are firmly
convinced that our domestic programme, the education and health
of our people, our responsibility to the very young and to the
very old all of these things depend upon our security as
a relatively small nation in a large and dangerous part of the
world. Our opponents depict the Government and its
supporters as people who have little concern for those in need
of help whether aged, invalid or disabled, or younger people
having a need for education or, as they marry, a need for
housing. Our record of performance over our period of
Government since you rejected Labor in 1949 gives the lie to that
line of propaganda. Let's follow the figures. The vote for
social welfare in the last Budget introduced by a Labor
Government, provided a total of One hundred and eighty-five
million dollars. Our Budget for this year provides One
thousand and seventy-one million.
Not only has the total provision grown enormously,
but the percentage of the total budget we devote to social
welfare is a higher percentage than in the last Labor Budget.
What is more, this increase in amount and percentage has been
achieved despite the increased provision we have made for
national defence from the low figure of One hundred and four
million dollars in Labor's last Budget to One thousand one
hundred and eighteen million dollars this year.
We have greatly widened the eligibility for
assistance to the aged and invalid. The education of the
young, the provision of housing, the care of the sick and
disabled have led us to introduce many new benefits not in
existence when we came to office. Let me name a few of them:
the provision of pharmaceutical and
medical benefits generally; 
-6
the special schemes in these fields for
pensioners;
o the assistance given to provide homes for
the aged;
grants to universities;
the other new policy measures in the
education field which have produced an
increase in Commonwealth provisions for
education from less than Eighteen million
dollars in Labor's last budget to One
hundred and ninety-four million dollars
this year,
All these measures illustrate a concern that the
wealth of a prospering community should contribute to the wellbeing
of people in real need,
These spectacular increases would not have been
possible unless we had succeeded by our policies in developing
and enlarging our economy,
I would like to tell you now a little about our
thinking and hopes in one or two areas of policy which concern
us all,~ The first is education. The sincerity of our
belief that education is important to every Australian and vital
to the nation is, I suggest, proved by our record. We now have
a Ministry of Education and Science. This year, the provision
for education in our budget increased by thirty-five per cent
over that of last year. Large though the growth of the education
vote has been over recent years, this does not prevent us looking
at targets for tomorrow,~ I know my colleague, the Minister for
Education and Science, would like to help children of preschool
age who are put at a disadvantage because of a bad home
environment. At the other end of the scale, he wants to help
talented youngsters who at present cannot pay their way through
universities. He feels, also, that the success of our scheme to
provide science laboratories and equipment invites us now to
look at the Humanities, to the school libraries,
I mention this background of thinking to let
you know we regard policy-making as a continuing process, not
merely as an electioneering device every three years.
Let me give you another illustration, We have
always said, and I repeat the undertaking, that we will continue
to improve our national health scheme. In many parts of the
world, our scheme is regarded as a model., But no plan meets 
-7
all human needs, We know we have not yet properly covered
the emergency of long illness. There is anxiety about this,
particularly in old people. Here then is another area of
genuine human need which will take a high priority in our
thinking, What we can do is, of course, governed by
what we have. Money can't be plucked out of the air. But we
do plan constantly to make further progress towards our social
objectives, I come back now to the issue of national security
on which you voted decisively for my Government a year ago.
Let me re-state our foreign policy aims in
relation to South-East Asia of whiL_': Vietnam is a signifcant
part. Our military commitment in South Vietnam arises out of
our larger and long-term assessment of the security of South-East
Asia and our belief that the new nations that have come into
being there should be allowed to survive as independent
communities. We believe this in their interests and in ours.
When we committed ourselves to the defence of
South Vietnam, we did so in the belief that the fact of aggression
in South Vietnam was real, as was the threat of its expansion
through other parts of South-East Asia, We have no cause to
alter our assessment, We believedthen, and we still believe,
that a successful communist takeover of any of the directlyaffected
nations would not only be disastrous to the peoples
of those countries, but would weaken, and in time destroy, the
capacity of other nations of South-East Asia to maintain their
own independence. We share the view of the Government of the
United States and of the governments of the free countries of
South-East Asia and the Pacific that the transfer of the area to
communist control, either by subversion or aggression, would
doom the peoples of the area to domination and servitude.
Who can deny that the unchecked advance of
communist subversion and aggression in South-East Asia would be
a threat to our own national interests? Our powerful ally,
the United States, has assessed that it would be a threat to its
national interests. For us, in our geographical and strategic
position, the threat would be very much greater,
But there is a more positive and constructive
side to our policies. The new nations of South-East Asia,
although beset by difficult political and economic challenges,
are real national entities with commendable purposes and a
vision for their future progress which is worth backing. Their
chances must fail unless external aggression and subversion
are held at bay. Already the other free nations of the area
have benefited from allied intervention in South Vietnam. They
have been able to go ahead with economic development and there
is today more genuine co-operation for peaceful, constructive
purposes than these countries have ever previously known.
These are the bedrock reasons for our policy
and our commitment. 
-8
The course of the immediate conflict in South
Vietnam does not alter the fundamental reasons for our policies.
But I have re-stated them here, because it is for you to weigh
them against the newest policy decisions of the Australian
Labor Party, It is clear from the decisions taken by the
Federal Conference of the ALP at Adelaide, that the Party has,
in substance, the same policy on Australia's military presence
in Vietnam that it had at the general election last year. The
United States is given an unacceptable ultimatum, But if it
is not accepted, Labor says that Australian troops will be
withdrawn. A Labor Government would scrap the foreign
policy which the Australian people Dverwhelmingly endorsed a
year ago. It would, for all practical military purposes, turn
its back on South Vietnam, and reduce our American alliance to
a meaningless set of pious words.
The issue is not whether we want peace in Vietnam.
We all want peace in Vietnam. The issue is whether an
Australian foreign policy, which attaches immense importance
to the American alliance and to the independence of the free
countries of South-East Asia, is to be preserved or destroyed,
So the Senate election, among other things, is
an opportunity for the Australian people to say again where they
stand in relation to their own vital national interests., This
is, I repeat, even more important than at the time of the
House of Representatives election a year ago. Since then the
intentions of Britain east of Suez have been made known.
While you are making your assessments about our
position internationally you should take into account the
British Government's decision to make a phased, but total,
military withdrawal from the mainland of South-East Asia by
the mid-seventies. Australia, its allies, and its friends will,
as a consequence, be engaged in close and far-reaching consultations.
I put it to you that we must, in these circumstances,
have in office a government with a consistent and intelligible
foreign policy a government which can work in close
co-operation with allies who see the needs of the area much as
we do. I mention, in particular, our American allies.
I was sharply reminded of the Labor Party's
isolationism in foreign affairs when I attended the opening of
the United States Naval Communication Station at North West
Cape as recently as September 16. Here was tangible, exciting
proof of the reality of our ANZUS Treaty with the United Statesa
dramatic example of the " effictive self-help and mutual aid"
described in Article 11 of the Treaty.
But have you forgotten that if the Labor Party
had been in power in 1963 there would have been no North West
Cape Station? When the United States Naval Communication
Station Agreement Bill was before Parliament, the Labor Party
produced an amendment designed to deny to the United States
sole control of the station. The Labor Party served notice of
impossible terms on the United States. When defeated on this, 
9-
the Labor Party moved that the third reading of the Bill should
be postponed for six months-This, in plain language, was an
attempt to kill the Bill,
But today we don't hear any apology from the Labor
Party for its wrong thinking in 1963, Instead we find a
perpetuation of the folly in Labor's present attitude to our
obligations under the American alliance. But there is nothing
new about the Labor Party's dangerous isolationism in foreign
policy. It emerges all along the line, It is a danger signal
a warning we should all take note of
So I say again that the issues of national
security are still paramount-Let me put it to you in the
simplest terms: The security of this country depends very
largely upon how far we can have South-East Asian countries
kept out of the hands of the communists. If -these countries did
fall to communism, we in Australia would be a very exposed and,
in terms of trade and area co-operation, a much more isolated and
restricted nation.. That's the heart of the political argument in this
country, We believe -and the majority of Australians shared
our belief a year ago -that the external policies of the Labor
Party are to put it bluntly -suicidal,
So I ask you to take this Senate campaign very
seriously. It so happens that the Labor Party's leaders in the
Senate enjoy the support of the Party masters outside
Parliament who would weaken the alliances which are the keystone
of our security. All that we have worked for and built up
over the years could be quickly and disastrously undermined if
the voice of the Labor Party's policy-makers became the voice
of Australia, As I said earlier, political instability and
uncertainty are inevitable when a government with a big majority
in the House of Representatives is in a minority in the Senate.
We want that position resolved in the interests of effective
government. But we also hope that you will record a positive
Senate vote for the Government as a reaffirmation of what you
said a year ago. What we plan for the well-being of Australians
and the development of our country must not be put at risk,
I put it as high as that with confidence,
because I don't think the Australian people change their minds
from day to day on basic questions of national security and
survival nor, for that matter, on basic questions of their
country's economic strength and their own welfare. 


