
Emoargoed until 7.45 p. m. on Monday, January 1
New Year Messa.{ e to Australia from the Prime Minister the Rt. lion.
John Mc Ewen
On this first day of the new year I send greetings and my
warm good wishes to all Australians.
For the year ahead we have a clear programme of national
ondeavoj To Mr Harold Holt must go the credit for the constructive
prograLme which lies oefore us.
We enter 1968 with our economic oase secure and strong,
There are proolems serious for some of our rural industries which
we must face up to in the coming year. Jut today there is, as never
uefore, a nation-wide sens3 of pride and progress. At every level the
nation is seen to be moving ahead.
It is my hope and my prayer, and shall be my endeavour
that 1968 will see peace in Vietnam. ur fighting forces are acquitting
t~ hemsleves with great distinction. To those who Nave naid the supreme
' crifice, we pay a nation's homage. Ve aT proach 1968 with a firm resolution
t. see this honouraole task through to the end, We will work to ensure
that the freedom for which they are fighting will be made secure.
Australia is stron-and confident, As a people, we are united.
Pe are free. These are our greatest lessings. What we enjoy we want others
also to have. We must always ue conscious That what we have today others
worked for, and fought for, Our greatest duty is to see that we hand on
to the coming generation a free, united, and even greater country.
Canberra 51/ 12/ 67 



92. C1 JAN 1968
ZI R i
FOR PRESS PM. NC. 3.33/ 967
MESSAGE FROM PRESIDENT JOHNSON
Following is the text of a message which was sent
by President Johnson to the Frime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen
" In Harold Holt's passing the free world has lost
a courageous and far-seeing leader, and I have lost a
comrade who was generous with the gift of a warm and wise
heart. I found comfort in his friendship and strength in his
partnership. He and the people for whom he spoke were
always dependable and unshakeable. Those blessings remain
as eternal as the sea which has taken him away.
" Please convey to the Australian people my deep
sense of personal loss, and my continued total dedication to
the goals of Australian-American friendship and world peace
for which Harold Holt laboured with such skill and devotiont
CANBERRA, 19th December, 1067 



TEXT OF STATEMENT ON NATIONAL TELEVISION. BY
THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. JOHN McEWEN, MP
19TH DECEMBER, 1967
We all share the terrible grief which Mrs Holt and her family
are suffering. On behalf of the nation I have conveyed to Mrs Holt our
deepest sympathy. It is dreadful that In the prime of his life this good, able and
devoted Australian should have been taken from us.
Early this afternoon I accepted a commission from the Governor-
General as Prime Minister. I have told Lord Casey that I Intend to retain
the office of Prime Minister until the Liberal Party has chosen fok Itself a
new leader. I have told the Governor-General that when this has been done,
It Is my Intention to step aside.
At my request, the Govern or-General will tomorrow swear all
the present Ministers in their existing portfolios.
During this period, my Government will continue with the policies
and administrative processes of Mr Holt's Government.
A number of very important official persons from overseas will
come to Australia to attend the Memorial Service for Mr Holt. President
Johnson has already decided to come to pay his tribute. Mr Holyoake, Prime
Minister of New Zealand, Is coming. Indications have been received that a
number of other Governments will be represented.
The very high calibre of many amongst the visitors who will have
travelled tremendous distances for this Service Is major tribute to the regard
and respect In which our Prime Minister was held internationally. I would
expect that advantage will be taken of the opportunity of their presence to have
discussions on great matters of mutual Interest, and I have asked my Cabinet
colleagues to be available. I am very sure Mr Holt would have wished this.
We are at this time deeply involved in world events. We share
with our Allies in Viet Nam the responsibilities and agonies of making It
certain that aggressive communism cannot overrun a free people. We are
having continuous communication with the British Government about its plans
for the extent of their continuing involvement in Asia.
My Government will continue to act as a responsible and concerned
member of the international community with an especial understanding for
Asian people and their problems. Our involvement In defence matters is
entirely related to working with like-minded people to bring about a more
stable world. On another front we are working with all our energies towards
fairer international trading opportunities for all countries.
The export industries of our country today have many problems.
We will press ahead with the work which Mr Holt Initiated at his last Cabinet
meeting to study the problems of Australia's rural Industries and the devising
of policies for their betterment.
There must be no Interruption of the great task of developing and
strengthening this land of our heritage. It is my intention, as It ever has been
to make the best contribution of which I am capable to establishing strong and
stable government for Australia. 



EN1O~ TB RGFOO: R RELEASE BEFORE 7.45 P. M. ON 19/ 12/ 67.
TRIBUTE TO MR. HOLT ON NATIONAL RADIO BY
THE PRIME MINISTER. THE RT. HON. JOHfN Mc~ l," EN. M. P.
Harold Holt and I have been Parliamentary colleagues
and intimate friends for more than 30 years. As two men in
Australian political life we enjoyed a long and understanding
relationship. His presumed untimely death is a tragedy for us
as a nation and for many thousands as individuals.
W He had great personal charm. He was one of the
warmest and most friendly persons one could know. He was a
humble man. The great and important offices he held did not
change this. He certainly was a man of honesty and of great
courage. In some ways I think he was at his best when the
going was difficult, when he sensed a challenge.
As a Minister he was responsible for some notable
measures for child endowment; for continuing the active
immig-ration programme commenced by Mr. Arthur Calwell in the
1940' s for improved relations on the waterfront; for orientating
our policies towards Asia; and for a firm commitment with our
great Ally the United States in the cause of freedom in Viet
N am. All this he achieved without weakening our British ties.
He brought to his administration a breadth of humanity,
a concern for the welfare of the individual. He had a strong
belief in the rights of the citizens to be made aware of the
Government's policies and its purposes. In this he had an
influence on all his colleagues.
We will miss him as a friend and leader. will miss
the wisdom of his counsel.
Now we must face the future with the same resolution,
the same energy and the same imagination which endeared him to
all of us.
Canberra, 19th December, 1967.
EMBARGO: 



~\~ VJSDEP 41
JAIA W
PRIME MINISTER, MR. J. McE\ 7 N, MEETS WITH PRESS
MR. McEVIEN: I wanted to see you yesterday, but pressure of events
overtook me, so I'm seeing you now.
First, I want now publicly to e-press through your media
my deep regret at the loss of Mr. Holt and to say that I am sure
this is a regret felt by every single Australian citizen and
obviously deeply felt in much wider circles overseas.
Mr. Holt, as you all knew, was a typical Australian. I
think any one of us would be happy to be so described. He was at
home with his fellows here in Australia and undoubtedly he was an
equal with his contemporaries when he was overseas. Ae was a good man.
He was a brave man. And he was a devoted man to his country. We
have suffered a great loss.
We extend our deep sympathy to Mrs. Holt and to the
family. I have, of course, communicated this to Mrs. Holt.
In thinking of her I want, in her deep distress to see
that she is relieved as much as may be done of the practical problems
that inevitably surround the wife of a great and distinouished man.
I have told Mrs. Holt that I have directed, in view of he enormous
correspondence in which she will be involved that secretarial
assistance will be made available to her; tAat, at least in existing
circumstances I want her to retain the use of a government car and
driver-and I have told her that she should contemplate moving from
the Lodge only at her om convenience.
For myself, gentlemen I achieve this high office with
no sense whatever of personal gratification. It's only in rare
circumstances that a man could become Prime Minister and not be
warmed and elated by the fact, but I am neither warmed nor elated by
the circumstances that have unexpectedly precipitated me into this
position. As I have already made it perfectly clear it is my
intentionto hold the office only until the major party in the
Coalition, the Liberal Party, shall have chosen for itself a new
leader, and I will put myself at his disposal, and at the disposal
of the Governor-General. I have already advised His Excellency of
my attitude in this repbard and advised senior members of the Liberal
Party. I've told the vernor-General it's my intention to step
aside as soon as the Liberal Party has electe its leader.
For the record, I want it to be quite clearly understood
that I have not been commissioned by his Excellency subject'to an
undertaking. His Excellency has commissioned me and I have, out
of a sense of the correctness of things and my own sense of
responsibility, advised him, as I have now advised you, of my
intention. 
2.
I have advised His Excellency to swear in all the
present Ministers in their present portfolios. I myself was
re-sworn as Minister for Trade and Industry yesterday, as well as
Prime Minister. Could I divert for just a couple of seconds to say
there has been some co~ nment on the fact that no Liberal Ministers
were present yesterday. I'm afraid this is entirely my
responsibility. It had not been contemplated that any Ministers
would be present at all And I just suddenly decided I would wish my
Countrty Party colleagues, particularly my young men of whom I am so
proud, to be present. I checked with the Dovernor-General that this
would be acceptable and invited them to come along, and frankly
confess I didn't give a thought to mv Liberal colleagues nor to my
friend, Ceb Barnes, who was in the btilding and I didn't know.
I just divert to say there's no ground for any speculation of
anything in this. It is my intention in this position to adhere strictly
to the policies of the Holt Government. There will be no new policy
departures. On Friday the Memorial Service is arraned in Melbourne.
Melbourne is itself an appropriate centre Mr. Holt s own city.
Of course we contemplate Canberra, but tAere is no Anglican Church
in Canberra with sufficient accommodation to hold the number of people
who undoubtedly will wish to attend the Service.
A number of very high-level personages will come to
Australia from overseas for this occasion. Prince Charles will come.
He will represent his mother, the Queen. He is the Heir to the Throne.
This is a very eat gesture. Mr. Harold Wilsdn, the Prime Minister
of Britain, withsufficient worries of his own, will come and
Mr. Edward Heath, the Leader of the Op osition in Britain, will come.
They will fly direct from London to Melbourne. It's my understanding
they will arrive in Melbourne on Friday morning. We understand
that their visit can only be a very short one, but I am moved I'm
sure we are all moved that the Queen has so feelingly and so
generously signified her owfn feelings by sending her son and Heir
to the Throne to represent her. It symbolises in a most moving way
the attachment of Australia to the Crown the Queen of Austra~ ia.
Mr. Wilson and Mr. Heath also pay us and Mr. Holt a very
reat tribute by their journey and their personal representation.
s I said, they'leave Britain at a time of very great personal
demands on them, and the journey is the longest of all of those who
are coming; and I want to acknowledge their gesture now deeply and
gratefully, and say that we will all look forward to meeting them.
It is a tremendous and unprecedented gesture, I think,
that the President of the United States should himself have decided
instantly that he would come and show his respect for Mr. Holt and
for Australia by coming personally. And this we attach tremendous
importance to. 
Mr. Holyoake, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, is
coming. There are other Heads of States and high dignitaries whose
names I will not attempt to enumerate now but which will be available.
I just observe# gentlemen that this unprecedented
journeying from all around the world to Australia is the ultimate
tribute to Mr. Holt to the esteem in which he was held, and we will
all recognise this.
I believe myself that with the presence in Canberra ot
in Melbourne of the President of the United States and Mr. Wilson,
and other people we will no doubt I will myself have some
conversations with thesei I have asked my Cabinet colleagues to be
available in case it should be desired that there should Be a wider
level of conferring. There is no thought in my mind, and I am sure
no thought in the minds of any others, of what might be thought of
as a conference between various people. I would expect that those
who want to talk, as I myself will vant to talk,* with the dignitaries
who will come here will have their conversations, but in no sense
formal conferences. I believe that Mr. Holt himself would in circumstances
of a similar nature, had he been involved, would himself have taken
advantage of the opportunity.
Yhen I spoke yesterday on the television to the nation,
I spoke of various policy circumstances in which we are involved.
The most serious and pressing of course, is our situation in Vietnam.
And I say we will stand steadfast with our allies. We will share
their efTorts and share their agony in this situation. Having said
that, I now make it clear that we want peace, we will work for
peace; but not for the peace of surrender to the aggressors of a
small, brave free people. We will continue Mr. Ho t's work of
coming to understanR the problems of all our Asian neighbours; and
not less we will work to endeavour to have them understand us'
to understand our willingdess to work and to help where possible,
and to establish in the minds of our Asian friends and neighbours
an understanding of the integrity of our own attitudes, of he
Australian nation. I make it clear that in defence, our postures are
entirely related to us working with like-minded people for a more
stable world where all can live in peace and security and with a
greater equality of living conditions.
The Government will continue to work in the field of*
international trade to et better and fairer trade opportunities,
not only for ourselves but for others.
And we will continue to devote ourselves to the policies
in which Mr. Holt and myself were involved in the decisions of the
last Cabinet meeting, his last Ccbinet meeting, to study the present
serious problems of rural industries and proceed to devise po icies
for their betterment. 
There must be no interruption in the Australian national
growth, and I will continue in whatever office I find myself to
endeavour to make my contribution to the best of my ability to the
securing of strong and stable government for Australia.
And I conclude my statement? gentlemen, by saying I am
confident in the strength of the Coalition.
* 0009.
QUESTION: Mr. Mclven, are you prepared to say publicly, as you
have apparently said privately, that you will not accept 111r. McMahon
as a Prime Minister, as Leader of the Liberal Party?
MR. McE VEN: Yes, I say to you that I have told Mr. McMahon that
neither I nor my Country Party colleagues would be prepared to serve
under him as Prime Minister. Mr. McMahon knows the reason. My
senior Liberal Party colleagues not only know the reasons, but knew
the reasons before Mr. Holt's death.
QUESTION: Do you disclose the reasons?
MR. McEWEN: No. No I will not. I had a tormenting problem for
myself, knowing tha{ this was the attitude of myself and my Country
Party colleagues, in deciding whether I should -isclose beTore the
Liberal Party's election, at the cost of being accused of seeking to
influence it? or, alternatively, not disclose my attitude and, it being
what it is if Mr. McMahon were elected Leader of the Liberal Party,
then undoubtedly produce a very serious national crisis by only at
that time indicating that we could not work under his Prime
Ministership. And T decided firmly in my mind that what I have dene
is the correct course: that is? not to allow the Liberals to go to
an election ignorant of the attitude of myself and my Country Party
colleagues. I've said this gentlemen. We're two dais from a Memorial
Service. WNe have the impending visit tomorrow of t~ e President of the
United States. And I will not myself contribute any further to
generating any atmosphere of controversy. I hope that you would all
feel that it would be intolerable that in this atmosphere of mourning,
in the atmosphere of the journey to this country of these great 
personages, that they should find us quarrelling domestically.
will answer no further questions on that subject.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, do you expect in the immediate few weeks
ahead to be making a decision on Sir Henry Bolte's tax proposals?
MR. McE 7EN: Oh, well, this is a matter that will come up for
Cabinet consideration. I can make no comment on that a this stage.
QUESTION: Sir, the President will be in Canberra tomorrow, you say.
Have you any thought of a general discussion with Cabinet with him
on this thing, on the major issues that
MR. McDVEN: I will, of course, meet the President on his arrival
and I will consult him on his wishes. I've already said I have
asked my Cabinet colleagues to hold themselves available if the
President does wish that there should be discussions on that level.
QUESTION: Are there any significant discussions, Sir, to which you
will be inviting potential leaders of the Liberal Party to
participate in Them so that they'll be kept informed?
MR. McENVEN: Oh, of course of course. We have a standard of two
levels of discussion of this nature. There is the level of the
Cabinet'itself and the Defence and Foreign Affairs Committee of the
Cabinet, which I think is a committee of about seven Ministers as
far as I remember in fact, Mr. Holt's appointed committee, and
that would be my appointed committee.
QUESTION: Because of the importance of the problems existing
between Australia and Britain, will you seek discussions with
Mr. Wilson while he's here?
MR. McEVWEN: Again, I will of course, be meeting Mr. 7ilson on his
arrival, and I would not force a discussion on Mr. Wilson, but 
6.
consult with him whether he himself would feel it would be fruitful
for us to have discussions. I would be willing to do so.
QUESTION ( Mr. Harold Cox)
mornng? When do you go to Melbourne, Sir? Tomorrow or on Friday
MR. McEVIEN: I have not quite decided that, Harold. I expect Prince
Charles Mr. Wilson and-Mvr. Heath to arrive in Melbourne on Friday.
I'll either go down Thursday night or early Friday morning.
QUESTION: ero n Sir, would you expect to take an decisions during your
Sproonthis rural industry consideration hat began with t&amp; last
Cabinet?
MR. McEWEN: Well, some decisions were taken at the last Cabinet and
I of course, don't know with what urgency other ma~ tters will arise.
TAere will be no changre of policy attitude and, if, against the
policy attitude alreaay decided under Mr. Holt s Prime Ministership,
some matter. comes up lor decision, no doubt we'll face it.
QUESTION: Sir, have you decided yet when you'll call your first
regular meeting of the Cabinet?
MR. McEWEN: No, I haven't.
QUESTION: Stanope? Where will you spend Christmas, Sir in Melbourne or
MR. McEWJiET: I don't know. I think probably Canberra.
QUESTION: Sir, I don't want to press you on this in view of what
y ou ye said already but would the Country Party take any objection
to any other Liberal Leader, Sir?
MR. McEWEN: No N. 
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen there has been a suggestion from, among
others Senator Turnbull that the Liberal Party should ask you
to continue in office. Would you be agreeable to doing so?
MR. McEWEN: I'm afraid I'm not responsible for Senator Turnbull.
QUESTION: You wouldn't be agreeable even if asked to, Sir?
MR. McFEN: I don't answer hypothetical questions.
QUESTION: Before your commission, Sir, it seemed that the position
on shipping freights had reached a rather critical stage. Now
we seem to put the Government in suspense for three weeks. Is this
going to affect what you hoped to achieve on shipping freights?
MR. McEWEN: Now don't be under any apprehension that the Government
is in suspense for three weeks. The Government is as existent'-t
today as ever E Government has been. If any matter of urgency and
importance arises we'll face it and deal with it.
QUESTION: Is this sufficiently urgent to be dealt with in the
immediate future?
MR. McEWEN: I think that the present issue on shipping freights can
be handled probably at my own Departmental level.
QUESTION: WVill you give a normal New Year message, do you think?
MR. McETEN: I've had too many other thoughts on my mind. Yes, I'll
give consideration to that.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Canberra, December, 1967. 


The President and the Prime Minister took the opportunity this morning, both in the Prime Minister's office and in a wider meeting in the Cabinet room, to exchange views on a range of current matters. As was made clear in advance, the meeting tock the form of conversations about these matters rather than a formal conference.
Those present in the Cabinet room were the United States Ambassador ( Mr. Clark), Mr. William Bundy, Mr. Walt Rostow and Mr. Marvin Watson, and on the Australian side the Treasurer ( Mr. McMahon), the Minister for External Affairs  (Mr. Hasluck), the Minister for Defence ( Mr. Fairhall) and the Leader if the Government in the Senate ( Senator Gorton).
The principal topic touched on by the President and the Prime Minister and his Polleagues was Vietnam. The President presented for the information of the Australian Ministers an account of the present military situation and political and economic development programme in Vietnam. The Prime Minister assured the President, as he had yesterd ay assured the Australian people, that there will be no change in Australia's commitment to stay steadfast with the Republic of Vietnam and the United States aa with other Allies in Vietnamuntil a just peace is won. 
Canberra,21st December, 1967.



ER'S -0D P
0 JAN 1968
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE J. McEWEN
The Prime Minister, Mr. J. McEwen, said today he had
been in consultation with the Indian Government about the pending
visit to Australia of the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira
Gandhi, scheduled to begin on 13th January.
It had been agreed that Mrs. Gandhi's visit would be
postponed because of the death of Mr. Holt until later in the
year at a date suitable to both Mrs. Gandhi and her Government
and the Australian Government. 



nC
FOR RE~ SS -3JAN 1968
NEW ZEALAND BUTTER IN AUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Minister and
Minister for Trade and Industry
( Mr. J. McEwen), replying to suggestions
that New Zealand Butter might
be imported into Australia.
Speaking as Minister for Trade and Industry,
Mr. MoEwen said that the New Zealand Prime Minister ( Mr.
Holyoake) had raised with him during talks in Canberra
last week the question of the likelihood of Australia being
unable to fill her full quota of butter for the British
market this season because of the drought in Australia.
He agreed that if Australia could not fulfil its quota he
would be glad if New Zealand could make good Australia's
shortfall this season.
Mr. Holyoake had apparently discussed this matter
with the British Prime Minister ( Mr. Wilson).
Mr. McEwen said that notwithstanding the drought and
notwithstanding any re-structuring of Australia's dairy
industry, Australia would still be an important exporter of
butter and certainly would not be prepared to import butter.
This had been a basic point in the Australia New
Zealand Free Trade Area Agreement, he said.
Canberra, A. C. T.
24th December, 1967. 



CL:-10 JAN 1968
Tariff Changes
( Statement by the Prime Minister
and Minister for Trade and Industry
Mr. J. McEwen)
The Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Industry, Mr. J. McEwen, today announced a number of
tariff changes which would operate iiarediately.
Mr. McEwen said that the changes would add to
the tariff preferences which Australia accorded to certain
manufactured, semi-manufactured and handicraft products
imported from less-developed countries. They would also
provide, he said, for amendments to special rates for
Canada and New Zealand which were consequential to the
Kennedy Round tariff changes which he introduced into
the House of Representatives on 19th October.
Mr. McEwen said that details of the tariff changes
had been published in the Commonwealth Gazette and were
also available from Collectors of Customs in all State
capitals and from the Departments of Trade and Industry
and Customs and Excise in Canberra.
Canberra, A. C. T. 110/ 67T.
2nd January 1968 



FOR PRESS: 04N16 ' 8,, A~ fCPM . No. 1/ 1968
UNITED STATES AND BRITISH GOVERNMENT MISSIONS
TO VISIT AUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen
The Prime Minister, Mr McEwen, announced today that a high
level mission from the United States would arrive in Canberra this week for
talks with the Austral'. an Government on the effects of the balance of payments
programme outlined In President Johnson's message to the United States on
1 Jan uary, 1968. Mr McEwen said the miusion would be led by the Under-Secretary
of State for Political Affairs, Mr Eugene V. Rostow. He would be accompanied by
the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Mr
Robert Barnett and other officials.
The Economic Committee of Cabinet would meet In Canberra on
Thursday and would have talks with the visiting mission on Friday.
The mission would have talks in Tokyo before flying on to Canberra,
Whtlo In Canberra it woWd explain to members of the Cabinet the new US economic
programme. Mr McEwen said that Cabinet Ministers would discuss with the
mission the Implications for Australia of the programme.
A second mission led by the Under-Secretary of State, Mr Nicholas
Katzenbach, has gone to Europe for talks with the governments of the major
trading countries there.
Mr McEwen said that the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee
of the Cabinet was also preparing for talks In the following week with a mission
from Britain led by the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Affairs, Mr George
Thomson. Mr Thomson would be accompanied by the Permanent Under-
Secretary of the Commonwealth Office, Sir Saville Garner, an Under-Secretary
of the Commonwealth Office, Mr J. 0. Morton, and an Under-Secretary of the
Ministry of Defence, Mr F. Cooper.
This mission would visit Kuala Lumpur, Singapore and VWellington
and was due In Canberra on 11 January. Talks would be held in Canberra on
the following day and the mission would leave for London on 13 January.
The mission would discuss with the Australian Government
economic and defence aspects of the review which was being made by Britain
of her spending at home and abroad following devaluation.
Mr McEwen said that advice was received only at the weekend
from the two governments that the missions were coming.
CANBERRA, 2nd January, 1968. 



FOR PRESS 224 JA141968
LIB3RpA" IPM. No. 3 968
ASSISTANCE FOR QUINTUPLETS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon John McEwen
The Federal Government had decided to offer to assist
the Braham family following the birth of their quins, the Prime Minister
( Mr McEwen) said today.
However, the Government would not decide on details
of the assistance until it had conferred with the family to ascertain their
needs. The Government would also confer with the New South
Wales Government in the light of any arrangements the State might be
making. Mr McEwen said was delighted to hear news of the
successful birth of the children. I and my colleagues sincerely hope
that Mrs Braham and the children remain in good health."
CANBERRA, 4 January, 1967 



I iJAN me
FOR PRESS: VLAR PM. No. 2/ 1968
ABANDONMENT OF PORTSEA SEARCH
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon John McEwen
The Prime Minister, Mr McEwen, announced today that
the organised search for the late Mr Harold Holt would cease tomorrow
( Friday) following advice given yesterday by the Victorian Government.
The Victorian Government said the Chief Commissioner of
police, after consultation with representatives of other organisations
participating In Portsea Searcil advises that It Is the opinion of all
concerned that It Is quite hopeless to pursue search further.
It was with the deepest regret, said Mr McEwen, that the
Commonwealth Government had agreed that there was no purpose in
continuing the search any longer. Every area where any clue to Mr Holt's
disappearance might be found had b een searched thoroughly many times.
The search over the past eighteen days had extended westward
to Barwon Heads and eastward beyond Cape Schanck. It had covered
extensively Cheviot Bay and other ocean beaches, the Point Nepean headland
and the bayside beaches in proximity to the Rip.
The Search operation had been co-ordinated by the Victorian
Police and had included the Navy, Army and Air Force, civil aircraft,
a number of Commonwealth and State organisations, volunteer forces and
members of the general public.
Everything had been done in an effort to establish the fate of
Mr Holt. A helicopter search and beach patrols had been maintained
this week but would now be withdrawn on Friday.
" I take this opportunity once again", said Mr McEwen, " of
publicly thanking all those who responded so promptly and have given
their time to this exthaustive and continuous search."
CANBERRA, 4th January, 1968 



FOR RES EMAB. ARGO: Not to be puiblished
FORPRSS2 4JAN 1966 or broadcast before 4 p. m. on
Friday, 5th January, 1968.
TARIFF CHANGES ON TEXTILES AND SOUYD RECORDERS AND REPRODUCERS
( Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for Trade
and Industry, Mr. J. Mc~ wen)
The Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Industry,
Mr. J. McEwen, announced today that the Government has adopted
reports by the Tariff Board on textiles and on sound recorders
and reproducers. Mr. McEwen said the reports on textiles represented the
conclusion of the General Textile Reference made on 5th October,
1960. The reports covered a wide variety of textiles which had not
been included in the earlier interim reports on this reference.
The Government had adopted the Tariff Board's recommendations
subject to some minor variations which were necessary to
comply with Australia's international commitments. On felts for
paper making machines, for example, increased duties recommended
by the Board would not be brought into effect until current
international tuariff negotiations have been. completed.
The Prime Minister stated that the new duties would
simplify areas of the Tariff which had not been reviewed in recent
years. Some of the more important changes were consolidation of
the duties of fabrics coated with P. V. C. and cellulose derivatives
at the levels of the combined present ordinary and temporary duties;
increased duties on certain monofil and strip of synthetic resin;
increased duties on certain elastic and elastomeric fabrics. Reduced
duties would apply to a wide range of the textiles covered by the
report. The present quantitative restrictions on imports of twine,
cordage and rope of polyethylene would be continued until 31st
December, 1968, and would be extended to cover similar products made
from polypropylene. Mr. McEwen also announced that the Government had adopted
the Tariff Board's recommendations on sound recorders and repr-oducers.
Duties of 45% ( General) and 32421 ( Preferential) would apply to most
recorders and reproducers of the types made locally. The present
duties on tape recorders will not be varied but the general rate
e./ 
-2-
of duty on record players will be reduced from the present level
of 60% ad valorem. Other changes include reduction of the duties
on gramophone records to 7o ( General) Free ( Preferential) and
increased protection for certain grades of magnetic tape.
Mr. McEwen added that details of the new duties,
which would apply after the close of business today, had been
published in the Commonwealth Gazette. Copies of the Tariff
Board's reports and the duty changes are available from Collectors
of Customs in all States and from the Office of Secondary Industry,
Department of Trade and Industry, Canberra.
Canberra, A. C. T. 1/ 68T
January, 1968. 



FOR PRESS: RARPM. No. 4/ 1968
U. S. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
AUSTRALIA U. S. DISCUSSIONS
JOINT COMMUNIQUE
The Economic Committee of Australian Cabinet and
associated officials met today with the U. S. Under Secretary of State
for Political Affairs, Mr Eugene V. Rostow, and his party. The
discussions continued throughout the day.
Mr Rostow came to Australia as special envoy of
President Johnson for the purpose of explaining and discussing the
short and long-term implications of the United States balance of payments
measures announced on January I by the President.
The talks were penetrating and frank.
The Australian Government expressed full and
immediate understanding and acceptance of the necessities which led
the United States to take its action, and expressed its support for the
overall objective of achieving a viable system of International payments
adequate to the needs of an expanding world economy. It acknowledged
the President's clear Intention to develop his programme of action without
sacrifice of U. S. commitments in the field of security or of its
contribution towards the needs of the developing world. This the Australian
Government applauded. The Australian Government noted that the proposed
adjustments were directed more particularly towards the countries In
balance of payments surplus and expressed the hope that these countries
would co-operate with the United States and other countries to achieve
the goals of the programme. The Australian Government gave a first assessment of
how some of the measures might affect Australia's economic position, and
explained the special circumstances of Australia's balance of payments
and reserves position arising from Its economic developmental needs and
its defence commitments in the South-East Asian area. Ministers
referred to the common Interests of Australia and the United States in
world trade, In security, and In aid to developing countries.
They expressed the view that the particular combination
of circumstances affecting the Australian balance of payments made it
necessary In the interest of both countries to keep any adverse effect
of the U. S. measures to a minimum.
To ensure this, there had to be a full understanding of the
consequences of the U. S. proposals. These consequences would become
apparent as the situation developed, and would require careful study over
*/ 2 
-2-
a period of time. For this purpose, -close consultation at both the
political and the official level would be maintained so that the special
interests and concerns of the Government of Australia would continue
to be taken into account at every stage of the development of the
United States programme. It was agreed that both Governments would work
together with other governments in their continuing effort to build
a unified and growing world economy based on the principles of
international co-operation and international responsibility.
CANBERRA, January, 1968. 



BACKGROUND BRIEFING GIVEN BY THE
LEADER OF THE LIBERAL PARTY,
SENATOR GORTON, AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA 9TH JANUARY, 1967
SENATOR GORTON: Well, I have no statement to make but perhaps you
have some question.......
Q. Perhaps you can give us the mechanics of the business
tomorrow?
A. I expect to be sworn In as Prime Minister at 2.30 tomorrow
afternoon. I do not propose to make any changes at all in the Ministry
which will carry on in the same way it is carrying on now until after the
Higgins by-election Is concluded.
Q. When will that be?
A. That I can't tell you because I have to speak to Wr Aston,
probably Friday or Monday, or some time like that, and I would like to
speak to the Liberal Party organisation down in Victoria. I would say
perhaps a month, perhaps five weeks, perhaps three weeks. S1. ay
between three and five weeks. After all, It is more likely to be four
weeks than three. We have got to send a letter to the Country Party, we
have to send a letter to the Labor Party, we have got to make sure from
the Speaker that the writs are properly issued, and that kind of thing.
About four or five weeks.
Q. What are the mechanics df your transfer? For instance,
how long can it be between the time you resign from the Senate until
you contest an election? Is there a statutory period?
A. No, but I think if I can rephrase your question: What is
the time during which I can continue as Prime Minister without being
a Member of either House of Parliament. The answer is three months.
Q. Are you sure you will be nominated or selected for the seat?
A. Ch no. I think it likely. t
Q. Does that mean no Parliament until March?
A. I think It might mean that. I would like to meet the House
when It first met.
Q. uni h0What are the reasons that would make you delay the Ministry
A. Well, after all, one can't in this world take things for granted.
I do need to have the Higgins electorate committee endorse me and
select me. I do need to win the seat of Higgins at a general election.
On figures, it looks as if this is likely to happen. Higgins Is a very
good seat indeed. But I think it would look a little odd, I think it would
be a bit peculiar If one has upheavals when there is a possibility, even
a remote possibility of one not being confirmed In the position.
I think It would be much better to wait until after the Higgins by-election. eoo* 9*/ 2 
2-
Q. When will you resign from the Senate, Sir?
A. I think I will resign from the Senate on the day before
nominations close for the seat of Higgins.
Q. Who do you have in mind for the Leader of the Government
In the Senate?
A. rwill have to consider that.
Qi When are you going to hold your first Cabiiwt meeting with the
present Ministry?
A. We are going to hold the first Cabinet meeting but not the
first Ministry meeting on the day after tomorrow.
Q. You will be leading the talks with Thomson?
A. I will be sitting in the chair when the talks with Thomson take
place. I don't know that It would be entirely accurate to say that
I will be leading the talks with Thomson because I think the pre sent
Prime Minister has been immersed in the materials on which these
talks will take place, and I would expect a great deal of assistance
from him sitting on mny right hand.
Q. Who will take part -the Defence and Foreign Affairs Committee?
A. The whole Cabinet. Not the whole Minktry, the whole Cabinet.
Q. Did you meet the whole Ministry tonight, or are there some
Country Party people who are not here?
A. I recollect they were all here
Q. What was the purpose of this meeting tonight, Sir?
A. Well, this is somewhat of a history-making event in Australia.
There has never before been a Senator who has been sworn In as
Prime Minister. There has never before, as far as we know it
it possible I may be wrong about the very early days of
Federation been an occasion when somebody would be Prime
Minister during a period of time when they were members of
neither Houses of Parliament. This will occur in my case because
I will resign just before the nominations close, and during the
period of the by-election, therefore, will not be a Member of
either House of Parliament. I haven't really checked this out, but
I hope and trust I continue to be paid my salary as Prime Minister.
I won't get any salary as a Member of Parliament. This is
therefore precedent-making and an unusual event, and I think that
the present Prime Minister felt in advising the Governor-General
he would like to have the complete backing of the whole Ministry
that this Is what they wanted to happen, and this iswhat they
wanted to happen.
Q. Will the Government the day after tomorrow announce or
decide on the names of the commissioners for the redistribution? 9 a / 3 
-3-
A. No. The Cabinet the day after tomorrow will be concerned with
the business of the British Minister.
Q. Will It be the Gorton Ministry or the Gorton-McEwen Ministry?
A. I hope and believe that it will be the Gorton-McEwen Ministry
just as It was the Menzies-McEwen Ministry.
Q. What were the voting figures?
A. I haven't a clue, have you? But If you find out let me know. I'll
be interested.
Q. Did all the Ministers pledge to continue in their present portfolios,
or Is there any Indication that any of them might not?
A. I haven't noticed any of them jostling around to resign.
Q. Can we take it that you have not concluded your discussions with
Mr McEwen on the coalition?
A. I think you can take it we have.
Q. Would It be correct to say that the coalition is on the same basis
as with the Holt and Menzies administration?
A. This is right.
Q. Were you surprised at this result today or did you always think you
had It sewn up? You have been regarded as favourite for a long time.
A. Yes, I know. But an awful lot of favourites get beaten In an awful
lot of races. I am not a betting man; that's what punters tell me. I
don't know whether Iym surprised or whether I was astonished. You
remember that story so I won't go Into it. But I was pleased.
Q. When will you move into the Lodge? Have you thought that far
ahead?
A. No.
Q. You have got less distance to travel than most Prime Ministers.
A. I have got to let my house first.
Q. How well do you know the President of the United States?
A. Not very well. I know him only from the meetings we had with him
when he came out here. I would hope to be able and I only hope to be
able to build something of the same kind of relationship with him that the
late Prime Minister built with him. I think it was almost a unique
relationship, just as I think his relationship with the Heads of Asian
countries was, as far as Australia is concerned, something quite new,
the relationship that he built, and something cf enormous significance
to us. And when I can and I don't know when I can because there are
a lot of problems crowding in I would try to see the foundation that
he laid was built upon to be an enduring structure. e e e e / 4 
-4-
Q. Mr Holt ' s first mission abroad was to Viet Nam. Do you propose
to do the same?
A. I clearly must go to Viet Nam as soon as It Is possible,
Q. That will be your first trip.
A. You always want to get these things down in a sort of black and
white... this Is his first trip... this is his second trip. I clearly must
go to Viet Nam as soon as It Is possible In order to continue the great
work which Holt did In this direction. And to other countries during that
trip. I don't know when that will be. All I can say Is that will be as soon
as the other problems which are crowding In would permit me to do it.
Q. It looks as though you will be pretty tightly leg-roped here until
Easter
A. Well, I have got an election to fight!
Q. Mr Bruce did lose one, didn't he
( Interjection) That was In Flinders.
A. Flinders is miles away, way down the peninsula. What's more It
was on the question of whether there should be an Arbitration Court or not.
Are you trying to scare me or something.
Q. Will you continue with your present portfolio?
A. For a while, yes, but I would hope to have somebody called In to
take over the duties of It, just as Menzies originally called me in to take
over the duties of It.
Q. Could we take it that since you are not making any Cabinet changes
you won't fill the vacn.
A. Until after the Higgins by-election.
Q. The vacancy will remain until after then?
A. Yes.
Q. You talked about upheavals, Sir. Can we take it you are thinking
about extensive changes....
A. Who talked about upheavals?
Q. You mentioned upheavals a minute ago....
A. Oh, well, I j ust meant. let's amend that and s ay " changes"
Aifter all, all changes are upheavals in politics.
Thank you. 



16 JAHW~
STATEMENT BY SENATOR GORTON ON HIS ELECTION
AS LEADER OF THE LIBERAL PARTY
PAR LIAMENT HOUSE. CANBERRA OTH JANUARY, 196C
I think that you will all realise that this is not really the
occasion for a press conference which would delve quite deeply Into a
number of matters that this is not the appropriate time to deal with.
All I want to say to you and to those who may be looking at
this programme is this. This is quite an awe-inspiring thing, using
awe-inspiring in its true sense, to happen to a man In some ways it
Is a little overwhelming. I am not yet the Prime Minister of Australia, but I want to
talk to you, and any of those who are watching if they will forgive the
presumption as If I were the Prime Minister of Australia. Tomorrow
I have no doubt that we will continue In this country as we should,
arguments, perhaps quite bitter arguments, as to the goals this country
ought to seek, as to the methods of obtaining those goals, as to the
differing priorities which might be put on different fields of national
endeavour. That is tomorrow.
In this moment I want to talk to all Australians, ar-Australiaqs,
not as adherents of this party or of that. And I want to say to them
thit I believe these last few days have shown it Is true that our
common history and our common future show that in this nation the things
that unite are infinitely greater than the things that divide.
It is not going to be an easy task for me. but to Australians
I would now say this in this moment They can be sure that I will try
my best, and I will look to them for the strength successfully to conclude
what we start which from within myself alone I thimk I could not get. And that
is all I want to say at this stage and at this point of time.
Thank you all. 


