
FOR PRESS PM. No 1/ 1972.
VISIT BY PRESIDENT SOEHARTO
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
It was confirmed in Canberra today that the State Visit
by the President of the Republic of Indonesia and Madame Soeharto
is to take place in the early part of 1972. The visit will begin
in Canberra with an evening arrival from Djakarta on Sunday 6
February and last four days. During that time the President and
Madame Soeharto will have Monday 7 February in Canberra, leave for
Melbourne on the morning of Tuesday 8 February, and travel from
Melbourne to Sydney on the morning of Wednesday 9 February. They
will leave Australia from Sydney on Thursday 10 February.
Commonwealth and State Authorities are working on a
programme of engagements for the President's and Madame Soeharto's
consideration and when all appointments are settled, a further
announcement will be made.
CANBERRA, January, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 28' 1971
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Statement bythe Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
This afternoon, His Excellency the Governor-General
received Mr. John Gorton at Government House and accepted his
resignation as Prime Minister.
Mr. Gorton recommended that I should be appointed as
Prime Minister. Subsequently I was sworn in by His Excellency. On my
recommendation, Mr. Gorton was appointed as Minister for Defence.
Other Ministers retain their portfolios until . I have
decided on the new Ministry after the normal consultation with
Mr. Anthony.
CANBERRA March 1971 



NEW PRIME MINIST'ER
PRESS, RADIO AND TV CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE
LEADER CF THE LIBERAL PAKW-T-7( 4R. WILLIAMFIMcMAHON
CANBERRA 10OMARCH 1971
MR. McMAHON: There is not much I want to say to you other than that today
the Party has had a vote, voting for the Prime Ministership, an~ d they decided
they wanted a new election for the Leader of the Liberal Party. The vote was
taken and I have been declared the Leader of the Party and I consulted with
Mr. Gorton about taking over from himr. The vote was also taken for the Deputy
Leadership and Mr. Gorton has been declared by me to be the Deputy Leader.
I don't know the numbers of votes. I think only the scrutineers would know
them, so I hope there won't be a great degree of speculation about how many
votes I won by or how narrowly I squeaked into the position of the leadership
of the Liberal Party. This afternoon, I will be going out to Government House with
Mr. Gorton in order to advise the Governor-General and to see what action he will
take about the courses of action that are open to him. At 2. 31.0 the House will
meet and Mr. Gorton will ther announce to the House the changes that have taken
place in the Liberal Party and will then ask for the adjournment so that the normal
Constitutional practices can be observed.
I don't want to say a great deal to you today othier than this. I am
a Party man. I believe in the Liberal Party and I believe the L-iberal Party is the
organ by which the national will and the national consciousness can be put into effect.
I am a very great believer in the system of Cabinet Governmsnt, in full discussion
in Cabinet with every Member having the opportunity to express his views, and only
when political mratters of the highest moment are involved, should the Prime
Minister feel that he should intervene and ensure that the fullest discussions take
place or fuller discussions take place between the Cabinet mT_-n. isters and Members
of the Parliamentary Party. I want the Party itself in the Party Room to be able
to play an increasingly important part in knowing what is going on in the Government,
knowing the facts on which Cabinet decisions are based, knowing the reasons
why we have decided to introduce new types of legislation, arid I hope by this mneans
to ensure that not only are we cohesive but when we go to the election, whenever
it might happen to be somewhere towards the end of 1972, vie will have that
degree of cohesion, we will have the public confidence that will make certain that
we come back with a bigger majority than we have at the present moment.
That is all I want to say to you. I can assure every member of
the Press, and most of you know me well by now, that whenever you feel you
want to have a press conference with me, provided you give me some notice oFF
the kind of questions and the problems that you want me to handle, believe me
I will do my best to fit in with your wishes because I want the Australian public
to be informed of what the Government is doing and, just as importantly, the
reasons why the Government is taking the kind of action we recommend. o. / 2 
Q. Mr. McMahon, do you intend to prorogue Parliament? Will
Parliament be prorogued, Sir?
A. I am not sure of the procedure, but it will meet at 2. 30. The
Prime Minister will announce that a new Leader of the Liberal Party has beep.
elected, and that we are to go out for an interview with the Governor-General,
and then the House will be adjourned until the ringing of the bells...
Q4 Mr. McMahon, I understand the Governor-General may not be in
Canberra today. Do you know whether this is so?
A. Well the information that is now available to me is that he is
there at Government House.
Q. After the ev ents of today and yesterday how do you now feel about
working with Mr. Gorton as Deputy?
A. Mr. Gorton has been elected as the Deputy Leader of the Liberal
Party by the Liberal Party itself. I am sure we will both work together in the
interests of the Party and above all in the interests of the cou-aitry.
Q. What do you know about the future of Mr. Fraser?
A. Don't ask me that yet because I have only been elected the Leader
of the Liberal Party in the course of the last hour.
Q. When do you expect to name your new Ministry?
A. Probably the existing Ministry will have to be sworn in. I am
not sure of this for the time being. But I will announce the Ministry when 1.
get a commission I will announce the Ministry as soon as I can. But that of
course will take some time and I must have the fullest discussions with
Mr. Anthony, with the Country Party.
Q. After Mr Gorton virtually voted himself out o! the vote of
confidence, were you surprised that he stood as Deputy Leader?
A. No, he had the right to stand as the Deputy Leader and the Party
had within its power the right to elect him if it wanted to. it elected him and that
decision binds me in the same way as it binds every other Member.
Q. ( Inaudible)
A. I have just given an answer to that question a few moments ago.
I 7,. aventt yet had time to thinlk about it.
Q. Could you say whether you will be making a decision on the
Ministry this week? I will try, but I can't be precise. 
Q. Mr. McMahon, the antipathy between you and Mr Gorton, I think
you would agree is a public fact. Do you think that despite this antipathy you can
still work together in the next 22 months to the election?
A. Yes.
Q. Sir, have you spoken to Mr. Anthony since the election?
A. I have spoken. to him to inform him that I have been elected the
Leader of the Liberal Party and I asked him if he would make the timre available
to speak to me as soon as he could.
Q. Has he indicated he will work with you, Mr. McMahon?
A. I haven't spoken to him on that matter yet.
Q. Could we ask a question of Mrs. McMahon? How she feels about
this
A NO.' Can you tell us who the other candidates were for both positions?
A. Mr. Snedden was a candidate for the leadership and Mr. David
Fairbairn and Mr. Malcolm Fraser were also candidates for thle Deputy
Leadership.
Q. ( Inaudible) concerned with Mr. Fairbairn wthdrawing his
statement that he was no longer available to serve as Minister in a Liberal
Ministry?
A. Mr. Fairbair-n is both a friend of mine and I admire him. But as
yet, I have not had any discussions with him about Cabinet or Ministerial portfolios.
But naturally I will have discu"-sions with him soon.
Q. Do you see a place for him in the Ministry?
A. I will think of every member of the Party and one of them will be
Mr. Fairbairn.
Q. Mr. McMahon, are you likely to be Prime Mirnister and Treasurer?
A. I haven't thought of that, but naturally it will be one of the problems
I will be giving consideration to. I don't think it is practicable for a person to
act in two portfolios for very long. Other Ministers have tried it, other Prime
Ministers have tried it, and it is a pretty diff icult if not impossible task.
Q. I was thinking of Mr. Ben Chifley. 
04
A. That was quite right. But he was the only one in the Labor Party
who had the capacity to do it.
Q. Mr. McMahon speaking of your Ministry, have you considered
the possibility of adopting the elected Ministry system?
A. No.
Q. Are you thinking in terms of a trip to Washington and other places
very shortly?
A. No.
Q. What do you see as the main problems confronting the Government
today?
A. Don't ask me that at this moment. As soon as I have had time
to settle into the leadership a2 the Liberal Party, then of course I will have another
conference and you can ask me all the questions you want then. I think at the
moment the real problem is how to organise the Government, the Ministerial
portfolios in the Government and that I believe is the main problem that must
face me for the time being.
Q. Do you think a new Mlinistry should have another look at how the
Government should deal with problems in the economy?
A. Yes.
Q. How long do you thinlk the House will be adjourned?
A. I can't tell you because there is a lot to do. Iwas quite surprised
when papers wiere brought to me, or to myself and Mr. Gorton, to see how much has
to be done, particularly as there is a new Government the whole of the Ministry
has to be sworn in before it can meet the House, so 1 couldn't give you any real
guidance other than I would lilke the House to meet today.
Q. You have said you will be having a look at the economy. Are there
any other recent Government decisions that you would like your Government to
review?
A. Yes, Commonwealth/ State relationships.
Q. Inaudible, concerning what sort of a line will be taken on this. 
I couldn't tell you because I have -said that I am a Party man from
the top of my head to the bottomn of my feet and I will want the fullest consultation
with the Ministry and with the Party before I make any decision or fill in any precise
details. Mr. McMahon, do you have in mind an early meeting with State
Premiers? April 5, will that still be on? That was arranged by Mr Gorton
with the Premiers. I see no reason-to change it but if I felt that it was impracticable
to hold it, I would let them know immediately. But I would have no difficulty at all,
no problem whatsoever in talking to them. I wouldn't doubt thazt in a few days I
would be talking to Mr. A skin and later on to Sir Henry. But later on, I want to talk
to them just as soon as I can.
Sir Henry is mrost anxious to talk to you.
As Deputy Leader, did Mr Gorton make any declarations of loyalty
within the party to you and your potential administration?
There was a universal declaration of loyalty. And in particular
there were declarations of loyalty by Mr Snedden and then after the election of
the Deputy Leader by Mr Gcrton.
Do you anticipate any challenges to your leadership as Mr. Gorton
has had. Inaudible comment about backbenchers.
I hope not, but I hope that I will be able to so change the Party
system to bring them well into the m echanism of governmenrt, I don't know how
I will go about it, but it will be one of the major problems Of Government I Will
face, and I hope it will bring great satisfaction to the Party.
Sir the Prime Ministership has been your goal for a long time.
Did you go in there this morning thinking that you might come out as Liberal
Leader? Were you surprised and how do you feel personally now that you have
attained it? It is a strange thing, but everyone seems to think I am a person
of tremendous ambition. I don't think I am. I'm a tremendous worker and if I'm
given a job to do I work at it and if it takes me to some other goal, and if the goal
is the kind-that most people in the world would like that most people in Australia
wi) uld like of course I'm glad I've got there. I think my wife would answer this
question better than anyone else. But I don't feel the slightest bit excited or
emotional, and you'd be as good a judge of this as she is. I have taken it in a
composed way because I have been * here for a long time. I've seen Prime Mi. nisters
come and go. I've seen the Miistry change. So I hope that what I will be able
to do with the co-operation of my colleagues in the Country Party and my own Party
I hope we can make this a very successful Government, and I'll do as much as I
can all I can to ensure its success. 
6.
Q. Mr. McMahon do you have in mind calling this the First McMahon
Ministry or the First McMahon-Anthony Ministry?
A. I hadn't thought of it. I don't believe in giving titles anyhow.
Q. Well it has to be one or the other.
A. Oh, I don't know. For a long time we called it the Liberal-Country
Party Government. And that title suits me for the moment.
Q. Sir, did you thiink back in 1969 that you'd had your last chance
at this job?
A. I didn't bother to think about it. I knew that events change so
quickly and as events change opportunities change with them, , so I didn't bother
about the past. I always look forward to the future. And now I can only express
my joy that I'm where I am.
Q. Mr. McMahon have you sent a telegram to Sir John McEwen?
A. I will.
Q. ( Inaudible)
A. I haven't thought out the contents yet.
Q. How do you regard Mr. Whitlam as an opponent to fight an election
against?
A. I don't want to get heavily into politics at the moment, but you have
heard me express my views in the past, and I see no reason after yesterday to
think I should change my mind.
Q. Sir would your Government be a more conservative one than
Mr. Gorton's? 7
A I don't know what that means.... what'tonservative" means.
I will try with my Party and with my Ministry to make those changes that we think
are desirable. I don't think " conservative" is a good word to use. We are a
practical people, anxious I believe, demonstrably anxious, to do our best in the
interests of the country. And whether that means being conservative, or being
radical or being liberal, I don't know. We'll do our best, it doesn't matter
what title people want to give us. All I can say to you is that I'll be very anticommunist,
and I'll be very anti-socialist.
Q. Mr. McMahon will Sir Cyrus Lenox still remain as Prime
Minister's Department Head during your -reign? e / 7 
* 0 7.
A. I haven't given a great deal of thought to that, but I will announce
that in due time.., or I might not even announce it, it might just happen.
Q. Prime Minister, will you consider an early increase for pensioners?
A. Look, I am not there yet. I haven't yet discussed it with
Cabinet. I want to ensure that Cabinet is fully consulted on everything before
decisions are made. I personally will not make any statement about this until
I have discussed it with the relevant Minister.
Q. Mr. McMahon how do you feel about being the first Prime
Minister from New South Wales for 22 years?
A. I thought of Billy Hughes immediately,, but I can't tell you what
my thoughts am. ounted to.
Q. Do you feel yourself bound by the decisions of Mr. Gorton's
Government in respect of tariffs, and trade practices and other economic
measures he has taken in the name of the Cabinet?
A. I am not going to discuss any policy decisions at the moment
but everything is open to review tariff policies, economic policies.
( To Max Walsh) I am sorry your guess this morning wasn't too good:
Q. Mr McMahoni you have made a point that you would be anticommunist.
Now there are a lot of families around Australia at the moment
watching you on television and wondering just what you are going to do about
Vietnam.
A. The policy on Vietnam, the Government policy, has been more
strongly pressed by me than by any other person there. Those policies will
continue. But as I said, all policies are open to review. I stated when I was
Foreign Minister there wasn't any single area of foreign policy activity where
we weren't looking at our policies, our policy objectives and trying to find out
whether changes should be made. Exactly the san-e will apply in the case of
Vietnam as applies to the other policies. I cannot give you aniy decisions because
I have not discussed the problem with my Cabinet colleagues.
Q. There has been speculation that if you won today you would consider
an early election to go to the people before the alleged honeymoon is over. Is
there any truth in that?
A. I think it is about 100-1 odds or even worse.
Q. Do you feel any gratitude to Mr. Fraser whose resignation
seems to have sparked all this off? 
" Gratitude" is a word that Is not frequently used in political
language. I respect Mr. Fraser. I think he is an able, perhaps a very able man.
I make no other comment about Mr. Fraser other than that, and I like him.
Q. Inaudible ( about the role of the mass media)
A. I think the greatest problem any government faces is one of
communication, and consequently the more intimate association you can have
with the mass media the better it will be for the Government, the better it
will be for Australia. The real problem is how do you do it. How do you
explain your policies? How do you explain your policy objectives? I do hope
I will be able to win the support of the mass media, particularly as I will be
communicating with them to let themn know what we will be doing and why we
are doing it.
Q. Sir, will it be possible to arrange a regular press conference,
say once a week?
A. I don't know about once a week, but, regularly yes.
Mr. Barnes Thank you very much on behalf of the Gallery Members. -Thank
you for your assurance that in our future relations we will be having frequent
contact. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 29/ 1071
NEW ADMINISTRATIVE ARRAlIGEMENTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Ur. William McMaho.
His Excellency the Governor-General in Council has today establihod
two new Departments of State and abolished two existing Departments.
The two new Departments are
T'he Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
T ae Departmenit of the Vice-President of the Executive Council.
The Prime Minister's Department and the Department of the Cabinet Office hav,-.
been abolished. The changes in departmental structure are designed to support the operation
of the Cabinet system of government. As I have already said, I propose to develop
this system to its full extent as to provide scope for the expression of its collective
wisdom, and to use to the fullest extent the expert knowledge and experience within
individual portfolios. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet will be central to
this process. It will be the task of the Department to provide the Secretary to Cabinet
and to the Committees of Cabinet, and the associated Secretariat machinery, and to
provide briefing to the Prime Minister in relation to matters involving him as
Chairman of Cabinet and Head of Government. The Department will be responsible
also for exchanging information with and maintaining close relations with Ministers
and Departments as part of the co-ordinating process.
Sir John Bunting, the present Secretary to Cabinet, has been appointed
Secretary to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. He will continue
as Secretary to Cabinet.
The new Department of the Vice-President of the Executive Council will
undertake a number of functions previously located in the Prime Minister's
Department and in the Treasury. It will be responsible for a wide range of matters.
A list of functions already approved is attached and the allocation to the Department
of certain other functions is to be examined.
The change will not involve the Executive Council itself, which is
separate from and completely independent of the new Department. / 2 
2,
The arrangements which have now been made will require re-allotment
of staff. Sir John Bunting will be taking up this matter with the Chairman of the
Public Service Board.
I have been in touch with Sir Lenox Hewitt and have placed before him
certain alternatives for his consideration.
I want to pay high tribute to him for his service as Secretary of the
Prime Minister's Department. He will, of course, retain his status as a senior
level Permanent Head.
CANBERRA 12 March 1971 
ATTACHMENT
1. National Library.
2, Archives.
3. Australian Government Publishing Service including
the Government Printing Office.
4. Council of Abbriginal Affairs.
Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
6. Office of the Environment.
7. Film and Television Training School.
8. World Expositions.
9. Commonwealth Literary Fund.
Art Advisory Board.
11. National Gallery.
12. Historic Memorials Committee.
13. Council of Performing Arts.
14. Assistance to Performers Advisory B oard.
Grants to National Organisations.
16. National Radiation Advisory Committee. 



FCR PRESS: PM No. 30/ 1971
DEATH OF FRANK CLUNE
Message from the Prime Minister
The Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon today
sent the following message to Mrs. Thelma Clune
" My wife and I offer you and your family our
sincerest sympathy on the loss of your husband.
As a personal friend and a writer who gave
so much pleasure to countless Australians, the
name of Frank Clune will long be remembered
with affection.
I well remember the inscription on the first
of his books he sent to me.
CANBERRA 12 March 1971 



PRESS) RAD! O AND TV INTER VIEW GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR WILLIAM MCMAHON AT
LIBERAL PARTY HEADQUARTERS, CANBERRA 12 MARCH 1971
Q. Prime Minister, can you confirm any rumours or
speculation about Ministebal appointments, for example Mr Fairbairn
as Foreign Minister?
PM: I can't confirm anything yet because I have not
made up my mind. I can't say that I cannot, but you will this
afternoon be getting a statement on administrative changes that is,
the changes in the structure of Departments. There will be the
abolidtbn of two Departments and the formation of two new Departments.
As soon as this matter is cleared with the Governor-General, you will
get a statement.
Q. Having in mind, Sir, that we will be going to air
at 6~. 30, could you outline them for me now?
PM: No, I can't. You will get it in time to go on air
at 6.
Q. Sir, can you say what will be the main topics you
will be discussing here at the Liberal Party?
PM: Mainly the organis akin, because I believe the
organisation has to run in parallel with the Parliamentary Party.
I want them to be independent, completely independent ind to be able
to give us independent advice as to what they think we ought to do,
r heir evaluation of what the public is thinking, and the best advice they
can give us in the interests of the Party as a whole.
Q. Has the machine itself been rather run down, low
morale
P M: I never like to look at the past and I am not interested
in the past. What I am interested in is making certain that it is part and
parcel of the Liberal Party and has an equal right to express its opinions
together with the Cabinet and the Parliamentary Party.
Q. Prime Minister, you said last night that you may not
be announcing changes in the Ministry for possibly another two months now.
Isn't there a risk that this will cause some dissent within the Ministry,
that people won't know what their situation will be? / 2 
PM: You can't do the impossible, and I will have to
explain it to the Party, and if there is any forecast or any attempt
to try to create trouble, then I will immediately state my opinion,
I will immediately say whether their forecasts are right or wrong.
But most of the time it will be that they are wrong because I won't
make up my mind and convey my decisiors to anyone else until I am
ready to make it available to the Press ard to the other media.
Q. Sir, could I address a question to Mr Southey?
What would you like to talk to Mr McMahon about?
Mr Southey I also have organisational matters to discuss with him.
I called on him yesterday morning to offer him the undivided loyalty
of the Party organisation throughout Australia. This I will reaffirm
today and we will go on from there.
-2-



FOR PRESS: PM No. 31/ 1971
PERMANENT HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF THEVC RE IDE O THCOU IL
Statement b the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
On 12 March 1971 I announced that His Excellency the
Governor-General in Council had established two new Departments of
State and abolished two existing Departments.
One of the two new Departments is the Department of
the Vice-President of the Executive Council.
His Excellency has today approved of the appointment
of Sir Lenox Hewitt as The Secretary to the Department of the
Vice-President of the Executive Council.
As I indicated on 12 March, Sir Lenox will retain his
status as a senior level Permanent Head.
CANBERRA 17 March 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 32/ 1971
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND
AUSTRALIAN LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Arrangements have now been completed with the State
Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and the
Australian Loan Council to be held at Canberra on Monday
April. The Parliament will not now sit on 5 April.
CANBERRA 18 March 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 33/ 1971
NEW HIGH COMMISSIONER TO NEW ZEALAND
The Prime Minister, The Rt. Hon. William McMahon, today
announced the appointment of Senator the Honourable Dame Annabelle
Rankin D. B. E. as the new Australian High Commissioner to New Zealand.
Mr. McMahon said " As Foreign Minister, I had had discussions
with Dame Annabelle about the possibility of her accepting a diplomatic
appointment. She then informed me that she would be interested in a diplomatic
post should a suitable one become vacant.
Dame Annabelle and I have again discussed the appointment and we
have agreed that she should become the Australian High Commissioner in
Wellington. I have already discussed the appointment with the New Zealand
Prime Minister, Sir Keith Holycake who welcomes the appointment of a
member of the Ministry as High Commissioner.
Dame Annabelle will be the first Australian woman to be appointed
as Head of an Australian Diplomatic Mission.
She will succeed Sir Edwin Hicks, formerly Secretary of the Defence
Department whose three year term as High Commissioner expired on 1st March."
Mr. McMahon paid warm tribute to Dame Annabelle's distinguished
Parliamentary career both as a Senator and a Minister. She was the first
Queensland woman to enter the Federal Parliament. She had been a Senator
since 1946 and a Minister since 1966.
Mr. McMahon said " I know she will make a unique contribution to
the very friendly relations that exist between our two countries".
CA NBERRA
18 March 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 34/ 1971
MURRAY BY-ELECTION
Comment bythe Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Voting in the Murray By-Election demonstrated strong
support for the Government Parties. The Country Party and the
Liberal Party secured about 63 percent of the total formal vote,
Congratulations to Mr. Bruce Lloyd on retaining the
seat for the Country Party.
The Liberal Party candidate, Mr. Bill Hunter, did well
in obtaining over 20 percent of the vote in the Liberals' first campaign
in this traditional Country Party seat, held by Sir John McEwen for the
past 22 years.
CANBERRA 21 March 1971 



EMBARGO NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE
reoTMU KI7_ T{? I1fW To/ 7Ch-Fq71
FOR PRESS: PM No. 35/ 1971
THE MINISTRY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
His Excellency the Governor-General has authorised me to announce
that there will be a swearing-in of certain Ministers into their new portfolios tomorrow
( Monday, 22 March). As a consequence, the Cabinet and the Ministry will then comprise
the following
1. Prime Minister
Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Trade
and Industry
Minister for Defence
Minister for Primary
Industry
MInister for Supply and
Leader of the Government
in the Senate
Minister for National
Development and Leader
of the House
Treasurer
Attorney-General
Minister for Education
af'i! Science
Postmaster-General and
Vice-President of the
Executive Council
* 11. Minister for Foreign Affairs
12. Minister for Shipping and
Transport
13. Mirister for Labour and
National Service The Rt. Hon. William McMahon, M. P.
The Hon. Q Anthony, M. P.
The Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, M. P.
The Hon. Itn Sinclair, M. P.
Senator the Hon. Sir Kenneth Anderson
The Hon. R. W. C. Swartz, M. P.
The Hon. B. M. Snedden, Q. M. P.
The Hon. N. H. Bowen, Q. M. P.
The Hon. David Fairbairn, D. F. M. P.
The Hon. Sir Alan Hulme, K. B. M. P.
The Hon. L. H. E. Bury, M. P.
The Hon. P. J. Nixon, M. P.
The Hon. Phillip Lynch. M. P. / 2 
14. Minister for External Territories
Minister for Immigration
16. Minister for Social Services
17. Minister for Works
18. Minister for Civil Aviation
19. Minister for Customs and Excise
Minister for Air
21. Minister for the Army
22. Minister for Repatriation
23. Minister for Health
24. Minister for the Navy
Minister for the Interior
26. Minister for Housing The Hon. G. E. Barnes, M. P.
The Hon. A. J. Forbes, M. C. I M. P.
The Hon. W. C. Wentworth, M. P.
Senator the Hon. R. C. Wright
Senator the lion. Robert Cotton'
The Hon. D. L. Chipp, M. P.
Senator the Hon. Tom Drake-Brockman,
D. F. C.
The Hon. Andrew Peacock, M. P.
The Hon. R. McN. Holten, DA. P.
Senator L Greenwood, Q. C.
Dr. M. G. MacKay, M. P.
The Hon. Ralph J. Hunt, M. P.
Mr. K. M. K. Cairns, P.
I have proposed to His Excellency that Senator 1. J. Greenwood, Q. C.,
Dr. M. G. Mackay, M. and Mr. K. M. K. Cairns, M. P. be sworn as Members
of the Federal Executive Council.
The first 13 Ministers named will comprise the Cabinet.
I foreshadow that a proposal will be put before Parliament for the
amendment of the Ministers of State Act 1952-1968 to provide for an increase in the
number of Ministers from twenty-six to twenty-seven. Providing Parliament has
passed, and assent has been given to, the necessary amendments, I shall
recommend to His Excellency the appointment of an additional Minister who will
administer the Department of the Vice-President of the Executive Council. In the
meantime, the Postmaster-General will administer the Department.
at 2 p. m. Monday's swearing will involve nine Ministers. It will take place
I mention the following administrative arrangements
Mr. Wentworth and Senator Wright will continue their functions
in relation to Aboriginal Affairs and Tourist Activities respectively.
Mr. Peacock will continue as Minister assisting the Prime Minister. / 3 
It is intended to appoint in due course certain Assistant Ministers
or Parliamentary Under-Secretaries who would be sworn of the Executive Council
and assigned to assist particular Ministers. At that stage the present " Minister
assisting" arrangements will be reviewed. I am of the strong view that it is
desirable to proceed on these lines, because of the growing complexity of government
and the need for additional members of Parliament to gain experience both in the
legislative and administrative fields.
I mention also that the outgoing Minister for Labour and National
Service, Mr. Snedden, now to be Treasurer, will, for the time being, have control
of industrial relations policy.
CANBERRA 21 March 1971 NOTE: This is embargoed until
10.00 pm, Sunday 21 March 1971
L 



FOR PRESS PM No. 36/ 1971
INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR ACTION TO COMBRAT RACISM
The Prime M/ inister, Mr. William McMahon, said today that the year
1971 would be observed in Australia as International Year for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination.
Mr. McMahon said:
" The General Assembly of the United Nations designated the year 1971
as International Year for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
in the same way. as it had designated 1968 as Human Rights Year and 1965 as
International Co-operation Year.
" Australian subscribes fully to the purpose of this Year which is to
achieve significant progress in eliminating all forms and manifestations of
racial discrimination. We voted in support of this resolution at the General
Assembly and we are taking steps to observe it.
Mr McMahon added " My Government abhors racism which is not
acceptable to the Australian way of life."
Mr McMahon said he was pleased that a number of non-governmental
organisations intcrested in the Year had decided to set up a National Committee
to organise a programme to observe it. The Commonwealth had made a grant
of $ 12, 000 to the Committee to assist it with its programme. He had been informed
that a major part of the Committee's work would be educational. This he felt
was most important. Education through teaching and the mass media was one
of the most powerful weapons to combat prejudice based on ignorance.
Mr McMahon added that the Government was already a party to some of
the conventions bearing upon the elimination of racial discrimination, such as
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the
1956 Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade and Institutions
and Practices Similar to Slavery and the UNESCO Convention against
Discrimination in Education. Australia had also signed the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the
question of ratification of that Convention was being carefully examined.
Mr McMahon concluded by wishing the Committee a successful Year.
He was hopeful that Australia and Australians would be able to make an effective
contribution to the objectives of the Year.
CAkNBERRA 29 March 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 37/ 1971
BACKGROUND TO OMEGA INSTALLATION.
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
In reply to a question by Mr Barnard in the House of Representatives
on 18 March 1 said that negotiations had taken place between the United States
and Australian Governments on a p roposal to set up an OMEGA installation in
Australia to guide international shipping and other kinds of transport.
I said that we had agreed to the proposal but no precise location had
yet been decided. I promised that, as soon as I had precise irifornntion which I
could give to the House, I would do so.
In view, however, of continued misleading statements on the subject,
I feel it would be wise to give some further background now, even though no
decision has yet been made on a site.
OMEGA is a general purpose world-wide navigation system that can
be used by ships and aircraft of any type fitted with the appropriate equipment;
but the system is not sufficiently accurate for use either in close coastal waters
or by ballistic missile submarines.
The plan envisages eight stations in various parts of the world, four of
which have already been established. It is envisaged that control of the worldwide
system will be vested in a body cornpo8ed of representatives of each of the
participating nations.
The Australian Government has agreed to this proposal in princi* i.
A final agreement is dependent on the selection of a mutually acceptable site,
conclusion of an agreement covering its establishment and operation, and the
negotiation of acceptable financial terms and conditions.
Initially the technical specifications called for a valley of a certain
type of configuration. On this basis the choice of sites would probably have been
limited to certain areas of New South Wales or Tasmania. As a result of
technical advances, however, the equipment can now be mounted on a tower and
this has greatly enlarged the area and range of options. Consideration is being
given to possible sites but no firm conclusion have yet been reached. When a
tentative selection has been made the Government would, of course, consult
with the State authority or authorities concerned.
CANBERRA 22 March 1971
6 



AUSTRAIJAN TRAkNSPORTATION CONFERENCE
CANBERRA, ACT
S1p etceh rim MiistrMr William McMahon
.24 MARCH_ 1971
M r Chairman, my Ministerial Colleague, Gentlemen:
This is a unique Conference. It is unique in the sense
that it seeks to identify the problems associated with Australia's
surface transport and to attempt to find solutions.
According to the information conveyed to me by one of
Australia's greatest industrialists and captains of transport, there are
thte reasons for this uniqueness.
First, it is difficult to think of any other occasion when
so many leaders of industry and representatives of transport operators
and users have got together to discuss the critical issues involved in
the transportation of goods.
Second the aims and objectives of the Conference are of
fundamental importance. Taking the two reasons together, it is
probable that many ideas will emerge having a direct bearing on the
future of transport development.
And third, you can be as frank as you like and you can
put forward as many suggestions and ideas as you like. They won't be
pigeon-holed. You have my colleague, Mr Nixon's assuranice on that.
The Government will consider the suggestions you have
to make. It is important for y7oiTo be critical and to be constructive.
Now, as to your objective that is of identifying what
are the surface transport problems in Australia today this is an
extremely complicated problem.
You have the task of finding out how goods can be moved
across the length and breadth of tlis vast continent quickly,
efficiently and economically. Everyone in Government and in industry
wants an answer to this problem.
Daily and with growing intensity, the technologist is giving
us new tools to use. The innovators and applied scientists are showing
us how they can be used. Not to be outdone by changes in the vocabulary,
there is a new language too roll-on-roll-off ships, container
transport and flexi-vans. 
1
I 
2-
Some sectibns of. the Australian transport sytem have made
marked progress; in others there is a tremendous amount to be done.
We hope this Conference will generate ideas about what can be done anid
how we can go about doing it.
You are look ' ing for all the answers t the problems visible
and hidden. We want you to find the answers for as many as practicable.
To crystallise the Government's thinking, we want a
transport system which will serve a nation as it should be served, so
that we can beat the barriers of distance, of mountain and of plain....
and can do so cheaply and efficiently.
I have spoken of technical progress. Much of this has been
the result of a res pcnse by private enterprise the basic system of our
way of life. But the Government is directly involved, too, perhaps more
than many of you realise.
If I may, Sir Ian, I would like to mention briefly one or two
things the Government has done and is doing because I think it is an
example of co-operation between industry and Government; between the
private and public sectors. And this co-operation, in a free enterprise
society, means two things growth and progress.
As to our own part, you know the Government's direct
involvement in sea transport took on a new dimension recently with the
entry of our own line into overseas shipping. This was a return to a
system pioneered and abandoned about half a century ago.
Coinciding with this involvement we are building our own
ships for a variety of purposes and are developing the skills that are
transforming Australia into an increasingly self-reliant country.
In ten years to June, 1970, the Commonwealth has provided
$ 84 million by way of subsidy for Australian shipbuilding. This, I know,
is a good investment and a wise and effective contribution of public funds.
Our other direct involvement in surface transport is through
the Commonwealth Railways which complement the State railway systems
and link East and West.
The Government has contributed significantly to rail
standardisation projects in the States because we recognise that a standard
system is both economical and a unifying force.
In the past ten years the Commonwealth has given $ 99 million
in grants and $ 76 million loans to the' States for this p urpose. /* 3 
-3
But the heaviest spending is on roads. This is where the need
is greatest. It was one of my great pleasures as the then Treasurer to
introduce the Commonwealth Aid Roads Bill. Under the Act, the
Government commits funds on a five-year basis for roads and for the
period 1969 to 1974, we are aporopriating 252 million, an increase of
67 per cent on the amount provided in the preceding five years.
This year, taking roads, railways, shipbuilding, navigation
aids and other transport programmes together as a transport
commitment, the Commonwealth will be spending about $ 31A million.
Mr Chairman, spending of this order is part of a long-term
programme. There is so much to be done and the demand continues to
grow insatiably and intensely. Close co-operation between the
Commonwealth and the States is fundamental to success.
Australia is now spanned by a standard gauge railway between
Sydney and Perth. Many improvements are still needed on the railway
networks. Our beef roads are opening up new pastoral lands. Here, too,
the job is unfinished.
The changes in ship design and in cargo handling have led to
modernisation of our ports. Here, too, there is still work to be done.
We live in an environment of large bulk carriers and specialised
general cargo ships. If we are to be successful this demands management
practices and technical excellence of the highest order. I am sure yc'lx
have the qualifications. Now Sir, may I speak about transport costs the critical
factor for everyone Inflation feeds on rising costs. Freight rates are
a significant factor in costs. You know the problem just as well as I
do. May I turn to one aspect of it.
The problem of the man on the land, who cannot pass on
increases in freights, is well known to us all. Today the farmer is badly
hit by rising freights. So too are others. In this sense it is a national
problem. If we contain rises in freights and better still reduce them
then the burden of rising costs would be lighter. Whilst the problem
is one of immense complexity, we know of your capacity and are looking
to you to find out the ways and means of finding a solution. / 4 
Not so long ago, in order to honour an election promise, the
Govermnent took the first steps to establish a Bureau of Transport
Economics. A Director has been appointed and for the time being,
in a restrained way, staff is being recruited.
The Bureau's main function will be to study and report on the
costs ) f transport operations in Australia and to suggest what can be
done to help reduce costs.
Gentlemen, for the next two days you will be putting under the
microscope the transportation philosophies and policies of both the private
sector and government.
I conclude in this vein we do want your help. In saying that,
I am not passing the problem from Government to you.
We will continue to do all we can through the Budget, through
the Department of Shipping and Transport through the new Bureau and
in co-operation with the States at all levels.
We will co-operate with industry wherever we can, according
to our powers and responsibilities.
Gentlemen, I do wish you success with your Conference... and
I now declare it open.
NEW 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 38/ 1971
GOVER1* ThAE1iT MEETING WITH A. C. T. U.
Statement by-the Prime Minister, TheRgt Honourable W. McMahon, M. P.
The Prime Minister said tonight that a meeting had been held today
between representatives of the Government and the A. C. T. U.
At the meeting Members of the Government were the Prime Minister,
the Treasurer, the Minister for Labour and National Service and the
Attorney-General. The A. C. T. U. was represented by the President,
Mr. Hawke, the Secretary Mr. Souter, and the Honorary Vice-President
Mr. Petrie. Mr. McMahon, opening the discussions said there were three major
issues. He wished to remove two misunderstandings of the Government's
attitude. First to the A. C. T. U. Congress decision of September 1969. The
Congress decision was that " pending the outcome of discussions with the
Commonwealth Government, Unions are advised not to meet any fines imposed
under the Penal Clauses of the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration
Act.... Mr. McMahon said that in the Government's opinion when the long
discussions over dispute settlement procedures successfully concluded in
May 1970 there remained no obstacle imposed on the Unions by the Congress
to the payment of the fines.
The second misunderstanding related to the recent discussions on
11 February between the Governmen't and the A. C. T. U. concerning the state
of the economy. At that meeting the A. C. T. U. representatives said that they
were prepared to enter discussions with representatives of the Government
and employers as to ways in which a wage and price pause could be achieved,
accompanied by a reduction in labour stoppages.
The President of the A. C. T. U. said, however, this was a matter for
consideration by his Executive, but the A. C. T. U. was normally prepared to
enter discussions. It has been inferred by the A. C. T. U. representatives that this implied
that no action would be taken on the fines until these discussions were
completed. In fact the payment of the fines was not discussed at this meeting
and it was never intended that they should be included in any talks arising from
that meeting. / 2 
It is worth recalling that the President of the A. C. T. U. was not in
the position to discuss the fines at that time because the Interstate Executive
meeting with control of the matter was set down for the week commencing
22 February. The second major issue was that in the interests of industrial sanity
in Australia it was essential that the Arbitration Commission should be
effectively maintained.
The Government is deeply concerned with this problem because it
believes the Arbitration System must be preserved i. the interest of the
community and the very large numbers of the work force who depend for the
protection of their minimum wages and conditions of employment on the
Commonwealth Arbitration System. More than UT, of the Australian work
force are covered by Commonwealth and State Arbitration tribunals.
The third major issue is the Government's intention to require payment
of fines and will continue the procedures necessary before those fies can be
collected. The Government accepted that, in order to maintain complete good
faith with the A. C. T. U. it would agree to a special mreeting of the NLAC being
called on or about 15 April to have discussions which were requested at the
meeting of the NLAC on Monday 22 M-arch. Within seven days of the
commencement of the special meeting the A. C. T. U. and employers will have
the right to make further representations to the Government.
Action to enforce collection will be deferred until after the NLAC
meeting on or about 15 April.
C ANBERR A
MARCH 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 39/ 1 971
RECONSIDERATION OF AMA FEE INCREASES
Statement-by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
The Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon, with the Minister
for Health, Senator 1. 1. Greenwood, and the Director -General of Healt h,
Sir William Refshauge, today met Dr R. H. Macdonald, the President
of the AMA and Dr E. G. Thomson, the Federal Secretary -General of
the AMA. Dr Macdonald explained the background to the problem of thie
recent '! ecision by the AMA to an across-the-board increase in fees'
and sought to ascertain whether it was now open to the meeting of th
Assembly of 17 April to reconsider its position in the light of the new~
and more complete figures submitted by the Department of Health.,
The Prime Minister said that the Government reaffirmed its
belief that there was no justification for the across-the-board increases
previously submitted and that the existing Government decision still
stood that unless there was agreement between the Government and the
AMA, there should be recourse to arbitration. However, the Prime
Minister said that it was still open for the AM1to reconsider its
recommendations and put them before the Gob'err-Irent.
The Prime Minister suggested that one possibility which the
AMA might explore was a variation of its fee recommendation proposals
announced earlier, so as to limit the increases in common fees to
general practitioner surgery consultations and home visits as from
1 July 1971, leaving unaltered for the time being the present common
fees for all other services such as radiology, pathology, anaesthesia,
operations and specialist consultations. These would be considered
later in light of all new information available.
Should the AMA wish to advance any further proposals, they
could be submitted to the Minister for Health to explore in detail with
the AMA.
CANBERRA, It'( March 1971. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
ON
CROWN OF THORNS STARFISH
MiniM* sterial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 30 March 1971]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
-by leave-On 7th April 1970 the Government
announced to the House the membership
of a joint committee established
by the Commonwealth and Queensland to
investigate the problem of the Crown of
Thorns Starfish on the Great Barrier Reef.
The committee comprised:
Commonwealth Nominees
Professor R. J. Walsh, Professor
of Human Genetics at the University of
New South Wales ( Chairman).
Professor W. G. Maxwell, Associate
Professor of Geology at the University of
Sydney. Mr D. J. Tranter, Senior Research
Scientist, Division of Fisheries and
Oceanography, Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organisation.
Queensland Nominees
Dr J. M. Harvey, Director-General of
Primary Industries.
Professor J. M. Thomson, Professor of
Zoology at the Queensland University.
Mr C. L. Harris, of the Department of
Primary Industries.
The announcement of the committee's
membership followed agreement reached
on 29th January 1970 by both Governments
that such a committee be established
and that it should be financed on a dollar
for dollar basis by each Government.
11942/ 71 I am pleased to be able to tell the House
that on last Thursday, 25th March, the
Chairman of the Committee, Professor
Walsh, reported to me on the results of
the committee's work. In view of the
importance of the report and of the widespread
interest which has been taken in its
progress I arranged for Cabinet to consider
the report today and for the report to be
tabled so that honourable members will be
able to inform themselves fully of its conclusions,
and of the reasons underlying
these conclusions. Honourable members will
be aware of the very deep concern which is
felt by many about the possibility of
destruction to the Great Barrier Reef by
the crown of thorns starfish. This concern
has been deepened for many by the belief
that perhaps complete destruction of the
Reef was inevitable unless early Government
action was taken. Some have suggested
that it may now be too late to save the
Reef. It is therefore pertinent to draw to
honourable members' attention a reference
in the Committee's report to articles in the
Press and in semi-technical journals on the
starfish as being either repetitive presentations
of eye-catching speculations or
exaggerations of the limited facts available.
Some of the confusion appears to have
occurred because the available methods of
estimating population densities of the starfish
are rather crude. Extrapolations from
these results are not reliable and are of
doubtful value. Also overlooked has been 
the fact that the published figures of the
proportion of dead coral on reefs attacked
by the starfish have included an estimated
to 50 per cent of corals kiled by other
means-such deaths being a normal state
of affairs. Analogies have been drawn
between the action which had been taken
on Guam and the situation in the Great
Barrier Reef. On Guam, teams of divers
were used to combat the starfish. Some felt
that a similar operation should be mounted
on the Great Barrier Reef. Such suggestions
overlooked the fact that Guam has a
comparatively simple reef surrounding it,
around which the starfish were said to
move, limited on one side by the island
beach and on the other by the sea proper,
whereas the Great Barrier Reef is of a
size and a complexity which makes similar
generalised action to that taken on Guam
ineffective. In the light of the wide differences of
authoritative opinion as to the threat, if
any, which the starfish posed to the Great
Barrier Reef the Commonwealth considered
it necessary to obtain more facts before any
further action was taken to deal with the
starfish beyond that already set in train by
the Queensland Government and to which
reference is made in the Committee's
report. The Great Barrier Reef is perhaps
the most complex eco-system known to
man and many experts considered that it
would have been irresponsible for
generalised action to be taken before knowing
the likely consequences of such action
upon the chain of life which comprises the
Reef as we know it. As to the results of
the Committee's investigations the Committee
has found that:
the crown of thorns starfish does not
constitute a threat to the Great Barrier
Reef as a whole;
there is no danger of substantial erosion
of the physical structure of the reef; and
there is no threat to the Queensland
coastline or ports.
The entire living cover, or even a large
proportion of the coral cover, of the Reef
will not disappear as a result of the crown
of thorns starfish. Whilst there has been
extensive damage to coral because of the
starfish, serious damage is limited. Recolonisation
and regeneration of coral have
occurred on all reefs examined by the
Committee. The Committee has not been able to determine whether the high density
of starfish in some areas is a unique or a
cyclical phenomenon but it appears more
likely to be an episodic event which may
have occurred previously.
The Committee refers to the fact that the
feeding by the crown of thorns on living
coral constitutes, in the long term, part of
the reef building process, whereby dead
material is consolidated in order to provide
the platforrm necessary for the Reef's continued
growth. Tourist activity has not
declined as a result of the starfish damage.
The Committee cannot give the reason for
the population increase of crown of thorns
starfish in some areas. It reports that the
hypothesis that local collection of triton
shells has reduced predator pressure on the
starfish has not been substantiated nor has
the hypothesis that pesticides and other
organic chemicals may have -been causal.
The Committee believes that there is no need
to attempt to reduce the population of the
crown of thorns starfish throughout the
whole of the Great Barrier Reef at the
present time. It does not dispute that certain
reefs or portions of reefs having social or
commercial importance may be protected
by manual destruction of accessible starfish.
The Committee finds that present knowledge
of reef ecology is inadequate to assess
fully present and future problems concerning
the crown of thorns starfish and related
matters. It therefore suggests a programme
of research involving continued monitoring 7
of starfish population; research into reef
ecology, with particular attention to the
biology of the starfish and corals; and experiments
in local control of the starfish. To
achieve this program-me it recommends that
a sum of money of the order of $ 90,000 to
$ 120,000 be provided in the first year to
allow such research and that the sum provided
be increased progressively in each of
the second and third years at which time
there would be a review in the light of the
operation of the Australian Institute of
Marine Science. As I have already mentioned,
Cabinet has considered the recommendations
of the Committee. I am pleased
to be able to say that -the Government agrees
with the recommendations of the Committee.
I have been in touch with the
Queensland Premier and we have agreed
that $ 45,000 be allocated on a matching
basis by each Government for research 
projects recommended in its first year by
an advisory committee. The advisory committee
would report to the Minister for
Education and Science, who will act on
behalf of both Governments. This amount
will be increased by $ 10,000 by each
Government in each of the second and
third years. Each Government is prepared
to increase its grant on a matching basis to the upper limits recommended by the report
if the advisory committee finds in practice
that it has sufficiently good research projects
to warrant this. I shall announce the membership
of the advisory committee as soon
as possible.
I present the following paper:
Crown of Thorns Starfish-ministerial statement,
30th March 1971.
Printed by Authority by the Government Printer of the Commonwealth of Australia 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
ON
FUTURE OF AUSTRALIAN FORCES IN VIETNAM
Ministerial Statement
[ Froin the ' Parliamentary Debates', 30 March 19711
Mr MeMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)-
by leave-Mr Speaker, the Government
has been reviewing the position of
Australia's military forces in Vietnam in
order to determine what further withdrawal
options are open to it, having
regard to the security situation and the
intentions of the Government of the
Republic of Vietnam and of our other
major allies. This review follows from the
policy stated by the then Prime Minister,
now the Minister for Defence ( Mr Gorton),
in April 1970 when, in announcing
the withdrawal of one Army battalion, he
said that ' Should the progress of pacification
and Vietnramisation succeed as the
President ( of the United States) : hopes and
believes that it will, then at some stage
during the 12 months period we will consider
phasing additional troops into the
planned withdrawal'.
During his recent visit to Vietnam, the
Minister for Defence had valuable discussions
with Vietnamese leaders and with the
Commander of United States forces in
Vietnam. These consultations have
confirmed our assessment that steady
improvement is being achieved in the security
situation. Many factors have contributed
to this improvement. The policy of
Vietnamisation, that is, the development of
the capability and effectiveness of South
Vietnam's armed forces, has produced a
much stronger and more cohesive fighting
11941171 force. The pacification programme has also
achieved notable successes, and its contribution
towards improved security in the
rural areas has necessitated the enemy concentrating
his effort against that program-
ne. These developments, in combirvalion
with North Vietnam's manpower
problems, have seen a significant decline in
enemy-initiated activity over the last 2
years. An important consequence of these
achievements has been that the South Vietnamese
have been able to continue their
operations in Cambodia against North
Vietnamese regular forces. Additionally
they were able to initiate and conduct the
recent operations against the North Vietnamese
supply lines in southern Laos. The
effect of these operations so far has been
to -prevent the enemy mounting large-scale
actions inside South Vietnam and thus they
have given the South Vietnamese time for
the further development of their forces
and for strengthening the pacification programme.
In a number of key areas within
South Vietnam the North Vietnamese have
for the present lost the military initiative.
Tihe enemy forces are thus being forced to
a position of reacting to the South Vietnamese
rather than being able to fight at a
time and place of their own choosing.
Turning to the overall security of South
Vietnam, it is undeniable that there has
been satisfactory progress towards the 
objective of establishing the circumstances
in which South Vietnam can determine its
own future. There remain, of course,
difficulties which should not be minimised.
The North Vietnamese at the Paris talks
have remained intransigent. Nothing constructive
has been offered by them towards
a negotiated settlement. In Vietnam itself
there has been some resurgence in Communist
terrorism, political agitation, and
attacks against lines of communication.
These tactics by the Communists, using
their remaining infrastructure in the
country, will doubtless be employed
against the Government and people for
some time to come.
In . its weighing up of the overall situation,
the Government has decided that further
reductions of the Australian forces in
Vietnam are feasible and desirable. With
the agreement of the Government of the
Republic of Vietnam, and following consultations
with United States military authorities
in Saigon, some forces will now be
withdrawn. These are:
Selected combat and supporting forces
of the Army task force, including the
tank squadron, totalling about 650
men;
Royal Australian Navy personnel, a out
in number, serving with the United
-States Assault Helicopter Company;
The RAN Clearance Diving Team
( clearance of underwater explosives)
of 6 personnel;
No. 2 Canberra Bomber Squadron
involving 280 men;
Some aircraft of the Caribou transport
squadron and about 44 men.
The reductions are therefore to be
spread over the 3 Services and will have
the effect of reducing the total Australian
personnel by about 1,000 men. The Australian
forces then remaining in South
Vietnam will comprise 6,000 men compared
with a peak of 8,000 in 1968-70. All
these remaining forces, including the 2-battalion
Task Force in Phuoc Tuy, will
retain an effective operational capability.
The tasks of our forces will continue to
change as the Vietnamese territorial forces
accept increased operational responsibility.
The units and personnel involved in these reductions will be withdrawn gradually
over a period of 4 months to 6 months,
commencing in May. This timetable will
permit detailed adjustments to be made
between the Australian, South Vietnamese,
and United States military authorities in
relation to the security requirements of the
areas involved.
Events in South Vietnam, to which our
own fighting men made such a notable
contribution, have made these withdrawals
possible and they are entirely in accordance
with the policy of the Government
as announced in Parliament. It must be
acknowledged that enemy forces in Indo-
China still retain a consid. rable offensive
capability, and there remains in South
Vietnam a structure of Vietcong cadres
and guerillas which has been long established
and whose strength is very difficult
to assess. No doubt the Government and
forces of the Republic may from time to
time suffer military setbacks, and the continuance
of the war against aggression will
be a heavy burden upon them. But perhaps
more than ever before, the ( Government of
the Republic acknowledges that getting on
top of the internal threat to security and
the development of progressive government
in the provinces are tasks best performed
by themselves once a sufficient degree of
security from massive external attack has
been established. Greater confidence now
exists. The Vietnamese authorities have
developed a variety of programmes which
are becoming increasingly effective in
bringing better administration in the countryside.
The Australian Government will
continue to assist the Republic of Vietnam,
though the character of our assistance will
progressively change. For example, the
new Jungle Warfare Training Centre at
Nui Dat has just completed its first course.
Australian economic and military aid in a
variety of forms will continue. We will
continue to build houses for members of
the Territorial Forces and their families.
Other forms of civil aid and civic action
will be examined by the Government. As
to the future of our forces in Vietnam, the
Government will keep the matter under
constant review, bearing in mind the security
of our own forces and our obligations
to the Government of the Republic of
Vietnam.
Printed by Authority by the Government Printer of the Commonwealth of Australia 



PARLIAMENTARY LUNCHEON IN HONOUR CF
1H ISRO6YAL H IGHNES57 DD~ ff ED INBURGH
CANBERRA, ACT
SecbyL the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon 31 M\ arch 1971
Your Royal Highness, Your Excellencies, Parliamentary Colleagues, Chiefs
of Staff and Gentlemen,
Prince Philip is very well-known to us and we are delighted he has come
back again as our guest to share with us the fiftieth anniversary of the Royal Australian
Air Force. Your personal standard, Sir, is now flying in Canberra. Its four quarters
are a record of the events which brought you to your high and responsible place
alongside the Throne.
The lions and the cross in the first and second quarters remind us of
your ancestors from Denmark and Greece. The fourth quarter contains the arms
of the city of Edinburgh.
But, Sir, it is the third quarter of the standard, with its black and white
stripes, that has an added interest for many Australians. Many of the locals will
claim you as a supporter of the Yass rugby team. Black and white are its colours.
If you went to Collingwood, in Victoria, you would get a riotous welcome. Their
colours, too, are black and white.
But Sir, I'm sure you'd get the best welcome of all if you went to the
Western Suburbs in my own electorate near Sydney. They too play rugby in black
and white. I've heard that Newcastle United in Britain claims your support and that,
in fact, you call your personal standard " Newcastle United". Our teams in black
and white are called " the magpies" and I'll stretch the story a bit further, Sir,
to recall that your f irst command was a naval frigate, H. M. S. Magpie.
But names apart, Sir, my advisers tell me that the black and white stripes
in your standard are the mark of the Mountbattens your family name and one of
great distinction in the British story.
I hope your standard will fly in this country many times and will always
bring with it the same enjoyment as it does today.
Your own family links with the Throne are deep-rooted in history and you
have given matchless support to Her Majesty The Queen. Together you have given a
new purpose and an involvement to the Crown and the people in this neo-Elizabethan
age. / 2 
1 2.
The Crown's adaptability to contemporary life is evident to all of us. It
is based, I believe, simply on a compatability with the world of today and an
understanding of the human values and the qualities that make our society what it
is. You are known Sir, not only as a sailor, airman and sportsman, but as a
man with a social conscience and a deep and understanding sense of community interest.
You have been a spokesman for most good causes and a number of neglected ones.
You have never been to use your own words " a sitting tenant in any
job". Not once or twice, but every time you have been with us, you have had
something inspiring to say.
Your speeches have purpose and point and are candid. They spark off
ideas and promote debate with a cutting edge finely honed for each particular subject.
Your appeals for a public conscience on the protection of our wild life
and the conservation of our environment have done much to win support for what we
want to achieve. It is part of history, Sir, that you managed to have the site of a
housing estate in Western Australia changed so that a " noisy scrub bird" to give it
its full name should not be disturbed, because the species was nearly extinct in
Australia. I am sure you know, Sir, that we have developed plans for a National
Advisory~ ouncil onConservation and also have decided to establish a Commonwealth
Office of the Environment.
You are an eloquent advocate of conservation and this helps to generate
a public awareness of the problem which is one, not for governments alone, but for
everyone. I think, too, Sir, your special interest in young people matches the mood
of the times. We want to expand their horizons and their freedoms. By that I mean
the freedoms that go with health and physical fitness education and opportunity.
These new frontiers must be explored and fertilised if our young people are to live
happy and rewarding lives.
The interest of Australian youth in the Duke of Edinburgh Awards Scheme
shows they will readily respond to new outlets for their enthusiasms, talents and
energies. We value the Scheme as we value the Commonwealth Study Conference
because it is one of those social movements of the fast-moving seventies that you
have sponsored with drive, imagination and more than a bit of blunt speaking.
We don't want Australia to stand still, and, I am sure Sir, neither do you.
You have warned that the propaganda of the " stop-everything brigade" is continuous
and in the long-run fatal. You have done what you can to make the " start something
society" remain active and dedicated. With these goals we all agree. oo. / 3 
3.
And you, Sir, are a family man. Those who have seen you with your
family as so many of us did last year will know how enjoyable and exciting it can
be. It is a reminder that the family remains the foundation of the good society.
When you spoke on television last Sunday you said of the Royal Family
" We have to live as people and we have to have a home".
I agree completely. There is no other foundation on which we can
build if we want to sustain a free and tolerant society.
Sir, it is refreshing to have you with us for all these reasons and to do
honour to the Royal Australian Air Force on its fiftieth birthday. Ilam specially glad
to be associated as Prime Minister with this anniversary, becadse in 1952 1 had the
honour to present, on behalf of Her Majesty, The Queen's colours to the R. F.
at Laverton. Ladies and Gentlemen, this is a special day for the R. A. A. F. The
R. A. A. F. has fought with heroism d. nd distinfction over Europe and Africa, across
the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and ih the war theatres of Asia.
This fighting Service is vital to our security because I believe air power
to be one of the keys both to survival and to peace.
We are proud that you are here as a Marshal of the R. A. A. F. and
as a rmmber of the Royal F amily.
And that you honour this fighting Service by your presence, as we, in this
Parliament, honour it, too.
We thank you, Sir, for being with us at this time. 



E-MB AR G 0 _ 9 p. 1_ Wednesday 31 March 1971
FOR PRESS: PM No. 40 / 1971
RAAFJUBILEE MEMORIAL
Statement bPj the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
In Canberra tonight, at the Air Board dinner marking the 50th Anniversary
of the Royal Australian Airforce, the Minister for Air, Senator Drake-Brockman,
announced the winning design for a commemorative sculpture to stand in Anzac
Parade, Canberra. The winning design for this RAAF jubilee Memorial was submitted
by Mrs. Inge King, of Warrandyte, Victoria.
The adjudicators for the comp. atition were
* Sir William Dargie, CBE,
Chairman of Commonwealth Art Advisory Board.
* Mr. R. Boyd,
Architect and Member of the National Capital
Planning Committee.
Mr. C. Last,
Sculptor and Member of Commonwealth Art
Advisory Baord.
Air Marshal Sir Colin Hannah, KBE, CB,
Chief of the Air Staff.
Mr. R. K. H. Johnson,
First Assistant Commissioner, Civic Design and
Architecture, National Capital Development
Commission.
The twenty five foot high, ground stainless steel sculpture which was
up~ pimously selected by the adjudicators, consists of three vertical wing shapes
sorrounding a symbolic flight image, mounted on a platform of polished black granite.
The adjudicators in their report on the sculpture stated that it had
monumental quality, expressed the idea of flight and had appropriate symbolism.
The wing shapes symbolized spiritual and physical growth and the everlasting
pq sibilities of greater achievement, at the same time representing a solemn monument.
The ground stainless steel was deliberately chosen to emphasise lightness,
strength and power.
It is an eye-catching memorial and, in the impressive setting of Anzac
Parade, will be a fitting tribute to the RAAF's first 50 years of distinguished service
to the nation.
CANBERRA 31 March 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 41/ 1971
VISIT OF THE KING AND QUEEN
OF NEPAL
Statement by the Pr ime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
At the invitation of the Governor-General, Their Majesties
The K~ ing and Queen of Nepal will visit Australia from Friday
23 April to Friday, 30 April.
The visit of IKing Mahendra Bir Bikram Shah Deva and
Queen Ratna Rajya Lakshmi Devi Shah will give impetus to the
steady development of the friendly relations between our two
countries which has taken place in recent years and which has
been marked by co-operation through the Colombo Plan.
Consultations are taking place to prepare a programme
of engagements for Their Majesties' visit which will include stays
in Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney, and an announcement of
these details will be made later.
CANBERRA 2 April 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 42/ 197 1
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Pr! ime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
There have been frank discussions today between the State Premiers and the
Commonwealth Treasurer ( Mr. Snedden) and me relating to the financial position of the
States during the Budget year 1970/ 71.
Unanimous agreement has been reached on amounts of special additional
financial assistance to be provided to the States by the Commonwealth in respect of that
year. There was agreement about the need for continued strong resistance to the
inflationiary trends in public authority expenditures on goods and services but at the
same time recognition by the Commonwealth of the difficulties confronting the States
in financing their prospective Budget deficits for 1970/' 71.
The Premiers laid great stress upon the need to reduce their prospective cash
deficits which still remain despite the measures they had taken since February to improve
their financial positions,
With this in mind, the Commonwealth offered additional revenue assistance in
1970/ 71 of $ 43 million. This would be distributed between the States in proportion to
the financial assistance grants ( see attached table).
The Commonwealth's offer was unanimously accepted on the firm understanding
that this additional assistance would be used to reduce the States' revenue deficits and not
to increase expenditure in 1970/ 71 above that following the measures recently taken by
the States. Following the latest revision to the estimated increase in average earnings for
the twelve months ended March 1971, the grants to which the States will nowbe entitled
under the financial assistance grants formula for 1970/ 71 have been revised upwards by
6 million. Taken with the $ 43 million special assistance offered by the Commonwealth,
this increases the revenues available to the States in 1970/ 71 by $ 48. 6 million.
Although there has been some preliminary discussion of the financial problems
likely to be facing the States in 1971/ 72, to which I briefly referred in my opening
statement ( copies have been circulated), it was also unanimously agreed that it was not
practicale to proceed to any definitive proposals about the States possible cash requirements
at this Conference. These questions will be taken up again between the Commonwealth
and the States at a further meeting towards the end of this financial year.
I welcome the degree of co-operation shown between all the Premiers an d
the Commonwealth. I feel it was an example of the sensible working of Commonwealth/
State relationships.
April 1971 
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES 197J-71
million
Proposed Speial Revenue Assistance ( a) Estimated
Additional F inancial
A ssistance
Gra nt s ( b) Total Additional Assistance
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Total 14. 1
10.6 6.6 4. 6
5.0 2. 0
43.0 1.9 1. 4
0.9 0. 6
0, 6
0.2 5. 6 16.0 12.0 745 5.2 5. 6
2.2
48.6
Total of $ 43 million divided between the States in proportion to
their estimated financial assistance grants, including additional
grants of $ 2 per head to New South Wales and Victoria, of
$ 12. 5 million to Western Australia and of $ 103 million to
Tasmania as well as the additional grants to Queensland resulting
from the $ 2 million addition to its base.
That is, additional to the estimates last supplied to the States
on 11 March. The estimated additional grants result from a
recent upward revision to the estimate of the increase in average
wages in the year ended March 1971 from S. 25 per cent to
8. 75 per cent. The final estimate of the increase in average wages,
and hence of the grants, is still subject to considerable uncertainty. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 43/ 1971
FURTHER VIETNAM WITHDRAWALS
Statement ty the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon said in Brisbane this afternoon that
President Nixon's statement at mid-day clearly indicated the growing capacity
of the Republic of Vietnam to provide its own defence.
It was this growing capability and the success of the total Vietnamisation
programme which had enabled President Nixon to announce the continuing
withdrawals of United States' military personnel.
Mr. McMahon said that this same progress by the people, Government and
armed forces of the Republic of Vietnam had made it possible for him to announce
on 30 March, the withdrawal of 1, 000 Australian servicemen from Vietnam
beginning next month.
Mr. McMahon said that the President had sent him advance notice of the
decisions. They would be taken into account by the Australian Government in keeping
continually under review the problem of future arrangements about Australian
forces in Vietnam.
Mr. McMahon said that the people and Government of Vietnam deserved
praise for all they had done to make Mr. Nixon's announcement possible.
But it must be remembered that when Mr. Nixon had taken off ice he had been
under enormous domestic pressure, as he still is, to end United States' involvement
in the War by an immediate withdrawal of United States forces. Instead, President
Nixon had taken the courageous and difficult course of reducing the United States'
commitment only as the increasing capability of the South Vietnamese Government
and forces made ir possible to do so, without conceding to the North Vietnamese
and Viet Gong all that had been so far achieved.
The President recognised that, the War would not necessarily end simply
because United States' forces were being reduced. He had taken the view that the
United States' responsibility extended not only to the citizens of his own country,
but also to the people of the Republic of Vietnam who had suffered so much and who
had called upon the United States for assistance against North Vietnamese aggression.
The Prime Minister warmly endorsed Mr. Nixon's call for an end to the
barbaric use by the enemy of prisoners of war as pawns in negotiation.
CA NBERRA
8 APRIL 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 44/ 1971
INTEGRATION OF ABORIGINALS IN QUEENSLAND)
Following a meeting today in the Premier's Office between the Prime
Minister ( Mr. M cMahon) and the Minister administering the Department
of the Vice President of the Executive Council ( Sir Alan Hulme) representing
the Commonwealth and the Premier ( Mr. Bjelke-Petersen) and the Treasurer
( Mr. Gordon Chalk) representing Queensland, agreement was reached about
the unresolved issues relating to integration of aboriginals into the Australian
community difficulties which might possibly have required legislation by
the Commonwealth. The Prime Minister came to Queensland at the invitation of the Premier
and said his visit provided an early opportunity to seek to resolve the unsettled
issues. In a joint statement issued following the meeting, Mr. McMahon and
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen said
" We now have a full appreciation of each Government's
problems and we discussed the various matters needing
resolution." Mr. McMahon outlined those in which the Commonwealth was especially
interested and Mr. Bjelke-Petersen indicated proposals which his Government
was ready to make.
After discussion, arrangements acceptable to the State and in accord with
the principles and objectives of the Commronwealth were agreed to.
Broadly, the matters considered encompassed questions relating to
Freedom of movement off Reserves;
Control, through Reserve Councils, of access to Reserves;
Control of property freedom of choice will be allowed but
with provision for consultation with the Council and/ or the
Administration as a safeguard against exploitation;
Control of transactions arrangements as in the case
of control of property;
Liquor Canteen System freedom of choice to Reserve
residents to decide whether or not liquor will be permitted
on a particular Reserve. e / 2 
Torres Strait Islanders a separate Act of Parliament;
Vagrancy Laws : Paragraph ( ii) of Section 4( l) of the
Vagrants, Gaming and Other Offences Act will be
repealed; Wage Rates special consideration will be given to
inexperienced, slow or retarded aboriginal workers;
Reserve Councils native representation will be
reviewed.
Full details will be spelt out later.
It was recognised that the existing Queensland legislation was designed
to assist in protecting persons who, without guidance and assistance, could
be subject to exploitation and that it was not, therefore, to be seen as
discrimination against aboriginals.
But both the Prime Minister and the Premier indicated that there
was a willingness on the part of both Governments to do all that was possible
to meet the desires of the aboriginal people.
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen added that he was now in a position to confirm to
his Minister in charge of Aboriginal Affairs the general lines already laid
down for the preparation of draft legislation to be introduced at the next
Session of the Queensland ParliamEnt.
BRISBANE 8 April 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 45/ 1971
CORAL SEA GUESTS
Statement by-the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The Coral Sea Week " Guests of Honour" for the Australian
American Association's celebrations in May 1971 will be Ambassador
Emil Mosbacher, U. S. Chief of Protocol and Mrs. Mosbacher,
Admiral J. S. McCain, U. S. Commander-in-Chief in the Pacific and
Mrs. McCain, and Mr. Lloyd Waring, Vice-President of Kidder/ Peabody
and Company, Brokers, and former Republican State Committee
Chairman of Massachusetts and his daughter Mrs. George J. Roebelen
Jnr. They will be in Australia from Monday, 3 to Sunday 9 May and
together will visit Sydney ( 3-4 May) and Canberra ( 4-SMay).
On Wednesday 5 May Admiral and Mrs. McCain will leave
Canberra for visits to Newcastle en route to Brisbane ( 5-6 May) and
Perth ( 7-8 May). Mr. and Mrs. Mosbacher, accompanied by Mr. Waring
and Mrs. Roebelen, will leave Canberra also on Wednesday 5 May for
visits to Hobart ( 5-6 May) Melbourne ( 6-7 May) and Adelaide ( 7-8 May).
The party will regroup in Adelaide for departure on Sunday 9 May.
CANBERRA April 1971 



NATIONAL PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON
Hotel Canberra-Rex, Canberra APRIL 1971
~ peeh~ yhe PimeMinister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. Chairman, Thank you and all members of the Press Club for inviting me here today.
I hope I come back on many, many occasions, not as a vision or a memory, not
as a former, but I hope in the way I have come today, in the capacity to enjoy mlyself
as I am in your immediate company.
And may I too refer to a bit of history because this will be the last occasion
we will see Tony Eggleton here for some time. When I first became the Foreign
M41inister then the External Minister for reasons that I will never really understand.'
( Laughter) But I did suggest to the then Permanent Head perhaps the area where we
were suffering most was in public relations, and I thought it mould be wise if I could
get a sufficiently high enough grading for a good public relations officer, the bloke
I would choose would be Tony Eggleton. We then decided well, perhaps, we couldn't
get him quite enough for that, so the best thing we could do was to induce him to come
in as a PR officer and later on we would be able to put him into the diplomatic service
proper. Tony, I can assure you it was a tremendous personal loss to me when I was
advised that it would be highly unlikely that you would come not because you would
take to heart the salary, but because you had other commitments and you were a bloke
who lived up to your commitments first and foremost. So we will miss you, and we
do hope, Tony in the days to come you will remember that if I am around the scene,
anyhow, I will be one of the first to welcome you back and I will still be thinking of
you for some position in the Commonwealth Civil Service diplomatic or otherwise.
Well ladies and gentlemen, today I would like to speak to you about three
different subjects. The first one I want to speak to you about is the state of our
economy, then something about the People's Republic of China I will call it from now
on Coptinental China and then to refer to this problem we have about the so-called
political problems associated with the sale of wheat.
Well, now first of all about the state of the economy itself. No-one can
deny that we are growing at a very satisfactory rate. Our rate of development is good,
and before I get on, therefore, to what are our real problems, I would like, if I could,
to dis ' miss certain other elements of the economy that are not causing great concern
but perhaps are ones that we can regard as very satisfactory too.
Now the first one happens to be our balance of payments, and within our
London balances. And I want you to remember these figures in the context of what
I want to say to you later on about wheat, because we haven't got a crisis in our trade
relationships, and we haven't got a crisis in our balance of payments or in our
international balances either. In fact, up to the present in this year, we will have a
surplus in our balances of something like $ 188 million, and our international balances
are running well over 700 million. For a country like us even though we are a
big trader, these are satisfactory figures. 
Secondly, insofar as the money supply is concerned, as I mentioned in a
speech in the House not so very long ago, we thought that round about the beginning
of tbe. June quarter we would have to liberalise the money supply, and the Reserve
Bank did that yesterday, and made a statement about it yes terday. It wasn't as much
as perhaps we might have expected it to be some two months ago, but it was in fact
reduced probably or mainly because of the fact that we had reduced the deficit of the
States when we gave them $ 43-$ 48 million at the beginning of last week.
And the other point that I want to mention to you is that consumption and
retail sales, or consumption expenditure and retail sale3 are running at a normal
level and are not therefore a contributory factor to our current economic difficulties.
Now, having said that may I then turn round and analyse what are the
difficulties and the specific kind of remedies that we are making in order to meet them.
Well first and foremost then, may I look at the private sector I want to
divide this up into three sectors if I can private, public and then average incomes
or average wages and earnings, and then to deal with the remedies themselves.
But first of 41l, if I can look at the private sector, we had two areas where
the demand -was too great and where the demand on resources was exceeding the
actual supply, where the main area was in investment in plant and equipment and
we immediately took action to take away the investment allowance. The second area
was in commercial building and construction, and here the rate of commencements
was exceedingly high and couldn't have continued unless we had a price increase of
something of the order of 12-L to 15 per cent per annum, judged upon Commonwealth
public works expenditure figures.
We got the various elements of the industry together and they assured us
that they knew that they were over-building and that there would be a very substantial
drop in approvals and in commencements and I believe that process is continuing.
Now, therefore, in the private sector we do look as though we can get
control of the demand factor.
I now turn, therefore, to the public sector, and here, of course, we do
have one of the two major problems besetting this country. In terms of our public
expenditure, there will be an increase in the State sector this year of something like
16 per cent and they have particularly big difficulties because they are labourintensive
in their employment figures and with wages in the education and in police
and in other civil service sectors, they have of course have got a boost in costs that
couldn't have been forecast at the time when their Budgets were being prepared.
And, secondly, we have one other very big problem there that I believe
that it is in terms of expenditure on goods and services outside wages that the amount
or the increase that is taking place is great and consequently we had in co-operation
with the States to reduce ours and they had to reduce theirs. They reduced their
expenditures by something of the order of $ 60 million in this current year. We
attempted a goal of about $ 75 million and I believe that to be a reasonable and a
satisfactory figure for the moment. / 3 
So in the public sector we therefore took action.
Coming to the third element, and that is average earnings, these of course
were the besetting evil that we had to face because I am confident in this view that
had it not been for the 6 per cent increase in the national wage case, driven forward
by the impact of a 40 per cent wage drift that is the. amounts that were paid in
average earnings over and above Arbitration awards I am absolutely certain that
we would have been able to keep the economy under fairly tight control and we wouldn't
have the inflationary problem that now threatens us today.
But when the national wage increase of 6 per cent, adding $ 900 million
to the pay cheque the take-~ home pay cheque occurred, then of course a totally
different element has to be introduced. And there was really nothing that we could
do about this because once your increasein wages runs ahead of your increase in
productivity, you get an inbuilt infdlationary pressure and there is very little or
nothing that any Government can do about this particular element.
So this does introduce an element of inflation that will, I believe..., an
underlying element of inflation that in terms of discounted gross national production
will, I think, be certainly higher than 5 per cent and is the real difficulty that the
Government has to face now and in the days to come.
Now the effect of this increase in average incomes and wages might not
occur immediately because savings can to some extent reduce the impact and, of
course, it can occur over a period of time and not be concentrated in any one
particular Budget year. So what then are we doing?
We have of course announced the various measures that I have spoken
of a few moments ago, but we are also looking at a wide range of measures so that
we don't have to press down too heavily in any one sector. Within the course of the
next few weeks we will be introducing a special Bill on resale price maintenance,
outlawing it, but having certain conditions under which an application can. be made to
the tribunal. We are looking in detail at the problem of restrictive practices again
to see if there can be a tightening-up in the procedures and in the kind of activity
that we might regard as contrary to the national interest or contrary to the competitive
interests within the Australian economy.
We will also be looking at the same time to see if we can strengthen the
Arbitration Commission and in these and in other ways we hope that we will be able
to get an internally consistent and a general programme that will, subject to what
I have said about the national wage case and average earnings, will, I think, put
us in a favourable position so that when the next Budget comes along we will be
able to reduce the rate of government expendi ture both in the States and in the
Commonwealth and thus give one other dampener to demand.
Now what I want to point out to you is this. That the problems are there
and in particular I have to emphasise, as other people have emphasised, too, the
real problem today is one of inflation and we must look at every avenue of expenditure
to ensure not only of expenditure but particularly in the area of arbitration awards / 4 
and over-award payments made by industry, to ensure that to the maximum of our
extent we can reduce the inflationary impact. So that then is the first statement I
want pd to make to you.
And the second one relates to our relationships with Continental China
Peking China. And here I believe there has been a great deal of misunderstanding.. This
problem itself must be looked at in two separate components. And I believe that when
I have listened to what has been said by the Opposition and particularly by people Who
have recently been talking too freely and in an ill-informed way down in Adelaide,. I
have been surprised at the lack of understanding of what is actually -happening.
Well, now let me look at the two components associated with China that is
Continental China and associated with it the problem of a Taiwan China the Republic
of China itself. First, as I said, we have the probilem of admission to the United Nations.
Now Taiwan China is in fact a member of the United Nations. It is a fact of life, and the
government there has de facto control and constitutional control over 14-1 million people.
It has lived up to all its international obligations, and lived up to its obligations under
the United Nations Charter.
On the contrary, Continental China Peking China is not a member of the
United Nations. It is not recognised by us. And while there are many who feel they vould
like it to be a responsible member of the United Nations and of the international
community, they do so and we do so on these grounds: that if they are to become a
member of the United Nations and to be recognised, then there must be some kind of
assurances that they will live up to their international obligations, particularly those
to the United Nations. In other words that they won't try and achieve their political
objectives by force of arms. Two, that they won't be guilty of insurgency or guerrilla
operations in neighbouring countries. And thirdly, that we hope they will leave their
neighbours in peace. Or to put it a little more eloquently they will let the people of
the countries concerned determine their own futures.
Now these are the goals that we have had in our international life, and
they are the goals that we want to sustain in the future. Now what then is the present
and the immediate problem that we have to fact?
At the last year at the United Nati. where I had the pleasure to be present,
I did come to the conclusion that of the two resjlutions that were before the United,
Nations one relating to what is called the Important Question and that means that a
particular question can be determined important and once it becomes important
it requires a two-thirds majority to permit the subsequent resolution itself to be
put into effect I wondered to myself whether it would be possible to sustain the Important
Question for very many more years, and then when it canrto the substantive question
of what is called The Albanian Resolution, then I was fairly certain that that resolution
would be carried and the effect of that would be that Continental China would become a
member of the United Nations and a permanent memiber of the Security Council. But
what you people and all Australians have to remember is that it would have automatically
led to the expulsion of Taiwan. 
Taiwan has been-a odinmerber,-and has lived up to its international
obligations and is responsible ior the welfare of 14! L million people. Now her
attitude has therefore been clear as a Government.
-Let us look, first of all, at what is the immediate and pressing
problem that is of admission. And consequently, as a government, we came to
the conclusion that our attitude would be of doing all in our power to sustain the
position of Taiwan as a member of the United Nations. We have had discussions
with many of our great friends. VWe have had them visit us and talk to us. We have
talked to them. We have let them know our thinking and I believe that the contribution
made and the papers prepared by our own Department of Foreign Affairs are at
least the equal of anything that I have seen or anything that I have heard. And while
I am not now the Minister, I pay enormously high tribute to the quality of the work
that has been done by the civil servants in that Department.
We will do all we can to sustain the positi on providing the R. 0. C. wiant
their position to be sustained in the United Nations itself.
Well now, then, let me come to the question of recognition, and here
I believe we run up against an extremely difficult problem because recognition
is now gaining some force. But what has happened, and I can illustrate this to you
by reference to the position of Canada.
In the case of Canada it recognised, but it recognised on the basis that
it noted the claim of Continental China, that it had an inalienable right to the whole
of China including Taiwan, and it was made clear by the Canadian Government that
recognition in this way meant that there should be withdrawal of recognition by
Canada of the representation of the Taiwan Government. In other words, recognition
of one meant withdrawal of recognition of the other, and this is the constitutional
and legal position as presented to me.
Now, wouldn't it be a strange thing for us if we put the cart before the
horse and we went straight ahead with recognition and said, " Well, it will mean
that we have to withdraw recognition from you", or what would happen is that if
we recognised Continental China, it would mean that Taiwan China itself would say,
" Look if you are going to do that, let us get in first and we will be first in the queue
because we don't want you to take the initial action".
Now I believe. the proper and the responsible course there, the only wise
course that you can take and this does require a great degree of subtlety, a great
degree of subtlety of handling and a knowledge of what most other countries in the
United Nations and in other parts of the world are thinking. But I believe that the
first step and the immediate step must be to try and ensure that by September of
this year we and our friends have mobilised sufficient strength to be able to keep
the Taiwan Government in the United Nations and to be able to ensure that it plays
its proper part in international affairs.
Now as to the facts themselves, I am fairly certain tha t if you were to
be able to get a Gallup Poll of all the members of the United Nations, what it would
mean would be this : That on admission, there would be a majority who favour the
admission of Communist China Continental China to the United Nations, and 
I think it would be by a bigger majority than the. Albanian majority was carried last
year. Equally, too, am I certain of this that a very big majority of the members of the
United Nations would like to find some means by which Taiwan China the Republic
of China could also retain its membership. That is our paramount goal and it is
the one that we will adhere to, and it is the policy we will be pursuing between now and
the next meeting of the United Nations in September of this year.
And now may I come to the other subject that I want to speak to you about
and that is the one relating to wheat. I wonder if there could be more misunderstanding
of the single problem of wheat than there has been at the Conference of the ALP in
Adelaide. Let me first of all try and persuade you on the facts and on the logic of
the situation alone. And the facts are these, and they are very easyto understand.
First of all this year in the first four months of this year we have sold
over three million tons of wheat in the international markets. That is 1. 1 million or
per cent more or whatever it ha-ppens to be in percentage terms more than we
sold last year. The biggest saiea v's-eavee ver had up until this year in the
corresponding four months have been 2. 6 million tons. So we are selling, and we are
selling better than ever before. But we haven't got to worry too much about the
Chinese market, at least in this crop year.
Secondly, in international trade, the quantities in international trade have
increased from 54 to 57 million tons and we are participating in that growth.
Thirdly, and this was pointed out by the Chairman of the Wheat Board
yesterday or last night and p'biish-, l t. day that China itself has had nine successive
good crop years and has now s'. iCient wh.-t to meet its immediate requirements and has
sufficient wheat also to build up quite substantial stocks.
Now there are two other facts of life that you should know. Normally
China imports wheat because it has a curpi-us of high quality rice that it can export
at a premium to other countries. Bec-: Iase there is a surplus of premium rice
throughout the world today and is litk" y . row, China therefore is in a position
where she has got a surplus of rice and w-:' re she doesn't need to depend so heavily upon
the importation of wheat even c:' r is the kind that she wants most, and in
terms of quality and price it is prU-b'bJLy their terms the best kind of wheat they
can get, subject to getting a reasonable quantity of high protein Canadian wheat.
Now those are the facts of life as they exist today and the other fact that I
should mention is that within the cocur.! s of the last few days the Australian Wheat
Board has returned from negotiating with Nung Fung Hong Corporation, cn behalf of
the Chinese Government in order to find out what the true position with regard to
Chinese Continental Chinese demand for wheat should be. They had established
and are continuing to establish the most clo se and friendly commercial relationships
with them, and the Corporation itself has s3id to them, " We want you to keep in
closest contact with us. We want the goodwill that exists between us to keep on because / 7 
4 4 7.
conditions may change."
And with the changing conditions, well, your guess is just as good as
mine -as to what could happen.
Now, I admit quite freely here that of course the Continental Chinese
would be making as much political mileage out of this as they could, but equally
certain am I of this particular fact that when they want wheat, and they want it
in quantities, they are hard traders and they will buy where they can get the best
commercial advantage. Some politics yes, but not a great deal. But I am sure
of this, that it is the hard facts of commercial life that will determine what their
actions will be. Put that in context against the fact that we are doL.-g pretty well
in the international wheat trade, the price is good, particularly good, and the
Wheat Board itself certainly cannot, if you read its statement of last night, be
regarded as coming back with any feeling that there is a crisis or that we face
real problems. Now as to the suggestion that there should be a political group, promoted
by people like Mr. Hawke and the Secretary of the Labour Party not the Parliamentary
representatives and this is something of tremendous significance to us that a
delegation should be going to China, to Peking China, to be able to put the political
position to them not as the representatives of the Australian wheatgrowers, not as
the constitutionally-established or legally-established Wheat Board that has the
responsibility for selling our wheat. If the delegation goes, I venture to suggest that
they can do both political harm and they can do harm to the interests of every single
grower throughout the Australian community. But they would do that only in
circumstances when China has a shortage of wheat through either bad crop years
or for other reasons. What I want to emphasise is that this is n political gesture
and I have never known political gestures to be successful in commercial life of this
kind. On the contrary, if you are playing politics for the shabbiest of motives, the
probability is that you will do harm and I believe this can do, as I repeat it again
this can do damage to the wheat interests of this country.
So there were the various matters that I vmanted to speak to you about today.
I want you to understand, too, and particularly those who are members of the Press
Gallery and of the National Press Club that my door has in the past been always open
to you. I believe as a practising politician that it is our responsibility as Members
of Parliament and as Members of a Cabinet and of a Government to be able to provide
you, unless there are security reasons to the contrary and that applies particularly
to Foreign Affairs that we should give you access to the maximum of information.
I want you to understand, too, that whenever you are givei, information that you feel
ought to be checked that either my door or the door of my Press Office will be open.
Consequently we will do our best to see that this communications gap is narrowed.
Thank you Mr. Chairman for giving me the chance of coming here and
speaking to you today. I ask you to put any question you want to me, and if it is in
my capacity, I give you my assurance I will do my best to answer it.
* This paragraph has been adjusted in line with the amendment made by the Prime
Minister in the subsequent question time. 



QUESTIONS P1. T TO THE PR V1EM M7 ! NSTER AT TH. E NATIONAL
PRESS ' 1971
Q. Vincent Matthews Me itrne Herald. Mr. Prime Minister, could
you tell us, apar. from th 2 wheit the Government is actually doing
or contemplating oic tc -s: 7o of-the China market is
not lost in the future to Aut~ asc~ otindu~ t-;. i, Iand could you perhaps
elaborate on 24ect Jm~ ;~ cndacshcwe had, particularly
the attitaide of the Democratic-La~ iur Party on the Government's approach to
the China problem?
PM If I can answer the second part of your question first. Naturally as
Members of Parifament, and a mters of a Gcvernment we have to take a total
look at the political picture befoire adi'-cisions aire made. But on our attitude
to trade with Continental China2, ad c-i our attitut'. z to the position of Taiwan
China in the United Nation., i can as~ n~ you thXath; is is a Government decision
and I now reflect Government -, 11* izW hi is deciId in the interests of the
Australian nation, and that pc-tior: vi13 dEpci. t ate our policy in every respect in
the future. As to the first part of your qjuastion I will divide the question if I
can into three different sectikmr.-. kir.-. t of all as to our actual trade with China
itself unless goods come with-in wi-at is called the Strategic Limitation List
or finless it comes within a special list of which we have administered quite
severely in recent years, then our own people are free to go and to return from
China and to trade with them to the maximnum of their capacity. So they can go,
they can trade. I can move a stage further and sa-y that our own people, of course,
have no obstacle placed in their y ii they want to go, and for that matter unless
there are security reasons invoi,. zod, involving the Peking Government itself,
then our citizens are free to r: un. I hope you'll understand the reservation
that I have made about security reasons coming from the Peking Government
itself.
Q. Ted Barker West Australian. Sir there was a certain amount of
concern last year about i . m_; rts of iron and scmp steel to China.
As Foreign Ministcer you' saild a hat you would re-examine the list of
strategic mateiiithat cau, 3. dnrot be iaxxxted. Has there been any change in
policy as a result of that re-. ivv; w have cj aterials such as iron, scrap steel and
zinc been added to the list of prohibited exports"
PM Yes I have. Ever since I made the statement or answered a question
in~ a h thr-o~ s-i'er ne~ View. I've also had it considered by
the Government-and s~ rvf111 bi': 2er the measures that we've taken in
order to ensure greater trade '. Corntnental China.
Q. Brown Brisbene CPr-Mail. Prime Minister you seem to have
left out one current imp " tir~ t c Z South Afri. an sporting tours. What
action do you plan to talKe afgai.. ntst ~. s_'. or-ACTU boycott?
PM Thanks for that buec: oa~ use I've A&amp; re-ndy answered this once in
the House and I reg,.-zr1 it as nJt b -hz CT n h ao
Party that they shouid try and stp sportiimg terns from coming to this country. 
We have the Gallup Polls 85 per cent of the Australian people thought they should
come. Now we don't like apartheid and already I have sent a message to the South
African Government, letting the South African Government know what I and my
Government, for that matter, think of their action in stopping two native South
Africans from coming out here with the South African cricket team. But we have
taken this attitude. We believe, and I'm sure most Australians agree with this
point of view, that we must not import our politics Into our sporting or cultural
life. I can explain it to you in this way. What a strange thing it is that an ACTIJ
that is supposed to be looking after industrial relations, should gang up with a group
within the Australian Labor Party and say yes, let politics superimpose itself on
every single aspect of our lives. If you'd like to took at it in a different way in
terms of our cultural relations, we don't agree with the USSR as to what its social
and political system might be. But we don't stop their sporting teams, and the Bolshoi
Ballet from coming here. Even in the case of Continental China, of the Peoples'.
Re public of China, they are now permitting a sporting team of the Unites States one
of their bitterest enemies to go there, indicating that they want a liberalisation so
far as these extra-political activities are concerned. I want to warn you of this
factor. You must now have recollections of the shadows of the twelve faceless
men, when the ACTU, not elected to Parliament by the people, when the Mick
Youngs not elected by the people of Australia to the Parliament are trying to
determine every single aspect of the social and cultural and sporting life of this
community. In my view the Australian people will regard it with resentment, and
I believe that they will treat these sporting teams, if they come, in exactly the
same way as they treated the South African Surf Life Saving Association. They gave
them a marvelous welcome, and I hope they show their strong sporting instincts
and give the cricket team and the football team when it comes, that they give them the
same kind of reception as th ey gave the Surf Life Association members.
Q. John Lombard Mel bourne Sun. Both the Treasury and Mr. Bury say
there will have to be a new Federal Tax. The Treasurer is reported as believing it
oi4ght to be a tax on retail sales. Do you believe a new tax will have to be found to
supplement income tax and what are your views on a retail sales tax?
PM These views have never been communicated to me directly and I have
no paper at all in front of me from ie Treasury or from the Treasurer or from
any other group of officials recommending any new type of tax.
Q. Max Hawkins, Brisbane Telegraph. Mr. Prime Minister on March 21
when you announced your Ministry, you said -you intended to appoint certain
Assistant Ministers or Parliamentary Under-Secretaries. Can you tell us how far
you have got with this proposal?
PM There are two pieces of uncompleted business. One is the appointment
of a Minister to head the new Department of the Vice-President of the Executive
Council that will look after a wide range of environmental and cultural relationships,
and the other is the problem of Assistant Ministers. I have not in the time
available been able to deal with either of these problems because until the last f ew
days I have not had worked out in specific and legal terms what the responsibilities
and the conditions under which the Assistant Ministers can in fact be apppointed, a a / 3 
particularly in order to meet the Constitutional requirement that they cannot accept
an office of profit under the Crown. All the details have now been completed and I
hope as soon as the House rises I will be able to appoint the new Minister as well
as being able to appoint the Assistant Ministers at the same time. I might, if I can
just add this. I might find it desirable some time next week or the week after to
be able to put down a paper in the House explaining the true i1~ ettion so far as it
concerns the Assistant Ministers.
Michael Richardson Melbourne Age. Could you give us an
explanation about why the Chinese bought a large quantity of wheat from Canada
recently. It was noted at the time that the announcement was made shortly after
Canada announced formal diplomatic recognition of Peking.
First I want to remind you of the backgrourd against which this
problem is being considered. I have said that our position cannot under any
circumstances be regarded as a difficult one. But secondly why China chose to
buy not a large quantity of wheat as you have said but a much reduced quantity
of wheat, of high protein wheat from Canada. Thirdly I admit that there was a
strange sort of coincidence between the date on which the wheat was purchased
and the negotiations that were taking place in New York at the United Nations
relating to recognition and the Albanian Vote. But I am not privy to the mind of
the Peking Chinese. I am not privy to the mind of the Canadian Government. In
my conversations with Mitchell Sharp, I came away no better informed than I was
when I first started to speak to him.
Peter Samuel Bulletin. I want to ask two questions. Firstly,
a cultural one, secondly a sporting one. On the cultural one, what are you going to
do about the proposal for a National Art Gallery here in Canberra? There has been
a proposal for a Director of that Gallery and the plans are all prepared for its
construction. Secondly, on the sporting question, the question of the ACTU's
proposed black ban on dealing with the Sac th African cricketers when they come
here, in a previous case where the Government has disapproved of a black ban in
t he case of the black ban on the export of merino rams the Government moved
in and used Service transport to break this black ban. It would seem logical if
you disapproved of this black ban to give consideration to using the Forces at your
command to break this black ban, too. Would you consider doing that?
As to the first question, which is, I must confess, a sensitive and
difficult one, I have appointed Sir Alan Hulme to act as the temporary Minister
in charge of the portfolio of Vice-President of the Executive Council, and he for the
moment has this task of deciding what is to be done. I can't give you any greater
answer than that other than some possible solutions have been put to me but have
not been put in a way that I would be able to make an immediate decision about it.
I am afraid this will have to wait for some time until I get more time to be able
to devote attention to it. As to the second question as to what we will do if the
South African cricketers do come, regrettably in a way, we can't transport them
in the same way as we did the merino sheep: But my very sincere hope is that by
that time the Australian people themselves will let both the ALP and the AC'Tt
know of their revulsion of feeling that these extra-Government organisations shnuld
try and dominate the Australian political scene and should determine what happens
in cultural and social affairs and sprnrting affairs iirthis country. But the true
so. / 4 
4.
answer to your question that is the second question is that at the moment it
is too hypothetical. I think it is best if you intend to do something, to reserve
your own opinion as to'what you will do and meet those when they actually have to
be met.
Q. Fingleton Argus Group of South African newspapers. The
trade unions, Mr. Hawke and Mr. Whitlam I don't know whether I have given
the right batting order have threatened a boycott of the South African team.
Can you say, Mr. Prime Minister, whether either the Australian Board of Cricket
Control or the Rugby Union Board has been in touch with you as to your views
whether the tour should be cancelled either tour and if they do, would your
opinion still be the same as you expressed here today that the tours should proceed?
PM I think your batting order was wrong on this issue. I think it was
Young, H-awke and Mr. Whitlam might have been somewhere in the team but I didn't
notice it: As to the second part of your question, the Secretary of the Australian
Cricket Control Board, Alan Barnes, has been in touch with me and I have informed
him that we would offer no objection to the tour and that i t should go on. To the
best of my knowledge, the Australian Rugby Union authorities have not been in
contact with me or with the Department. Nonetheless, I will check on this fact,
Mr. Fingleton, and I will let you know as soon as I can.
Q. Commins, A. B. C. In the context of controlling inflation, you said
amongst the measures to be taken would be to strengthen the Arbitration Commission.
Do you imply by this they are not doing their job now, or in what manner would
you do it? Also, Sir, in the same context, Sir Colin Syme has recommended some
advance in unemployment as a means of controlling inflation and Mr. Hawke has
said he would not have been game to have said', this under Mr. Gorton, but is game to
do so under you.
PM That is Mr. Hawke's opinion, and in public like this I must refrain
from expressing any personal opinions about him. But if I can deal with the opinions
expressed by Sir Colin Syme, 1, for one, do not believe that the creation of
unemployment is the way in which you solve your problems of inflation. Every
country that has tried to create unemployment, or permitted unemployment to develop
has failed miserably and I think it should be known that the one Government that
solved the problem of unemployment before any other was the Government started
by Menzies, continued through Mr. Holt and Mr. Gorton and now led by myself.
With us, full employment is a cardinal act of political faith and we will sustain
it and won't resort to any kind of unemployment in order to achieve our objective.
And I repeat again, I don't think this is a very satisfactory way of handling it.
That, too, might answer Mr. Hawke as to whether or not he thinks there might
be a different approach during the course of the last three ar four weeks. I have
forgotten the first part of your question could you repeat it?
Q.' Sir, it was to control inflation you were aiming to strengthen
the Arbitration Act.... 
PM Well, I said we would try. We will be looking to see whether there
are some methods by which we can ensure that the Arbitration Commission itself
does try and control the whole of the structure of the Arbitration Commission, in
order to ensure that the Commissioners fit in with the policy directives or the policy
lines that are determined by the Presidential Members themselves. But this is only
one area that we are looking at. We want to look at the total area to see if we can
make some contribution here to strengthening the forces which will reign back or
break back inflationary tendencies in our community.
Q. Tom Connors Financial Review. How closely does the
Government watch and check the activities of the Australian Wool Commission
which has built up a considerable stockpile of wool without actually checking the
drift in prices, and what form will the proposed review of the Commission's
activities take at the end of this financial year?
PM As to the second part of your question, this is a matter witich is
within the jurisdiction of both Trade and Treasury and they will be advisixg us towards
the end of the season, or at the end of the season, what they think should be done and
will be making their recommendation to the Cabinet. So far as watching the
activities of the Commission, as I understand it, and I am not in the machine for
this myself, but as I understand it and it is agreed to by the Australian Wool
Commission itself that there is regular examination of the activities of the
QCommission and that the Commission regularly reports not only to Primary Industry,
Trade but also to Treasury as well.
Q. Tony Thomas Melbourne Age. It has been mentioned that private
office construction has fallen off lately in view of the economic climate, On the
other hand State and Commonwealth, or rather Government off ice construction is
iiicreasing fairly sharply. How do you regard this?
PM. I didn't phrase it in exactly the same way as you've said. I did
say that because there had been over-building in commercial and industrial
buildings we had been advised by the civil construction people that automatically
there would be a reduction because they wouldn't be able to find rentals for the
space that had been built. I agree with you that it has been difficult to reduce
State expenditure on public works. But what we are doing now and I want to
emnphasise this and I thought I'd emphasised in the body of my speech itself that
qt the time of the next Budget we must ensure that public works expenditure
Commonwealth or States that the rate of increase is reduced to what we could
regard as a satisfactory level. Once you've got committed, as they have got
committed in this present Budget year or the Budget year of the Commonwealth
or the States, it's difficult to stop expenditure. But when we start on the new year
that is the appropriate time when we ensure or do our best to ensure that the
rate of increase in these works and services is reigned in.
Q. Richard Ackland from Maxwell Newton's publications Two
questions Prime Minister in your capacity as a Treasury expert can New Guinea.
pay all the subscription to the Asian Development Bank, and what are the
advantages of New Guinea being a member? And secondly, are you going to
press ahead for an abolition on withholding tax to interest payments overseas
as the previous Prime Minister announced last year? 0 / 6 
PM As to the second one yes. As to the first as Foreign Minister
I did all in my power to ensure that Papua/ New Gu,-nea became a member of
ECAFE, and through becomin. g a memi; er of ECAFE became a member of ECOSOC
and through becoming a merrnmr of ECOSOC wa3s nittled to participate in the
World Bank and the 2DC. Secondly I had -s the fu; l objertive and w, achieved
it of making ? apua/ New Gur. nea a , r. emer of te A-' an Development Bank. We
did this because we tknew thn. r iv didn't marter w'hat . ontrbu: ton was made by
Papua / New Guinea either oEf ts own ~: cdgerncus tfnds or through advances
provided by the Commonwealth tha aitt ist t woi: id get benefits many, many,
many times greater than the contribution :! at it would make the initial contribution
it would make to those funds. If you can l at the participation of the World
Bank in the construction and development projects for Papua/ New Guinea you will
know what I mean. Equally am I certain tat not only so far as expertise, but access
to funds is concerned, the Asian Development Bank will turn out to be a very, very
good investment project.
Q. Hugh Armfield Melbourne Age Bearing in mind how you've
handled relations within the Liberal Party, pensioners, Premiers' Conference
and the Queensland Government since becoming Prime Minister, would you regard
this period as one in which your main role has been that of a peacemaker?
PM I know the word I'd like to use, but as you know in a press
gathering you've only got to use one word in humour and it's likely to be taken
seriously and so I refrain from using the word. I wouldn't like to give it any
conceivable sort of title other than to say that I believe it's been in the best
interests of this country. And I hope that during my term of office as the
Prime Minister, whatever I do is not determined by a title, or by any other
grouping of words or phrases, but is determined in the national interest and the
national interest alone.
Q. Bruce Juddery Canberra Times. I've also got a double-pronged
question, Sir. Last January, your , predecessor said in Singapore that within
the next two years the State Governments must legislate to remove all
discriminatory legislation on the aboriginal question or else the Commonwealth
would do so for them. Since then you've apparently made some progress last
week I think it was in Queensland. Sir are you committed to this undertaking
of your predecessor, and more generally what thoughts do you have on the
progress of aboriginals and the Commonwealth's role in seeking that progress?
Secondly, Sir, you have recently removed the Office of Aboriginal Affairs, the
Office of the Environment, various cultural groups you mention from your own
Department where their presence was an earnest of the Prime Minister's personal
commitment and concern for these issues, to another Department whose Head has
got a fairly grandiloquent title but no particular guarantee of access or influence
within the Government. Are you not concerned that some sections of the community
may think you're playing down these relatively minor in absolute terms
but nevertheless emotionally-charged issues?
PM As to the first question there is a great deal of difficulty about
definition. I sometimes feel that the word " discriminatory" is used too freely,
and that what has to be thought of is some sort of means of protection of
certain sections of the aboriginal community. But to come down to the facts of
life, I did obtain from Mr. Wentworth a note as to 11 different areas where he
felt we should try and come to an accommodation with the Queensland Government. / 7 
I went up and I had the most successful discussions with the Premier, with
Mr. Gordon Chalk the Treasurer, and their officials and with Sir Alan Hulme and my
own officials. On 9 of the 11 points that I put to him, they were all agreed to by the
Queensland Premier, and we will have no difficulty about them whatsoever. On the
other two, I believe protective measures may perhaps be taken. If I can just mention
some of them to you. That is people can freely leave the Reserves. Access to the
Reserves will be under the control of the Aboriginal Councils themselves. There
are really a lot of matters of this kind discrimination and a separate Act of
Parliament relating to the Torres Strait Islanders. The only place where there was
an agreement between us that I can regard as of a protective kind was so far as
alcohol is concerned, and there, the proposition was put to me that each of the
Local Councils should have the right to determine whether or not alcohol should be
permitted on the Reserve itself. In other words, not that it should freely come in
but those elected by the members of the mission or the members of the station
should have the right to determine. I felt this was a wise recommendation and one
I immediately agreed to. The second one that caused a little discussion but again
we came to a sensible solution related to control over property. And here it was
felt that if you immediately gave some aboriginals immediate access to considerable
suims of money, that they could be exploited. And consequently it was felt that the
Aboriginal Council itself should have some power of supervision, and that if there
was extreme difficulty relating to exploitation, then the State ( lovernment
Administration itself should have the power to protect the aborigine. The details of
these last two have not been worked out. But I must confess they seem to me to be
sensible propositions and one that when we look at we can consider the details and
I am fairly certain we can come to a happy conclusion about it. So I don't believe
under these circumstances that legislation is necessary or desirable. Nor do I
tjiink for one moment that my predecessor thought that under all circumstances
legislation would be enforced. What he did say, I believe, was that unless our
requirements are met, then we may be compelled to legislate. As our requirements
have in fact been met or are in the process of being met, then I don't think legislation
i s necessary and that consequently I don't think that there'll be any need for me to
introduce it.
Q. Richard Carleton This Day Tonight. The influence Sir of the DLP over a
number of Government decisions in recent years has been quite evident. Bearing
in mind Senator Gair's attitude towards recognition of mainland China, what attempt
do you make to accommodate him before reaching a final decision on Australia's p
position.
PM I think I've said to you that the immediate problem that we face and one that
ought to be solved before we come to grips with the problem of recognition is
admission or the tretention of the position of Taiwan in the United Nations. As the
first part of the question relating to recognition of Peking China is hypothetical and,
in any event, is something that we'd have to deal with not in the immediate future,
I think being hypothetical it's best to be left exactly where it is.
Q. Alan Fitzgerald. Sir your predecessor suggested that he may enfranchise
18-year-olds in Federal Elections. The States of Western Australia and South
Australia have done so, which if you don't act could perhaps lead to a situation in
the next Federal Election where 18-year-olds in two States of the Commonwealth
were voting, and 18-year-olds in the other four and the Commonwealth Territories
weren't. Have you given this your consideration? / 8 
PM I'm glad that you've given me your opinion of the Constitutional
legal position.' I can assure you that there's a wide divergence of views amongst
all those I've consulted, and I'm not happy about any of their opinions, with the
exception of the former Attorney-General and the Present Attorney-General too.
But what I've decided to do, and I've answered a question on this in the House on
at least. one occasion, was to say that I've given assurances to my Party to the
Liberal-Country Parties that before the Government makes up its mind as to
what it will do, that there is to be full and frank discussion of this in the Party
room. That hasn't happened yet.
Q. Bob Baudino Daily Telegraph. This is a supplementary
question. You referred to the opinions of the former Attorney-General and
the present Attorney-General What were those opinions?
PM I'm not prepared -these are Government documents..... I'm
talking about the Constitutional position and this is the position relating to the
interpretation of the Constitution. I'm not talking about the political aspects
of whether or not it should be done. Frankdy at this moment, as I've said, I
think there are divergences of opinion as to what the position is, both in relation
to the House and of the Senate. As they're government documents I've got no
intention of saying what they are.
Q. Maximillian Walsh Financial Review. In your initial speech,
Sir, you said that Australia would do all it could providing the Republic of China
wants to sustain its position in the General Assembly, to make sure it is
sustained there. Do you think that the Republic of China would be happy to have
to sit in the General Assembly with Mainland China?
PM . I couldn't give the answer to that question, nor does anyone other
than Chiang Kai-shek himself nor is any other person than Chiang Kai-shek able
to give an expression of opinion as to what Taiwan Chinai would want.
Q. Barry Wain from the Australian. Mr. Prime Minister, on
Australia's phased withdrawal from Vietnam, for the next round is it militarily
feasible, for one battalion to be withdrawn or would they have to both come out
together?
PM Once upon a time we had only one battalion there and it seemed
to be feasible then. But I don't want under any circumstances to commit
ourselves to the future. Before any further action is taken and as yet I
haven't asked that action be initiated before any action is initiated, we would
want the comments and the recommendations of the Defence Committee and the
Chiefs of Staff Committee. I repeat I haven't asked them to give me an
opinion yet.
Q. Peter Samuel of the Bulletin The question of the role of our
troops in Malaysia. The former Prime Minister seemed to imply that they were
confined in their defence role to the mainland of Malaysia to what he called
Malaya. Is this still Government policy? .000 ./ 9 
I think it was put a little differently. In fact I am sure it was put
a little differently. The word " Malaya" was used and primarily they are there in
order to provide confidence during the period the Malaysians and the Singaporeanc
are building up their armed forces. But as was made clear both by the former
Minister for Defence and the former Minister for External Affairs, that does not
automatically count out a contribution that we could make if we were asked and if
in our wisdom we thought a contribution should in fact be made
outside the mainland....
Outside the mainland.
Max Hawkins again Prime M. inister. I think when on the day that
you were elected Prime Minister you gave a strong indication that your then
thinking was that the present Parliament would run out its full course. Has anything
happened in the last month or so which might have influenced you to change your
mind and perhaps think of an early election?
So much happens every day that I never make up my mind firmly
about any matter until I'm compelled to do so.
Michael Guy Reuters Economic Services. Mr. Anthony recently
said the attitude to China is governed to a large degree by the attitude of the
United States. To what degree do you regard this as governing Australia's
attitude to the Republic? I think I've expressed my views and I believe Government views
a few moments ago when I said that our actions and our policy decisions will
be ietermined by what I and the Government feels is in the best interests of the
Australian people. Now you would have read in today's paper that President
Nixon has somewhat liberalised the approach of the United States to Continental
China. And he had announced shortly after the Nixon Doctrine that certain changes
that were taking place in American policy. I think I can say that in many respects
we are in advance of them, because as I said a few moments ago, we don't place
any obstacle in the road of our own people going to China in the case of trade we
do not unless the goods come themselves within the strategic limitations, or
limitations that are imposed because of military reasons we permit trade to
take place and we buy goods from China. And our ships freely move into Chinese
ports as well. So that, consequently, I think it is difficult to sustain an argument
that we are dependent upon United States' views. Of course we want to co-operate
with them as closely as we can. They are great, and friendly allies, but under
no circumstances do I think that our policies ought to be dictated by what the
United States does, or what the United States might want.
Michael Richardson Melbourne Age. There is a rising tide
of public concern in Australia about the related matters of environmental
pollution and conservation. Do you regard these matters as serious problems
and do you think the Commonwealth is doing enough to help deal with them? 
PM I think I should have answered the question that you asked me a
few moments ago, and thanks for the opportunity of coming back to that part of
his question which I ignored answering. As you know we've already dealt ' with
the question of pollution of the Barrier Reef and the Crown of Thorns Starfish.
You know at the present time there are two committees of the Senate meeting.
I have or Sir Alan Hulme has stated that the Professor who was the Chairman of
the Committee that looked into the Crown of Thorns Starfish has recommended to
me that there should be a general enquiry into pollution of which he would be only
too happy to participate either as a member, or as the chairman. This is a
tremendously important subject and consequently I've placed it, with aboriginals,
as one of the major subjects or jurisdictions that are under the supervision of the
new Minister. I take it extremely seriously. But before we act, I believe we've
got to get the best advice and know exactly where we're going. And I believe that
the report that we received on the Crown of Thorns Starfish indicates quite clearly
that precipitate action can be dangerous. It's best to know the biological and
other reasons before remedial action -is taken. To come back to your question of
aborigines, I can give you an assurance that the Minister who is appointed will be
in the closest contact with me, and I regard it as my personal responsibility
to see that we do everything we can to integrate the Australian aborigine into the
Australian community.
Q. Mr. Fingleton Mr. Prime Minister, should Dr. Patterson go to
Communist China and return with a wheat order, would you see that it was fulfilled?
PM I'm sorry to have to correct you, But I think you know that the
Wheat Board is there as. the Australian Government authority and the representative
Of the Australian wheat-growing interests for the sale of wheat overseas. If he can
go and get a contract where the Australian Wheat Board itself in the last week has
failed, then . his proper course of action is to go to the Chairman of the Wheat Board,
put his proposition there, and see what the price is arid let them make their decision.
I'm one of those who believes that once you've appointed an authority, particularly
one that has been so unbelievably successful in its sale of wheat when other countries
haven't been anywhere near as successful, then you repose you r confidence and
trust in them. I'll leave it to them, because I know they'll do ever so much better
over the long term than Dr. Patterson has any hope of doing.
Q. Prime Minister, you spoke in your opening remarks about the
communications gap. I may be inflicted with one myself in as much as in your
opening remarks you deplored the fact that Mr. Hawke and the Leader of the Labour
Association would be leading the delegation to China on this wheat business...
PM Would what...
Q. Would be leading a delegation... would be going to China in a
delegation on these wheat negotiations. You referred to the fact that Mr. Hawke
and the Leader of the Labour Association would be going....
PM Promoted... Promoted. No " promote". Well if I could correct
this then. If I said " going", my pronounciation was no where near as good as I'd
Q. like it to be. I meant promoting it. 



cOL
FOR PRESS: PNL 4A6Z1971
DEATH OF BRIGADIER SIR FREDERICK GALLEGHAN
Tribute bj the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
It was with regret that I learnt of the death of
Brigadier Sir Frederick Galleghan.
He had a long and distinguished career in both
peace and war. The only Australian citizen soldier to have held a
commission for more than fifty years, he will chiefly be remembered
as the man who led Australia's first action in Malaya during World
War II and later became Australian commander at Changi Prison.
On behalf of the Government, I extend sincere
sympathy to his widow.
CANBERRA, April 1971 



ASSOCIATED CHAMIBERS OF MANUFACTURES OF AUSTRALIA
PRESIDENTS' LUNCHEON
PARKROYAL MOTOR INN, CANBERRA 21 APRIL 1971
 pieech by the-Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen
Now, I am not one of those who believe that we should take too unhappy a
view of our future. But I do want to emphasise, and I keep on emphasising it as
often as I can, that the major difficulty that we face today is inflation, and that we
have to keep the forces of inflation whether they are the cost-push type
or demand type we must keep both of them, not only under constant review, but
I think we also have to keep them under constant control.
Well, what then about the economy?
As I see it, we have some difficult areas. It is not the consumption area, it
is not our balance of payments. It isn't in terms of liquidity because in the last few
days, as we forecast in a recent " No Confidence" motion we forecast then that we
would Improve the liquidity position of the banks, not so that they could expand
activities but so that the activities of industry would not be reduced.
In other words, we have a feeling that while we have inflation, we don't want
to strangle the economy in the process of trying to find a cure, but we want to
gradually try and bring inflation under control. While at the same time to permit
expansion of the kind that we want round about 5-1% per annum to keep on going
and to permit us the increased production out of which better standards of living
can be sustained. So we are not worried about every section of the economy. We can identify
three or four problems. The first one is, of course, in capital investment in plant
and equipment and we have taken what we regard, at least for the time being,:. the
necessary precautions here.
The second one and it doesn't really affect you people to a great ext ent
is in commercial and industrial buildings. And here even in the last few days, I have
been advised by the constructing people that they will be able to come to grips with
their own problem because they are probabl,. over-built, particularly in office
capacity which is now too great the rents are falling and there is an automatic
reaction and consequently Government Intervention isn't justified. / 2 
But the real problems that we face, and these are two that I want to emphasise
to you are Government expenditure Commonwealth and States. What we are doing
is preparing the way now for the next Budget, and second what we have to look at' is
the wage increase or the increases in average incomes or average earnings. Because
we believe, and I am sure that this is true, that if it had not been for the 6 per. cent
increase in the national wage case, we wouldn't have had any serious problems to
face at all. In otherwords, we could have looked somewhat benignly at the
development of the economy and we wouldn't have been looking to the next Budget to
ask ourselves the question " How do we keep back demand inflation and how do we
ensure, not only in terms of our international trade in commodities and in processed
materials, but also so far as our primary industries, how do we stop them getting
involved any more heavily in the cost and price squeeze?"
So these are the real difficulties. I want to emphasise to you that we must,
and you must, keep inflationary pressures under control. And I hope that you don't
think that because of some chaniges that we have made in the last few weeks there
can be any lessening of the activities of the businessman to see that his costs keep
within acceptable limits and that where you have the capacity and I know that in
all cases you haven't got the capacity but where you have the capacity, you do keep
your costs from rising.
Wages, particularly arbitration and over-award wages, are, I believe somethings
that are extremely difficult to handle, and we and you must be active before
the Arbitration Commission and in other sources to see that wages are kept within
reasonable limits.
Now, I suppose it can be argued that because there was a fall in the consumer
index from 1. 9 per cent in the last quarter, the quarter before last, of 1. 1 per cent,
there might be some easing. And you could be fortified in this opinion, too, if
you felt that there was some almost imperceptible easing in the labour situation in
the past few months. But I want to assure you that whilst there was this almost
imperceptible change, it is so small, and against the context of very heavy pressures,
that we don't think we can ease up in our control of inflationary forces at all.
I think some people might perhaps say, " Well you eased up. You gave the
pensioners, in the case of the married couple a $ 1 increase; in the case of the
single person, 50 cents.
I have to answer that by saying I could never see for one moment that the
pensioner, the people on the maximum rate pension, ought to pay the penalty because
wages are rising somewhere else. Consequently, I would have regarded as the
strongest of strong moral obligations that these people should receive help.
Equally, too, with the States, I am a little baffled by the opinion that is being
expressed that it could be inflationary. We don't think it can be and the highest
technical authorities that advise me don't think it has got any substantial influence
at all, because what we have done is to reduce our surplus in our internal accounts
and to reduce the deficit that exists due to the funding operations of the States in
their accounts. 
And if it might be that the banks do-get an increase in liquidity, we offset
that because as I said a few moments ago, when we were discussing the " No
Confidence" motion on the Budget, we anticipated that there would be an increase
in liquidity in the June quarter and we have only increased the liquidity by half the
amount we intended prior to the time when we gave the States the extra $ 48 million,
$ 43 of which was to reduce their own funded deficits.
So similarly you find that the technical experts who are advising me are
giving me the kind of advice that I believe is not only in one. case morally right;
in the other I believe creates a position so tha' the States themselves will be able
to face their 71/ 72 Budget on a much more sensible basis than before.
What we are doing is to help those that need help not to slow down the economy
because economic growth is of critical importance to us and then to see that
whatever remedial measures that we take outside the wages system are spread over
as wide an area as is possible.
I know that I have given you this information and I have done so very very
quickly, but in a speech like this you honestly don't get the opportunity to set out
in detail what you are thinking or what the path ahead might lead to.
The second point that I want to mention to you, and I think it proper that I
should do this, is to say something to you about tariffs. I want to emphasise to you
as one who has been on the relevant Tariff Committee of the Cabinet for more years
than anyone else, and as one who has read, I believe, very nearly every tariff
report that has been presented to us over the course of the last fifteen years, that
I am not one who speaks to you I can't speak to you as a technical expert but I
do speak to you as one who is fairly well informed about the tariff mechanism of his
country. Not like Alan Westerman, who was one of the great members they had on
the Tariff Board, but at least I can speak with a considerable degree of Ministerial
authority. What I want to emphasise to you is this. First, we ourselves as a Government
no matter what might have been said in critical quarters in the last year or so, will
maintain control of the' tariff mechanism itself. -And we will maintain control of the
final decisions that-v-e muade because whilst the Tariff Board itself can make
recom mend ations', it is we alone who can make the actual decisions themselves.
Andi I say that we -will give it special attention.
I have established a tariff committee . of the Government. Now it is a pretty
high-powered one, with people who will be able to read the reports, and who go into
the Cabinet Committee with the advice of their own Departmental officials. And
what I can assure you about is not only will we take into consideration the social
consequences of action, but we know that if we are to grow and particularly ensure
that productivity has to improve, then it is up to us to ensure that manufacturing / 4 
~ 4.
industries not only remain competitivebu -he ideals of being economic and efficient
will be one of the bases on which we will make up our.. minds-on-what should be done.
The point I want to make to you is this :-of course tn the interests of this
c ountry we have to regard the manufacturing industry as a tremendously important
section of the community and the one where we have got to get productivity increases
if we are to be able to sustain increasing wages and increasing standards of living.
Our Chairman a few moments ago, did ask me a question relating to meetings
with manufacturing industry and other groups of industry as well. The opportunities
will be there for you to present your views to us. We will change the procl-2Iure
considerably on this occasion.
After discussion with the various authorities the manufacturers, the
primary producers, the construction experts, the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council, the Export Development Council and others I am fairly certain that you
will find that on the n ext occasion before the Budget discussions commence, we will
arrange, on a much more individual basis say with the manufacturers alone or
with their associated industries we will arrange for discussions vi th them.
Secondly, we will give you much more time. It won't be a question of coming
there and reading out a document with us scratching our heads and wondering what it
is all about and seeing a bewildered look on Harold Herford's face.
We will give you plenty of opportunity to present your views. Ard what is
much more important, I hope that we will be able to cross-examine you and find out
what the manufacturing industries are thinking, and what they think can be don~ e in
the best interests of their own industries and through supporting their own industries,
the best interests of the Australian community.
So you have the chance. I think we will only meet once a year from now on, but
at least the time available will, I hope, be at least as good as you would have-on the.
two meetings that you would have throughout the year.
This I think will bring us together. You know our problems. We will know
yours, but above all, I believe we will be working in the interests of the Australian
community and we will be working in the interests of trying to push up productivity.
And could I point out this to you about.... because I had mentioned the
industrial position and I have now brought in this question of tariffs and of your
own industries. Within the course of the last few days I have been looking at the
wage rises that have occurred in Japan and of the productivity increases that have
occurred. What has surprised me because I have so frequently put the argument
that whenever increases in wages grow faster than increases in productivity,
then of necessity you get an inbuilt inflationary pressure.
And I have said over and over again that I think according to that single
factor alone, we have got an inbuilt inflationary pressure of something of the
order of 5 per cent. I don't mention the exact figure because I believe it possibly is
a little stronger than that. But of all the indexes that we take, particularly what
is called the Paasche index, it is obvious that on discounted gross national production
figures, that there is an inbuilt rate of inflation of at least 5 per cent. 0. 
But nonetheless the argument that I want to put to you is this can be conquered
if we get productivity high.
The Japanese wage increases are about 10 per cent per annum much bigger
than ours but because they have a productivity increase in excess of 11 probably
in some years a little higher than that, they are able to absorb them and that is
why in international company, they are able to better than compete with other
countries in the world.
We are not in that position because in the case of our primary industriet,
our rural industries they can't have productivity increases of that kind, but ever.
if they did, the international level of commodities prices spread over a wide area
isn't sufficiently great to permit them to take the increase in costs.
Now the only other point that I would like to make to you is this. I haven't
had the opportunity to come and talk to you as much as I did in other years, and to
get the benefit of the advice that you were able to give.
I can assure you that in the days when I did have the opportunity to talk to
the manufacturers, I was probably as well versed and as well informed on
manufacturing problems, and consequently of the problems of the w~ iole economy
as any other person in Cabinet.
I want to assure you, and particularly you Mrl. Chairman and those of my
friends that I have just spoken to, that my door is usually open.
I welcome opportunities to talk to you. I don't welcome them to talk to you
as I mentioned a few moments ago on a personal basis. But I do welcome them
because I know that if we can co-operate, you and I I representing the Government
and my colleagues and you representing great industries that are increa singly
making this country powerful and great. Permitting us, too, to compete in
international trade and to do so successfully, permitting us to grow at a rate of
gross national production in real terms of 5-f per cent. Believe you me, if we can
co-operate together with the mining and the other industries we can make
our contribution to greater productivity, then I won't be so worried about inflation.
The day hasn't come yet, but if we can co-operate, we can make a lasting
contribution to the increasing greatness of this greatest of all countries. 



ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS POLICY
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
The Rt Hon. William McMahon
TO THE CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE
MINISTERS RESPONSIBLE FOR ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
AT CAIRNS
23 April1971
I am sorry not to be able today to meet the Ministers responsible for
Aboriginal affairs throughout Australia. It is, however, appropriate that I
should take this opportunity early in the life of my Government to declare
the profound concern I and my Government have for the advancement of
Aboriginal Australians and our determination to move steadily and firmly
towards the solution of the many problems which confront us in achieving
it. At the same time I would like to give a brief outline of some of the principles
underlying our policies and our administration of them.
I believe that the problems of racial differences and the evils of poverty,
ignorance, prejudice and discrimination which so often go with them are
among the most urgent and most difficult in the world today. At a time.
when the moral indignation of the world is directed at these evils it is important
for our own sense of humanity and for our relations with the rest of the
world that our determination to deal effectively with them in our own
society should not be in doubt. While we intend to proceed with discretion
and care, we will not allow prejudice or temporary financial difficulties to
stand in the way of more effective action to deal with these intensely human
problems. Let me say a little about fundamental objectives. I do not like attempts to
embody complex policies in single words like assimilation or integration,
capable as they are of varied interpretations and acquiring often irrational
associations. We believe that Aboriginal Australians should be assisted as
individuals and, if they wish, as groups to hold effective and respected places
within one Australian society with equal access to the rights and opportunities
it provides and accepting responsibilities towards it. At the same time 
they should be encouraged and assisted to preserve and develop their culture
their languages, traditions and arts so that these can become living elements
in the diverse culture of the Australian society. My Government's policy will
be directed to these ends.
I welcome this meeting especially as a symbol of our genuinely federal
approach to this problem. Aboriginal affairs is not a single functional responsibility
like most other portfolios. It is a general care for the whole welfare of
a minority people with a variety of special problems. Housing, education,
health, employment, economic opportunity, civil liberties the foundations
of community advancement are in their general aspects the responsibility
of a number of Ministers and their Departments, sometimes in a State and
sometimes in the Commonwealth. Aboriginal advancement must be built
upon the same foundations. Hence I believe that, to the extent practicable,
we should move towards devolving upon individual Ministers and their Departments
the administration of those aspects of policies for Aboriginal advancement
for which they are responsible for the rest of the community.
It will, as I see it, be the function of Ministers responsible for Aboriginal
affairs, with the active interest of the Prime Minister, and in the States, I
hope, the Premier, to develop policy, to co-ordinate different components of
it, and to check up on its balance and effectiveness. Since responsibility for
many of these components of policy lies in the State sphere we look to you
to participate fully and to give to policies and administration a genuinely
local quality and flavour. You may rely upon the genuine co-operation of
my Government in your efforts.
In my own Government I intend that the Minister responsible for Aboriginal
affairs will have my strong personal interest and support. It will be his
task to work out, in collaboration with his colleagues in functional departments
and with the Minister for the Interior, policies to meet the special
needs and problems of Aborigines.
For this purpose I shall establish a special Ministerial Committee presided
over by the Minister. He will, with the aid of this Committee, be concerned
to present these various policies as a coherent whole and to ensure their
effective balance and co-ordination.
In this work the Minister and the Ministerial Committee will be advised by
the Council and Office of Aboriginal Affairs whose functions and powers I
am taking steps to clarify and re-state. The close liaison which has developed
between the Council and Office and their opposite numbers in the States
will, I hope, be strengthened even further. 
I have asked the Council, in consultation with appropriate Commonwealth
and State Departments and authorities, to review urgently existing Commonwealth
programmes for the advancement of Aboriginal citizens and to advise
me through the Minister on a programme of action which can be put into
effect progressively. This programme will build on the special welfare activities
designed to improve the health, housing, education and vocational
training of Aborigines now being carried out with Commonwealth financial
support primarily through the States.
The programme will be concerned to increase the economic strength and
independence of Aborigines by widening their employment opportunities and
by assisting them into potentially successful enterprises both as individuals
and as communities. Attention will be devoted to the search for opportunities
for Aborigines in areas with which they have traditional links. For instance
we hope, with the collaboration between the Commonwealth and the States,
to find opportunities for them in conservation-type enterprises and activities
which may include forestry, flood mitigation, rehabilitation of the natural
environment and the development of national parks with special Aboriginal
interests. But in parallel with these efforts we will try, by training, accommodation
and placement, to assist those willing to move to areas and centres of
greater opportunity.
Consideration will be given to an appropriate policy for Aborigines and
the land, ensuring to continuing Aboriginal groups effective access to land for
recreational and ceremonial purposes as well as for the development of enterprises.
I am happy to inform Ministers that discussions with the States, following
the agreement reached at this conference a year ago to examine remaining
legislation which appears to discriminate against Aborigines, have proceeded
amicably and promise well for a successful outcome. Thereafter it will be our
task, with, I believe, the support of the great mass of the Australian people,
to move towards the complete enjoyment of normal civil liberties by Aborigines
generally.
We believe that this will not wholly be achieved until Aboriginal citizens
are given the-fullest opportunity to demonstrate the richness of their own
cultural life and its potential as a component in our general diverse culture.
Consequently we intend to assist Aborigines to protect and develop their
own languages, arts, traditions and general culture and to help educate the
community generally to understand, respect and enjoy the contribution
Aborigines can make to the richness and diversity of our national life. 
Finally we believe that Aborigines must be helped to take an increasing
part in the management of their own affairs. We welcome the moves that have
been taken to develop State, regional and local councils and other representative
and consultative bodies in Aboriginal communities and hope that this
programme can be stimulated. There is scope for programmes of consultation
with Aboriginal groups to be further developed and in particular for types of
organizations to be studied which may build up decision making and action
by Aborigines themselves. Interesting experiments are in process with organizations
in community development and group economic enterprises. We will
encourage and help their further progress.
My Government recognises that much has already been achieved in health,
education, housing, vocational training, placement in employment and in
economic development. However it sees continued and substantial progress
in Aboriginal affairs as the test of our community's determination to end
racial discrimination in our midst and to deal with Aboriginal Australians
with respect, justice, humanity and compassion. If existing programmes can
be built upon effectively on the lines I have described I believe we can achieve
a break-through to a new level of performance. I welcome your collaboration
in proving that we can measure up to this test in the eyes of the world and to
the satisfaction of our own conscience.
I wish you well in your deliberations. 



PARLLAMEhTT'ARY LUNCHEON R4 HONGUR OF THE
KING AND QUEEN OF N, EPAL
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 23 APRIL 1971
 peechby the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Your Maje.; ties, Members of the Diplomatic Corps, Ladies and Gentlemen
Sir, this is the first time a reigning monarch from Nepal has come to Australia,
arid the first time that a reigning monarch from Nepal has been in the Parliament House
of the Commonwealth. We welcome you and we welcome your wife.
Sir, you should know that there has been a long association in one way or
another between the Nepalese people and ourselves. Many of us here today, if not all of
us, remember the fact that at Gallipoli, Gurkha troops shared the responsibility with our
own Fourth Brigade under General Monash. We can never forget their braveness. We
can never forget the assistance they gave us under the most troubled and difficult
conditions. And I well remember on many occasions, listening to a former Governor-
General of ours, Viscount Slim, when he continually referred to the tract that he liked
talking to the Gurkhas. He liked talking to your own people, and above all, he liked their
steadfastness under action, under active service conditions, and how much he liked them
fighting because he knew they would never fail.
But there are other reasons, too, Sir, why we have got reasons for happin ess.
Our own Colombo Plan was, in the days when I was Foreign Minister and that was
only a few weeks ago was, I believe, a little out of proportion to the vote that we gave
to other countries. I hope it hasn't changed, but if I find it has, or there is a likelihood
of change, I can assure you I will be the first one reminding my c&amp; gethe Treasurer.
Now, Sir, we have a Colombo Plan, as you know, and we have already had
something of the order of 90 of your young students come here. We welcome them, and
we hope that more will come in the days to come. I can't say that we will bu-ild up the
programme because it is a difficulty for you just as much as it is for us. But we do like
them. We regard them as people who are adaptable, people who are fitting into the
educational system of this country and I hope they go back much better trained and able
to play their part in the future of your country.
And, too, Sir, we have these problems of tourism. Yours is a magnificent
country, of grandeur and of plains of the ranges and the mountains and the plains.
Providentially, nature built the ranges on the North and the plains on the South. And I
think, Sir, it has been a protection to you and it will, I believe, in time be a protection
to others. But I am sure what we can do is to build up our tourism. At least I know that
in the case of my own two children, not only do they know of Everest and of the exploits
of Hillary and of Sherpa Tensing, but they also, Sir, would like to come and find the
Abominable Snowman, if they could, even if they have to beseech your help, as probably
the best guide there is in Nepal, in order to try and find him. a. / 2 
Then Sir, may I turn to you as a person and as a reigning constitutional monarch.
I have looked with awe, Sir, at all the portfolios that you have held. Roughly, I have
held about fourteen, one way or the other, but I believe, Sir, as I looked at the record,
you have held ever so many more than I have. And you have been there less time than
I have. I wonder how you fit into them the Treasurer, as well as the Chief
Administrator, as well as the Head of your National Development Corporation, and I
believe one or two other portfolios which for the moment the names evade me.
But, Sir, if I can look at what you have done the World Health Organisation,
in education for the young people and the people of the universities and the colleges, in
looking after the women and children. I think, Sir, that you have given the kind of
leadership that any country in the world, including our own, would be proud of.
And besides that, I was asked today by one of my officials, if I would care to
recite " The Man From Snowy River". Naturally it caught me a little by surprise because
it is so long since I have heard it. And when they asked me to do it, I couldn't
remember the opening bars. But I was told, Sir, that if I did ring you, Sir, as a. poet
in your own right, you who know the ranges and the mountains so well, would have
responded. And I perhaps, Sir, might have been a little flabbergasted and certainly
would have been put in the shade with the eloquence of your speech.
But, Sir, may I now turn to your Constitutional activities as the reigning
monarch, Head of State and Head of Government together. Sir, if I can refer to three
areas in which you have taken a part.
First of all, I want to refer to your activities in what we call the Panchayat
System of government, which commences right at the grass roots, and goes through
local government and other organisation working up to the central government under
yourself, both as Prime Minister and Head of State. Sir, we hope that this scheme
is successful, drawing the people into the government at the lower levels, giving them
the opportunity to participate, and in time strengthening the very fabric of government
in your own country.
But there are two other reforms that I believe will meet with the warmest
of warm approval by Members of Parliament and of the Australian people. The first
one is your adoption of the rule of law the application of law to everyone, no matter
who they might be and without any kind of discrimination, fairly and judiciously and
making sure that every single person in the community has the protection of an
independent judiciary. Secondly, the programme of " Back to the Village", designed
to ensure that the leadership shall come from you down to the paeons and the people and
back from the paeons and the people to the government itself, in combination working
in the interests of your own country.
Sir, naturally enough, we want each of these programmes to be successful
and we feel reasonably confident that under your direction and leadership that they will
be. In the international field that I have recently vacated, as I said a few moments
ago, I knew that on the last occasion I was at the United Nations the 25th anniversary
celebrations you were there too. Equally, too, can I say that the year before, whilst
I wasn't there, I knew that you were there, and that you played your part as the
leader of your own delegation and you certainly took a prominent part in the Economic
and Social Council. / 3 
Internationally, too, with the non-aligned countries, you have taken a very
prominent part. First of all in Belgrade and later on in Lusaka. And we, Sir, again
if I can repeat these words, welcome the part that you played to try and mould this'
th~ ird force together. To be a force that can make a contribution, and in time a bigger
contribution, to try and ensure that there is a better balance of forces in the world"'
4nd consequently a greater prospect for peace, a greater prospect of success for the
things that we hold dear in your and in our time.
And, finally, Sir, may I say something to you about the grace and charm of
your wife. She, too, complements in very nearly every way your own activities. 7 with
the young women, with the children, with health and educational organisations, in
the. arts and in culture, and too, in conservation measures. We welcome you, Your
Maiesty, along with your husband, and we do hope that in the days to come, in reven
days that you are with us, they will be days of unequalled joy for both His Majesty
and for yourself. Now His Majesty himself. I first of all should say this to you as a maiter of
fact. Normally a reigning monarch under circumstances like this doesn't make a
speech. But the mood has caught him not while he was sitting here in Parliament
House, for which he would have been forgiven, but on the way here. Without urging
but voluntarily of his own free will, he has decided he would like to say a few words
to you in Nepalese, but translated by his Foreign Minister. I wanted you to know this
before I called upon the Leader of the Opposition to support the Toast.
But, Sir, I want to assure you before I sit down that we, the representatives
of the Australian people welcome you. We know that the Australian people Mvuld
welcome you too if they were given the chance. Thank you for coming. We will
always welcome you back again. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 48/ 1971
DEATH OF SIR RODERICK MILLER
Statement by _ the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
It is with regret that I learnt of the death of
Sir Roderick Miller. Chairman and Managing Director of
R. W. Miller ( Holdings) Limited, Sir Roderick was one
of Australia's leading businessmen.
Amongst other achievements Sir Roderick
Miller was instrumental in revolutionising the handling
of oil in the Australian coastal shipping trade.
He was an outstanding Australian.
Sir Roderick, a New South Wales rugby
union representative, was a personal friend of mine.
I extend my sincere sympathy to his widow.
CANBERRA 27 April 1971 



PRIME MINISTER
OFFICIAL OPENING OF " CONSTRUCTION HOUSE
CANBERRA 27 APRIL 1971
Speech by the Prime Minister,. The Rt lHon. William Mc~ ahon, M. P.
I would also like to thank Mr. Williams and Mr. Box on your
behalf, and on behalf of myj wife and myself as well, for inviting
us today. It is most appropriate that the building and construction
industry should decide to build this magnificent national headquarters
building in Canberra. It's hard to imagine a more apt way
for the industry to display its presence in the national capital.
This city which is as much a tribute to the construction industry
asit is ' oour own planners, architects and engineers. There are
three industry organisation partners here in Construction House.
Firstly, the Master Builders' Federation of Australia which is well
known and respected in Canberra. It has been submitting the views of
the industry to the Federal Government on a wide number of matters
of industry concern for a long time. And last year, my Government
was pleased to co-operate with your industry in sending an official
survey mission to South East Asia to help Australian contractors try
to win competitive contracts in that developing region.
During the last three or four years, Australian consultanfts
have been successful throughout the South East Asian region. It
would be natural for Australian building and construction companies
to be looking for a similar trend in the export of their skills.
This region is virtually on Australia's doorstep, and it is one
where Australian building could make an important contribution in
applying the world standard of competence it has reached.
I will be visiting Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore myself
soon, and my Government attaches very great importance t-o our
relations with these closc neighbours to our north whether in
defence, in aid and development pr. ogrammes in cultural relations,
or in the growth of trade. We would like nothing be~ tter than to see
private enterprise doing more in backing up and developing the
Government's efforts to stranqthen our ties with these nations.
0 I A 17 
The Australian Institute of Building is a newcomer to
Canberra. But its vital role in establishing and maintaining
standards is well known in the building industry. The third
member of the triumvrirate occupying this building, the Master
Builders' Association of the A. C. T. deals with the day-to-day
industry problems in Australia's fastest growing city. And it
does that well, as the evidence of our eyes shows.
In a short ten years, building in Australia has grown from
a modest to a very large industry. It is now an industry which
helps significantly in setting this nation's growth pattern. And
much of the credit for Australia's development in the past twenty
years must go to it. its influence in Australia's growth,
development and standard of living are, of course, visible everywhere.
Let me elaborate Investment in physical capital is one
of the mainsprings of economic progress: It has rnThyed a key role
in Australia's strong rate of economic and population growth.
The building and construction industry is responsible fbr
something over half of total fixed investment and about 14 per cent
of gross national expenditure in Australia: But its importance
does not end there. Through its demands for materials the industry
affects output and investment throughout many sect6rs of manufactu-'
ring industry. It is also a very large emnloyer of 430,000 people,
or 9 per cent of the national workforce, according to the last
census. But if you take account of related industries, building
and construction could be said to be responsible for employing
about 15 per cent of the workforce; you have rapid growth as well.
In those ten years, total spending on building and
construction has gone up by about 140 per cent. That compares with
an increase of 12o% in gross national spending generally, because
your industry is such a mass user of scarce resources, i-t has an
important responsibility to make a maximum contribution to growth
by making the best and most efficient possible use of those
resources thus both your industry and our own economic policymakers
have a strong interest in the soundly-based growth of
building and construction activity.
Continuity in building and construction operation raises
productivity, encourages technological innovation and facilitates
longer-term planning. Stability in your industry makes it easier
for us to maintain stable growth and full employment in the
economy as a whole. That's why we are very pleased to see the
development of, and increasing professionalism in organisations
like the Master Builders' Federation..
The Federation and its affiliated bodies have also found
themselves increasingly involved in industrial relations, and
Master Builders' Associations have recently featured prominently
in major industrial disputes in the industry. I can recall some
recent disputes in New South Wales which have proved very costly
both to employers and individual employees, One particular
building union resorted to the use of physical violence and
caused damage to property in pursuing its demands. ./ 3 
But I am confident that under the guidance and co-ordination
of your Federal organisation now established in Canberra, industrial
relations in the building industry will bring increased employeremployee
harmony. I would not want to leave such a distinguished
audience as you are without some comments on how we in the Federal
Government see our role in relation to your industry, particularly
in relation to housing.
It has become almost a cliche of the political scene that in
Australia we enjoy the highest level of home ownership in the world
and one of the highest rates of housing construction. But no matter
how well accepted and commonplace those statements may seem to some
observers, they show a solid record of achievement against which
current problems and criticism must beweighed. There will always be
problems to be overcome. But we are not resting on our record in
this vital area of housing which is so closely identified with the
everyday life and aspirations of Australians. On the contrary,
we are carrying on and improving the record of successive Liberal/
Country Party Governments, in the increasing involvement of the
Commonwealth in housing.
Housing is one of the few portfolios that I have not held
during my ministerial career and that's mainly because it was
established in comparatively recent years. I seem to have had my
chance in just about all the others. The total is thirteen portfolios,
they tell me. Our position as a Government with respect to
housing is that we believe every Australian family should be well
housed and housed in a fashion of its own choice. We recognise
that Government assistance is necessary to achieve this aim. But
we believe such assistance should be implemented in a co-operative
rather than in a domineering and bureaucratic way.
We take the approach that we can co-operative successfully
with private enterprise, and this new building and this national
capital are testimony to the success of that approach. We also
believe we should co-operate with the state Governments in helping
them to fulfill the housing needs of the people as speedily as
practicable. More recently, we have taken a number of decisions in the
housing area. For example, last December we made new arrangements
for Commonwealth financial assistance to the states for housing.
As a direct result ther ' have been substantial reductions in the
interest rates charged by all state authorities. They represent
the greatest reduction in housing interest rates in a quarter of
a century. The interest charged on dwellings sold by the state
housing authorities and financed by co-operative societies have
been reduced substantially, and the benefits of these reductions are
being passed on to home buyers. We have also relieved the States of
the need to provide housing for members of the armed forces. This
has released additional funds for civilian and welfare housing.
We are also paying the States $ 1.25 million a year for the
next five years towards rental reductions for the really needy. / 4 
Since the last Budget, the maximum advance under the war
service homes scheme has been increased by $ 1,000, and interest
charged by our housing loans insurance corporation has been reduced.
At the Premiers' Conference in February, we provided additional funds
for state works, and a number of states have stimulated their home
building programmes as a result.
These are all decisions taken to assist housing, but another
problem the industry faces is the rising costs of land. This
problem can only be solved by co-operation b tween all levels of
Government and private enterprise.
As for the future. You can be. assured that we will. o. continue
to improve and update Government asistance in the housing area, as
we have dcne in the past: We are proud of our record. But we
acknowledge that there are still many policy aspects of housing
which we should be looking at. Having said that I want to thank
you again for inviting us here today, and I have much pleasure in
declaring construction house officially 6pen. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
TheRt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
ON
MINISTERS OF STATE BILL 1971
Second Reading
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 29 April 1971]
MINISTERS OF STATE BILL 1971
Bill presented by Mr McMahon, and
read a first time. Second Reading
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
( 2.15)-l move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to obtain parliamentary
authority to increase the number
of Ministers by 1. Section 65 of the Constitution,
coupled with section 51, placitumn
36, gives' to the Parliament, and to it
alone, authority to vary the number of
Ministers bf State. The additional Minister,
which it is the purpose of the Ministers of
State Bill to provide, will bring the number
of Ministers of State approved by Parliament
to 27. * Clause 4 of the Bill provides
for payment at the rate applicable to
Ministers not in the Cabinet.
Three major considerations have led me
to propose an increase in the number.
Firstly, I want to allocate to a separate
portfolio some important matters which
could only otherwise be handled by a
senior Minister by adding unduly to the
responsibilities now imposed upon him. I
am thinking particularly of the discharge
of Commonwealth responsibilities in the
fields of Aboriginal Affairs, the Arts and
the Environment. Secondly, there are
administrative advantages in placing with a
single new Minister and Department a
11948/ 71 group of specialised general service functions
which have hitherto been attached to
a number of departments. Thirdly, and in
association with the creation of the new
Department of the Prime Minister * and
Cabinet, ' the additional Minister and
Department will permit the Prime Minister
to discharge more effectively * his main
functions, which are leadership of the
Government'' and administration of the
Cabinet system.
Before discussing these ma * tters further,
I think it will assist honourable members if
I list the functions which at . this stage will
be under the administration of the new
Minister. These are:
1. Aboriginal affairs, including responsibility
for the Council for Aboriginal
Affairs and the Australian Institute of
Aboriginal Studies.
2. Activities relating to the environment,
including icesponsibility for the Office of
the Environment.
3. Activities relating to the arts and letters,
including responsibility for-
Australian Council for the Arts
Australian National Gallery
Commonwealth Art Advisory Board
Historic Memorials Committee
Commonwealth Literary Fund
Commonwealth Assistance to Australian
Composers Advisory Board
4. National Library of Australia.
5. Commonwealth Archives Office. 
6. Australian War Memorial.
7. Anzac Agency, Commonwealth War
Graves Commission.
8. Activities relating to the production
of Australian films, including responsibility
for the Australian Film Development Corporation
and the National Film and Television
Training School.
9. Grants to national organisations
World expositions.
11. National Radiation Advisory Committee.
12. Certain general service functions,
including responsibility for-
Australian Government Publishing
Service Government Printing Office
Commonwealth Advertising Division
Commonwealth Stores Supply
and Tender Board
I have decided that, in addition to these
functions, administration of Commonwealth
activities in the rapidly developing
and increasingly important field of tourism,
including the activities of the Tourist Commission,
should be placed with the new
Minister. Overall policy on matters relating
to tourism will remain, as at present, with
the Minister for Trade and Industry.
For the past 3 years, as honourable
members know, Senator Wright has been
the Minister responsible for tourism under
the Minister for Trade and Industry. He
held thisi portfolio in addition to his other
principal duties as Minister for Works. I
take this opportunity to acknowledge the
fine service he has given to the development
of tourism during his term of office.
He has been energetic, enthusiastic and
effective in helping to create a new awareness
in Australia. of the value of tourism
and the great opportunities for its development
on a national scale.
Following a review by the departments
concerned, we have also decided to establish
an Overseas Property Bureau. The
Bureau will be a specialist agency charged
with a functional responsibility for the provision,
management and maintenance of
overseas land and property for Commonwealth
. purposes. It will not detract from
the responsibilities of other departments or
Heads of Mission for the effective operation
of overseas posts and will be assisted by an Advisory Overseas Property Committee
composed of senior representatives
of those departments. The operations of
the Bureau will help departments and
Heads of Mission to concentrate on their
principal task of representation. Administration
of the Bureau will be placed within
the new Department, as an additional general
service function for which the Minister
will assume responsibility.
The administration of Aboriginal affairs
and of Commonwealth functions in the
fields of the arts and the environment are
among those to be transferred to the new
Minister. It is the Government's view that
it is now appropriate to separate these 3
functions from the Prime Minister's own
administration. As Prime Minister, I will
continue to have a deep interest in them.
But it is not necessary, for that purpose,
that I remain the responsible Minister. I
now mention briefly each of these 3 functions
because of their importance in the
new Ministry.
The effect of the successful referendum
in 1967 was to give the Commonwealth
Parliament power to make laws in relation
to the Aboriginals, as it already could for
the people of any other race. Following
the overwhelming vote of the people the
then Prime Minister, Mr Holt, judged that
initially the administration by the Commonwealth
of Aboriginal Affairs should be
within the Prime Minister's responsibility.
A Council for Aboriginal Affairs was
established and a Minister, though necessarily
occupying another portfolio, was
appointed Minister in Charge of Aboriginal
Affairs under the Prime Minister. It now
seems opportune to entrust this important
responsibility to the new Minister, as one,
of his major functions.
As the welfare and development of
Aboriginals affect more than one department,
a ministerial committee will
be appointed to study the special needs
and problems of Aboriginals -and to
advise ways of improving them. In
this connection, I invite the attention
of the House to the statement on Aborignal
Affairs which the Minister for
Social Services ( Mr Wentworth) read on
my behalf at a recent meeting in Cairns of
the Australian Aboriginal Affairs Council,
which is composed of Commonwealth and
State Ministers responsible for Aboriginal 
affairs. Furthermore, I want to acknowledge
the energy and application of my colleague,
the Minister for Social Services and
the high worth of his contributions in his
role as Minister-in-Charge of Aboriginal
Affairs over the last 3 years. He has established
the portfolio for the Commonwealth
and has contributed in large measure to
the advancement of Australian Aboriginals.
The Government will, of course, continue
to get his counsel in Aboriginal matters
and he will be a member of the ministerial
committee which was referred to in the
statement made by him ori my behalf last
week at the Cairns conference of Ministers
responsible for Aboriginal affairs.
In the field of the arts, the Commonwealth
is becoming increasingly involved
and is giving assistance in a wide variety
of forms. I have no doubt that this is
widely welcomed. We ought to continue to
develop in this field and we will. But the
increasing variety of Commonwealth involvement
again suggests that the time has
arrived where the functions can be transferred
to a new Minister. In addition to
responsibility for the Council for the Arts,
the new Minister will be responsible for
the National Library, for the Australian
National Gallery, and for assistance to
Australian authors and composers. All
these are related functions and can usefully
be put in the charge of the one Minister.
Then there is what has come to be
called ' the environment'. An office to bring
together and generally to superintend the
Commonwealth's work and responsibilities
in the environmental field is a new initiative,
and an important one. Commonwealth
activities in this field are beginning
to gather momentum, and will need the
attention of a Minister. Responsibility for
them, too, may now with advantage be
moved to the new Minister. Putting th ese
proposals* in another way, the Commonwealth
initiatives in Aboriginal affairs and
the arts have now achieved a status and a
level of activity that require separate
administration. It has seemed desirable at
the same time to add what will be a
rapidly developing role in relation to the
environment. The second main reason for creating the
new portfolio is that there is a range of
what might be termed ' general service' activities which are at present allocated
among various departments. In each case
the activities are not directly related to the
primary purpose of those departments, but
they have an important contribution to
make to the effective functioning of the
administration as a whole. Examples are
the activities comprehended within the
Australian Government Publishing Service,
the Commonwealth Archives Office, preparation
for world expositions and the new
Overseas Property Bureau. Each of these
functions involves the provision of services
in important areas for all or a number of
departments. The Government believes that
locating them in the one department,
under the control of one Minister, will
yield significant advantage to the administration
as a whole.
The third main reason for creating the
new portfolio is to permit the Prime
Minister and * his Department to devote
themselves to the matters which are central
to Government. An examination of the
history of the functions attached to the
Prime Minister and his Department reveals
a recurring theme of the detachment from
the Prime Minister of new functions as
they develop sufficient momentum to sustain
a portfolio or department of their
own, or as other opportunity for appropriate
attachment arises. Thius in earlier days
the Department of External Affairs and, in
more recent times, the Department of
Education and Science have been separated
from the Prime Minister's Department. It
is natural that, as initiatives are made and
before they are fully proven, new ministerial
and departmental arrangements should
not be sought. But equally, once the
significance of the new activities has been
proved and accepted, it is appropriate that
they be given separate ministerial and
departmental status. Further than that, it is
important that the Prime Minister, as leader
of the Government, should be able to
give a great deal of attention to the administration
of the Cabinet system. Whatever
other functions may come or go, the Prime
Minister is Chairman of the Cabinet. It is
his function to ensure that leadership is
given; that there is effective co-ordination,
through the Cabinet machinery and by
individual consultation, of the activities of
Ministers, each of whom has full responsibility
and accountability to Parliament; and
that, through the Cabinet machinery and 
in other ways, the ever-changing problems
of Government are given full attention and
co-ordinated and speedy resolution.
These are the central functions of the
Prime Minister as leader of the Government,
and he must look to his Department
to give him support in them. It is these
considerations that lie behind the creation
of the new Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet. This Department
will have administrative responsibility for
the co-ordinating role of the Prime Minister
and it will also be geared to give me
advice on the demanding and ever-present
preoccupations of the Government as a
whole. These vary from day to day but
range across such matters as the state of
the economy, the Commonwealth's role in
welfare, relations with the States-so
important in a Federation-and external
relations and defence. These are the
administrative responsibilities of the Prime
Minister as leader of the Government.
When to these -are added the role of leadership
in the Parliament, the duties as
leader of a party, the requirements
imposed as chief spokesman for the Government
both in the Parliament and in
public, and the many representational
obligations that must be accepted, it can
readily be seen that functions which are in
the main administrative, or can be handled
by another Minister and department,
should where practicable be transferred to
them. In short, I believe that the addition of a
new ministerial portfolio to discharge the
functions I have outlined represents a
significant advance in the organisation of
the functions of government. There will be
renewed emphasis upon the importance the
Government attaches to three different
groups of responsibilities-in Aboriginal
Affairs; in the arts; and in the environment.
In each of these the Commonwealth
is increasingly assuming a role in community
affairs at the national level. There will
also be a useful concentration under single
control of a number of ' general service'
activities having a functional or administrative
affinity. By making these changes,
the Prime Minister and his Department
will be released to discharge more effectively
their primary functions. And the
lines of responsibility to the Parliament for
the various functions will be clarified. T
commend the Bill to the House. Debate ( on motion by Mr Whitlam)
adjourned. APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANT
MINISTERS
Ministerial Statement
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)-
by leave--In association with the
Ministers of State Bill, I wish also to
inform the House of my intention to
appoint Assistant Ministers to support certain
Senior Ministers in the discharge of
their responsibilities. Honourable members
will recall that, since the earliest days of
Federation, Assistant Ministers, Honorary
Ministers or Ministers without Portfolio
have been a recurring feature of ministerial
arrangements. These Assistant Ministers-
I use that term to describe all the
persons I have just referred to-are not
Ministers of State in the strict Constitutional
sense. The Queen's Ministers of
State are, under section 64 of the Constitution,
only those members of the Executive
Council who are appointed to administer
Departments of State. The Assistant Ministers
will be members of the Parliament
who are appointed to assist a particular
Minister in the discharge of his duties.
Because they are not Ministers of State
in the constitutional sense, section 44 of
the Constitution precludes the payment of
any salary to Assistant Ministers in respect
of their duties. All it will be possible to do
will be to make payments to them to meet
out-of-pocket expenses, including travelling
expenses, which they necessarily incur in
the performance of their duties. I intend
that the Assistant Ministers will be sworn
as Executive Councillors. They will thus
form part of the Federal Executive Council
whose function, under section 62 of the
Constitution, is to advise the Governor-
General in the government of the Commonwealth.
The Assistant Ministers will
thus participate in a most important aspect
of the continuing good government of the
Commonwealth. As members of the Federal
Executive Council, the Assistant
Ministers will in general be able to exercise
statutory functions of the Ministers they
are assisting-including the making of
appointments and the performance of
other functions expressly conferred on the
Minister-provided he has authorised them 
to this effect. This is made possible by section
19 of the Acts Interpretation Act
which, subject to any contrary intention in
the particular legislation, permits any
Minister or member of the Federal Executive
Council to act for and on behalf of a
Minister referred to in the legislation.
Thus Assistant Ministers will be able to
make appointments and perform other
functions expressly conferred on the Minister
by legislation.
The Assistant Ministers will be assigned
to assist certain Ministers of Cabinet rank,
who have the responsibility, not only of
administering their own departments, but
of taking part in the continuing process of
consultation which is an essential feature
of effective Cabinet government. By
appointing Assistant Ministers in this way I
see the system of Cabinet government as
being strengthened through allowing senior
Ministers to give more time to Cabinet
business. Assistant Ministers will, of
course, work in accordance with the
authority given to them by the Senior
Minister. I see them, within this general
authority, as conducting correspondence
and making inquiries on his behalf. They
will also be able to receive deputations on
behalf of the Minister. I emphasise that
Assistant Ministers will not be able to take
political responsibility in the administration
of any department. This is as it should be.
As Prime Minister Menzies explained in
his ministerial statement on Parliamentary
Under-Secretaries on 27th August 1952, it
is important that Ministers should be
directly answerable to the Parliament for
the administration of their departments.
Again taking up what Sir Robert Menzies
said in that statement, there are
occasions when it would be of great assistance
to a Minister if his Assistant Minister
could, during the Committee stages of
a Bill, sit at the table of the House and
represent his Minister in the discussion of
clauses and amendments as they arise. I
shall be consulting with the Presiding
Officers on this matter to ascertain
whether, to achieve this, an amendment of
Standing Orders will be necessary. Numhers of those who in times past held office
as Assistant Ministers were in due course
elevated to full Ministerial status. I believe
that the experience they obtained as Assistant
Ministers was of great value in preparing
them to assume full Ministerial
status. I am confident that those who will
be appointed to the new positions will
obtain valuable and broadening experience.
To sum up, the new Assistant Ministers
will bring greatly needed assistance to
senior Ministers in the discharge of their
heavy duties, and will contribute to the
better working of the Cabinet system.
Secondly, they will help such Ministers to
achieve more effective supervision of the
activities of the departments to which they
are related. Finally they will, as I have
mentioned, provide important experience
for members from this side of the House
in both the legislative and administrative
fields. I do not intend at this stage to make
specific appointments to the office of Assistant
Minister. These will be left until the
parliamentary recess, when there will be
opportunity to give further consideration
to details of the way in which the Assistant
* Ministers will work and to select members
for the positions. I make the statement at
this stage partly to acquaint the House of
events that will take place before it meets
for the Budget session, and also because
the decision to appoint Assistant Ministers
needs to be seen in the full context of
other changes being made in administrative
arrangements, including particularly the
proposal to appoint an additional Minister
of State. I present the following paper:
Appointment of Assistant Ministers-Ministerial
Statement, 29th April 1971.
Motion ( by Mr Swartz) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr WhItiam-May I suggest that this
matter and the Ministers of State Bill be
the subject of a cognate debate in due
course. Mr McMahon-I will agree to that
course being followed.
W. G. MuUAy, Government Printer, Canberra 



POR PRESS: PM No. 49/ 1971
TASMANIAN SHIPPING CRISIS
Statemnt . y tePieMinister, Mr. William McMahon
A deputation led by the Acting Premier of Tasmania, the Honourable
K, C. Lyons, M. H. A. had discussions with the Commonwealth Government in Canberra
thlis morning. In addition to the Acting Premier, the deputation included the Leader of
the Opposition, Mr. E. t. Reece, M. H. Mr. A. N. Currie, President of the
Tasmanian Trades Labour Council and Mr. M. J. Overland, Secretary/ Manager
of the Tasmanian Chamber of Manufactures. Commonwealth Ministers present were
the Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon, Mr. Nixon, Minister for Shipping &amp; Transport,
M. Lynch, Minister for Labour National Service, and Senator Wright.
The fundamental purpose of the deputation was to take up with the Commonwealth
; he need to seek arrangements which, recognising the special position of Tasmania,
woild be directed to providing the Tasmanian community, in the longer term, with
ome assurance that employment and business activity, and thus the welfare of the
06' mmunity, would be protected from the serious damage wItch would otherwise
occur as a result of disputes involving shipping services. The Acting Premier and
hjs'colleagues stressed the vital place of shipping in the Tasmanian economy over
of the State's trade being dependent on shipping services and threats to the ma intonance
of these services constituting a problem for the entire Tasmanian community.
The deputation asked that, at an appropriate time, the Commonwealth should
call a conference representative of the unions, the shipowners and the two governments
to see whether some formula could be devised and adopted to give Tasmania some
immunity of this kind. It was accepted, however, that the calling of such a conference
must await the outcome of discussions which had been initiated by the Tasmanian
Traaes Labour Council with the ACTU and the maritime unions in connection with
this Objective. The Commonwealth Government, acknowledging the particular vulnerability
of Tasmania to maritime industrial disputes, indicated that it wished to assist where
it coild in overcoming the problem. Against the background of recent developments,
and taking note of the case presented by the deputation, it would be prepared at the
appropriate time, and subject to the outcome of the initiative now being taken by the
Tasmanian Trades Labour Council, to propose a conference on the lines suggested,
it being understood that the agenda for such a conference and any action foreshadowed
by it must, of course, be a matter for agreement between the parties concerned.
As regards the immediate problem of the present shipping strike involving
the Marine Stewards'and Pantrymen's Association, it was noted that the strike was
already affecting employment and business activity in Tasmania in a substantial way and
that large-scale unemployment and disruption of trade would follow if the dispute were
prolonged. However, it was also noted that this dispute is now at a most sensitive
stage and that there are grounds for hoping that the talks between the unions and shipowners
now taking place in Sydney could lead to a settlement.
CA NBERRA
3 May 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 50 / 1971
APPOINTr1MENT OF SIR WILLIAM REESHAUGE
AS PRESIDENT OF WORLD HEALTH
O A ASSE'AW9 RfL: Y
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon, announced today that
the Commonwealth Director-General of Health, Sir William Refshauge, had
been appointed President of the 24th World Health Assembly.
Mr. McMahon said " The election of Sir William Refshauge to
preside over the 24th World Health Assembly is a very great honour, both
for Australia and for Sir William personally.
" It is a recognition by the 132 member nations of the World Health
Organisation of the value of Sir William's personal contribution to the cause of
international health, and more generally, of the support Australia, which was
one of the founder members of Wi H40. in 1948, has always given to that
organisation. " The World Health Organisation has as its objectives the attainment,
of the highest level of health by all peoples and this is a cause to which Australia
has always given wholehearted support.
" Sir William has been closely connected with W. H. 0. activities since
his appointment as Director-General of Health in 1960 and he has during that time
earned a high reputation as an international statesman and administrator in the
cause of world health.
" Sir William has previously been honoured by the World Health
Organisation by being appointed Chairman of two of the main committees of the
World Health Assembly and in 1969 he was Chairman of the Executive Board of
CA NBERRA
May 1971 
Major-General Sir William Dudley Refshauge, 0. B. Ee I C. B. B. p E. De.# F. Re. C. 0. Go,
F. ReA. C. F. R. A. C. P. i Hon. F. Re SiH., F. A. C. MA.
Major-General Sir William Ref shauge became the Commonwealth Director-
General of Health in September, 1960, on the retirement of Dr. A. J. Metcalfe. He
was formerly Director-General of Australian Army Medical Services.
He was born in 1913 and educated at Scotch College, Melbourne and Melbourne
University. His interest in the Australian Army began in 1930, when he enlisted as
a member of the Scotch College cadet corps. Nine years later he joined the Commonwealth
Military Forces at the outbreak of World War 11, and was appointed Regimental Medical
Officer of the 2/ 2nd Field Regiment. He subsequently commanded the 2/ 8th and
Field Ambulance, and was acting Director of Medical Services, 7th Division.
In seven years with the A. L. F. he served in the Western Desert, Greece,
Crete, Wau-Mubo, Salamaua, Ramu Valley and North Borneo. He was awarded the
0.13. e E. in 1944 and Mentioned in Despatches four times.
After the war Sir William was in civil practice until February 1948, when he
became Medical Superintendent of the Royal Women's Hospital, Melbourne. He
occupied this post until 1951. In May of that year he enlisted in the Australian Regular
Army as Deputy Director-General of Army Medical Services. In this capacity he
v isited Japan and Korea in 1952. He later visited military medical establishments in
the United Kingdom, Germany and Canada and attended the 16th Congress of the
International Committee of Military Medicine and Pharmacy, in Rome.
On June 15, 1955, he was appointed Honorary Physician to Her Majesty the
Queen and on June 26 was promoted Major-General and appointed Director-General of
Army Medical Services. He represented the Australian Army at the Bikini and Elnewetok
weapon tests in 1958.
A former rowing blue of Melbourne University, Sir William Refshauge gained
his degrees of Bachelor of Medicine and Master of Surgery at the MIbourne University.
He is a Fellow of the Royal College of Cbstetricians and Gynaecologists, London, a
Fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons, and a Fellow of the Royal
Australasian College of Physicians.
He was created a member of the Order of the Companion of the British
Empire In 1959, and knighted in 1966.
Sir William Ref shauge has attended meetings of the World Health
Organisation as Chief Australian delegate. each year since his appointment as Director-
General of Health in 1960. He has been Chairman of the two main Committees of the
World Health Assembly and Chairman of the Standing Committee on Administration
and Finance of the Executive Board of W. H. 0. In 1969 he was appointed Chairman
of the Executive Board. He has been appointed President of the 24th World Health
Assembly now in session in Geneva.
In August, 1942 he married Helen Elizabeth Stanfield Allwright, daughter of
the late Richard Everett Allwright and the late Edith Allwright, of Peckham Vale,
Gretna, Tasmania. He has five children ( four sons and a daughter) and lives in
Scarborough Street, Red Hill, Canberra. 



AUST RALIA -JAPAN BUSINESS GO-OPERATION COMM= TEE
ACADEM/-Y OF SC IENCE, CA NERRA, A. C. T. 6 MAY 1971
Spechbthe Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Now may I make some comments to you formally. And the first I would
like to make, and I will put it in three different classifications, is the importance in
aim trpaodritnagn csee nthsaet oJfa pJaanp acna nto pulas, y tahse ai mpoploitritcaanlc ein folfu eJanpcaen foinr at hwe orrilgdh ctso notfe xtht ea npde oapllseos tohfe'
South East Asia. It is probably well known, but it bears repetition, that within the course of
the next ten years, Japan will be, undoubtedly, the second greatest production nation
in the world. And in order to be able to sustain its continued growth, it must have
access to raw materials, semi-processed materials and, I believe, a large range of
manufactured items as well.
Thus it necessarily follows that Japan, in order to be able to sustain its
production and its trade, must be able to obtain raw materials from various parts of
the world. There can be no doubt that Japanese businessmen will be looking increasingly
at Australia as the source of raw materials and processed materials.
The second point is that as Japan's economic growth continues, and as it
increases its trade in Asia, including South-East Asia and further South, it must be able
increasingly * to play an important part in the development of the countries with which
it trades. And so too should it be able to play a part in parallel with other countries
in qnsuring that the less developed countries of South-East Asia have the opportunity
for development. And the last assumptions on which I want to base my subsequent remarks
are,: That as Japan develops its industrial strength and its trading strength as well,
it will increasingly be able to play an important political role in the development of
Asia, and particularly those parts of Asia closest to our shores.
Consequently, we want to be able to join with the Japanese in order to ensure
that Japanese political activity is directed towards ensuring the political freedom and
the physical freedom of the countries of South East Asia. And that increasingly together
we can make our contribution to helping the poorer people of this part of the world.
Now while we as a Government can create an effective and real atmosphere
or milieu in which development can take place, nonetheless, it is you as businessmen
who can go out, seek the contacts with the political, and industrial and commercial
people, and be able to achieve the kind of ideal I have just mentioned. That is increasing
trade and with that increasing trade, increasing understanding and with that increasing
understanding a higher responsibility for helping others in order to help themselves.
Fortunately for us, trade between the two countries is complementary.
They will be, as I have said be! ore, large importers of rawx materials and processed
materials, and we will in our turn be able to import from them large quantities of
highly sophisticated industrial eqa. ipnent. / 2 
Li-14.1.. 
If we look at the trade between our two countries,, we can, on a preliminary
estimate, get a false impression. Becaus. we have undoubtedly a big surplus in our
balance of payments our balance of trade with Japan. In the latest figures that have
been made available to me, we have, in recent years, increased our trade by about
per cent to Japan, and they have increased their trade from us by about 60 per cent.
So there is very nearly reciprocity at this present moment.
The point I'd like to make, however, is that the Japanese authorities from
the Prime Minister down, recognise that it is in their best interests and our best
interests to have multilateral trade. And they realise that in a multilateral trade
and finance world it is not essential that there should be a balance with every country.
Japan accepts the fact that its balance of payments with us will be adverse,
and probably this adverse balance will increase as the years go by. That does not
mean that both of us don't want increased trade. Of course we do. As I said a few
moments ago you can be absolutely certain that that trade will increase and increase
at a rapid rate. As to the future, I think the first submission that I put up to the Cabinet
or I should state in a preliminary way that I asked the Department of Foreign Affairs to
prepare was the way in which we should look at the problems, the inter-relationships
between Japan and Australia. As a consequence of that submission we have appointed
a high-ranking group of civil servants at-F irst Secretary level or at Deputy Secretary
level in order to be able to co-ordinate the relationships between the two countries.
Equally, too, if I can interpolate this, although it is not exactly relevant
but It has a bearing on what I am saying, we also in recent weeks prepared three
papers for the Government on our relationships with China, particularly improved
trading relationships with them.
I have been able to announce in the House that we will considerably liberalise
our trade with the People's Republic and that the Minister for Trade will shortly be
releasing two lists one of goods that can be exported to the People's Republic, and
one, the Strategic List in which there will be prohibitions imposed on trade.
The substance of this is that businessmen will shortly know exactly the
type of goods they can and the type of goods they cannot export.
May I now refer shortly to three different subjects first capital
movements, secondly, our problems relative to tariffs, and third, if I can mention
It, guidelines for borrowing in this country by overseas interests.
First, then, as to capital movements. I must again interject to say that
in recent months the Japanese Government has indicated quite clearly that it will
liberalise the quota restrictioces that are now imposed. And secondly I go on to say
that as Japan has a very favourable balance of payments surplus, and one that is likely
to grow, and is now in world terms in the financial market in a very strong position,
we wifl welcome the fact that Japanese markets of this kind will be opened up to
Australia. And we can hope for capital movements to increase between the two
countries. In the last three years there has in fact been a movement of direct
investment in Australia by Ja-anese interests of something like $ 43 million. 
3.
The second point I want to mention is borrowing capacity by Japanese interests
or Japanese firms that have been established here. This depends on the amount of
Australian equity as well as on the duration or the time during which the Japanese
interests have carried on buiness here.
We have two political objectives. We do want Australian equity participation
when Japanese firms establish here and I know this is well known to the Japanese
authorities, and 1 believe to Japanese business and commercial interests. And secondly
we do like Australian talent, whether it happens to be on an administrative or a technicalI
basis, to be able to participate with the Japanese in the development of Australian projects.
I applaud the statement made by Mr. Miyazawa when he was here a few weeks
ago that the Japanese look forward to co-operation between Japanese and Australian
interests for the development of industry here. I hope we can extend that and extend our
joint influence to the development of Australian/ Japanese interests in other parts of Asia.
The third element is with our tariff policy, and whilst I would never like to
feel I had become involved in controversy with the Minister in control of MITI, I thinkj
I should say here that we have in fact only one kind of restriction on goods from Japan
entering this country.
Virtually we have an open-door policy to import and we do not, except on a
very limited scale, impose quotas or non-tariff policies. But whatever we do, we do it
after a thorcugh-going review by the officers of the Australian Tariff Board and after
recommendations and reports by them to the Government. We do not act unilaterally.
But all of this that I have just mentioned relating to the Tariff Board and
capital movements will be submerged by the fact, and I repeat this again because it is
so critically important there can be no doubt at all that trade from Australia to Japan
and in the reverse direction will increase substantially in the years to come.
We in Australia do want the most friendly international relations with the
Japanese Government and people and the Australian Government and people. And from
all I can gather and I have recently been to Japan as a guest of the Japanese Government
for a period of something like ten to fourteen days, I think I can express the feeling that
there is an increasing desire to be friendly. And not only friendly, but that we should get
to know one another, that tourism should increase and that we should be able more and
more to establish direct contact between the two peoples.
And I finish on this note that while we as a government can do much in
order to provide the infrastructure, the circumstances in which trade can increase,
I do want to emphasise that the businessmen themselves can, and I believe will do the
job. I know of the tremendous industry and the application of sound business principles
particularly in finance and industry of the Japanese. Equally, too, do I know of the
abilities of Australian businessmen as well. I am sure, and I express this view on behalf
of the Government, that you will. make our task easier. But if you ever feel that we
can do something to improve the relationships and to improve the trade between the
two countries, I assure you that everyone in the Government will be only too happy
to participate with you. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 51/ 1971
MINISTERIAL COMM ITTEE ON ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
Statement bythe Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
In my statement to the meeting of Commonwealth and State Ministers
responsible for Aboriginal Affairs in Cairns on 23rd April 1971 1 said that I wou. ld
establish within the Commonwealth a Ministerial Committee to assist the Minister
responsible for Aboriginal Affairs to develop and co-ordinate policies for Aboriginal
advancement and to prepare material dealing with these policies for Government
decision. The Committee, which will commence work as soon as possible, will
comprise: The Minister responsible for Aboriginal Affairs;
The Treasurer;
The Minister for Foreign Affairs;
The Attorney-General;
The Minister for the Interior;
The Pcstmaster-General;
The Minister for Social Services.
Other Ministers including the Ministers for Health, Housing, Education and Science,
and Labour and National Service, will join the Committee when matters for which
they are responsible are under review. The Comm-ittee will be assisted by the Council
and Office of Aboriginal Affairs.
The Committee will take into account the policies and programmes in
operation in the Northern Territory which are comprehensive and impressive and
which it is important should be more generally known.
The Committee will review urgently Commonwealth programmes for the
advancement of Aboriginal citizens. These programmes will include those which are
carried out by the Commonwealth on an Australia-wide basis or in the Northern
Territory as well as Commonwealth financial support for State programmes. The
Committee will report to the Government progressively.
There are some aspects of this question on which it would be inappropriate
for me to comment until the question of a possible appeal in the Yirrkala Land Case
is determined. In the meantime the Government has decided that if an appeal is made
it will meet the legal costs of the appellants.
In the Northern Territory areas totalling 94, 000 square miles are reserved
for Aborigines. Special legislative provision has been made for pastoral and
agricultural leases within these Reserves for Aborigines only and a considerable
number of applications for these and other purposes has been received. They will be
considered by a specially constituted Land Board with Aboriginal members appropriate
to the localities concerned. 
Financial assistance is also available to help Aborigines in agricultural or
pastoral activities and business ventures such as timber, fisheries and various
commercial projects. The work of delineating areas of ceremonial or traditional
interest to Aborigines is proceeding and a number of these places will shortly be
declared for protection under law. Consideration is also being given to setting
aside certain areas associated with hunting, foraging or recreation e. g. at Gove and
Groote Eylandt. It is impossible to summarise adequately the range of policies
and action taken and I have asked the Minister for the Interior to elaborate on them
in a statement he will issue shortly.
The Committee has. been asked to consider whether changes in or
developments of policy in the Northern Territory are desirable in relation to
protection of lands reserved for the use and benefit of Aborigines and
within such lands
ensuring continuing groups of Aborigines
the use of land for ceremonial, religious or
recreational purposes
( it) making available on appropriate tenure to
individual Aborigines and groups of
Aborigines land necessary for the conduct
of commercial enterprises.
setting up an Aboriginal Land Fund to acquire land coming
on the market in the Northern Territory which can be made
available on appropriate tenure to Aboriginal groups for
commercial enterprises and other purposes.
ensuring that subject to the requirements of national development
Aborigines on lands reserved for their use and benefit will be
given reasonable preference in mineral
prospecting and exploration and
( it) the opportunity to participate effectively in
mining and related developments.
supporting commercial enterprises which have reasonable
prospects of success on land held by Aboriginal communities
( particularly where they are isolated and without alternative
opportunities) by grants from the Aboriginal Advancement
Trust Account as well as by loans from the Capital Fund for
Aboriginal Enterprises.
I do not wish to anticipate the recommendations of the Ministerial Committee
or decisions in relation to them but I repeat what I said at Cairns that it is my
Government's intention to build effectively upon existing programmes both in its own
fields of responsibility and in collaboration with the States so as-to achieve a
breakthrough to a new level of achievement in the advancement of Aboriginal citizens.
CA NBERRA
6 May 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 52/ 197 1
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINJA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon--
T he A us t rali an G overnment has noted the rapid
succession of events which suggest a marked development in the willingness
of the People's Republic of China to deal with the rest of the world.
We have already stated that it is our long term objective to
normalise our bilateral relations with the Government of the People's
Republic of China and we have further decided that we will now explore
the possibilities of establishing a dialogue with the Government of the
People's Republic. We must bear in mind that a major obstacle to the
development of formal relations with the People's Republic of China
has been that Government's support for insurgency and subversion in
countries of the region with which we as an Australian Government
have close relations and mutual strategic interests.
For those reasons we will proceed with caution and we
will want to ensure that when any steps are taken there will be some
response of a reasonable kind from Peking.
Whatever we do will be without prejudice to the rights of
the Republic of China on Taiwan.
Subject to security requirements there are, of course,
no restrictions on the rights of Australians to visit the People's
Republic of China.
CA NBERRA
11 May 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 53/ 1971
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon,
announced today that the Minister for Labour and National
Service ( Mr. Lynch) had now assumed control of industrial
relations policy in addition to his other departmental
duties. CA NBERRA
12 May 1971 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINI3TER TO THE CITIZENS
CLUB DINNER, SYDNEY, MAY 13, 1971
Tonight I hope you will permit me to speak about where
we are going and what Initiatives we are taking in novel areas of
international affairs that up until a few years ago we had riot been
concerned with. By that I mean our diplomatic international
relationships with Japan and the emerging world powers immediately
to the North. That is with the two Communist countries Soviet
Russia and the People's Republic of China that is Mainland China?
I do this because in each case I want to speak to you
about the dates on which the initiatives were first taken beginning
in April 1970. Before I get into the body of my speech I want too
purely for the purposes of identifying the dates to mention the
dates on which subsequent initiatives were taken.
In May 1970, we were looking at papers, position
papers and documents that were subsequently presented to the
Ministry, relating to a new approach to Japan. In March of this
year, we considered papers relating to China, that is, the
People's Republic of China Mainland China. Every single phrase
that has been used lately, and that I will use tonight, have beer.
taken out of those basic documents.
And finally, we had in April of this year a paper
relating to our relationships with the U. S. S. R.
I mention these dates purely to point out to you that the
Department of Foreign Affairs has been doing this work and that
we haven't, as it~ were, been forced by ping pong diplomacy to take
the kind of action recently taken.
I had the great pleasure in every one of these cases to
initiate the yolicies that I will mention to you.
If anything is to be gained or, behalf of the Commonwealth
Government, I car. assure you that each and every one of the
proposals has received the full endorsement of Cabinet, and of the
Ministry. Whilst I am going to speak about, Japan, the U. S. S. R.
and the People's Republic, I don't want you to think that I am
forgetting our great permanent and powerful friends in the United
States, and in the Uniited Kingdom. 
-2-
The United Kingdom is still using its benign influence
for good in South-East Asi!, and has joined with us in the post
Anglo-Malaysian defence agreements. And the United States,
of course, has been the most powerful influence for good and
for the salvation of the free world since World Wat 11. And it will
still be expected to play this role.
Tonight, I want to speak to you about both our bilateral
and multilateral relationships with the countries I have mentioned.
By bilateral I mean our direct relationships,
diplomatic and other relationships between two countries without the
intervention of thi-rd And by " n ,... ti-lateral" relationships,
I mean those relarionshi=~ between oursel'es and a dozen and one
other countries as, for exa le, in the Un'ited Nations and the
Asian Development Bank anr. similar types of institutions. Over and
over again, you will hear me use the wo.: ds bilateral and
" multilateral" and I make his very brie explanation so that you
won't be kept in the dark about exactly what I mean.
Now I want you, too, to understand that we are a great
trading nation. We are, per head of po:,-' ation, as great as any other
country. But we also have to remember that besides the interest we
have in trade, we have other international relationships as well. We
want to achieve poe-tical s-. ltbility in the area in which we live, to help
others in the ecoc-mic de. rel. opmen: t of thi. r countries and the overriding
objective we have in international affairs that ie to play our
part to the maximum of oUl. capacity to ensure that the people of
the future the young chil'e-n of today and those who will come after
us will have a better opprranity to live under more peaceful conditions
than you and I have beer, able to live ir..
So this, then, is the basis on which I want to speak to you
tonight. May I then turnto Japai. the paper that was presented
in May of last year.
Japan is one of our great trading partners. h fact, in
terms of total trade, it is ahe greatest tr-. ading partner we have. Our
exports to Japan top the liht. She is by far and away the greatest
importer of what we produce. In terms of imports, she runs third
only to the United States, and in terms of total trade she is second
only to the United States.
It was for this reason, more than for any other, that I
started the discussions ir; the Department of External Affairs, ea'rly im May
.1973. I the: n established with the approval of -the then Prime Minister,
r. G3orton, the strongest inter--de'artmental Committee that we could
establish in order-to con sictently look at our policies and to ask ourselves
Can we improve themn' Can we improve them for the. benefit of our own people? 
This worked very well, . and you people will kn~ ow that
we have i-ow established rnot only trade, but in other kinds of
relationships, the most close relationships with Japan.
What then of the future?
Let me mention that in teni years' time, Japaii will be
unmistakeably the second most powerful productive country in the
world. And because our two economics are complementary and there
is an enormous degree of complemerntarity between the kinds of
goods they want and we are able to sell to them, arid the kinds of
goods they have and are able to sell to us, that our future trade
relationships with Japan offer enormous opportunities for us.
It is axiomatic that the greater your trade, and the greater the
amount of foreign exchange you can earn, then the greater the
prospects you have got for productivity increases arid also for better
standards of living of our own people.
So we have this complementarity, and as I have said,
as Japan grows, then it is axiomatic that we will grow too.
I also want to mention other factors associated with
this period as Minister for Foreign Affairs. Japan started to change
its low posture to an exercise of a kind of global influence that a
country of its power should start to exercise. At the Djakarta
conferences, Japan for the first time took an initiative in order to
help to try and achieve peace in Cambodia along the lines of the
Geneva Conventions an-d Protocol of 1954.
I believe that Japan is moving definitely, precisely, calmly,
but still with a low posture, to play its part in trying to achievepolitical
stability in South East Asia.
But it is not of Japan that I wanted to speak to you tonight.
It is rather of the U. S. S. R. and of the People's Republic of China and
of China I want to speak at considerable length.
When I speak of these two countries, I want to remind you
of certain assumptions and of certain principles that flow from them.
The first one is that we must recognise that both of these
countries have different political and social systems to ours. Both
of them base their foreign relations on different basic ideologies.
Theirs is a philosophy of centralised government, of a political
system that depends on the Party as the dominant element in
potlcal life the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. They concentrate
on the Party itself. It is the political organisation which determines
not only their internal but their external relationships as well. 
A
We, on the other hand, believe in representative
government, We believe that it is the people who are sovereign,
it is they who support a Party, and through the Party determine
who will represent the people in the National Parliament itself.
I want you to understand that whenever we are thinking
of trade between a communist country and ourselves, we must
remember the differences particularly that we have a free press and
freedom of expression, while theirs is controlled and their people
know little or nothing about what the real objectives of the
government might be.
This is tremendously important under present
circumstances, because if I can use Rob Askin's phrase of ping
pong diplomacy, let us remember that we are not going to gain a
great deal out of ping pong diplomacy.
We have to look much further and ask ourselves when we are
engaged in dealings with them What are we likely to gain out of it
in the long term, in the medium term and in the short term as well?
And on every occasion when we are making a decision,
we must, as all businessmen must, prepare a profit and loss account.
Ar. d we must always, when we are adding up the sums, ask
ourselves the single question. When we look at the total final figures
are we sure that they will be in the black and to the advantage of this
country. Having said that, I mertion two other principles associated
with it. I want you to realise that when we are dealing in either
bilateral of multilateral relations with other countries that we must
not think that because they have different political systems to ours
that that fact alone should prevent us from entering into negotiations
with them. That is far from the truth. The mere fact that they happen
to be socialist or communist is not in itself sufficient reason
to prevent us from entering into negotiations with them.
And the second principle that I want you to realise is that
even though you recognise international law, that
recognition does not mean that you approve of the policies of the
government recognised. It merely means that you look at the facts
of life objectively, pragmatically, coolly and calmly and thin ask yourself
the simple question if we take a certain course of action, what
advantage has it for the Australian people and the Australian nation? 
This brings me to the text country I want to speak about
at this dinner tonight Soviet Russia.
I don't have to draw distinctions in this case between
multilateral and bilateral negotiations because they are in fact a
member of the United Nations and they have diplomatic relations
with us. They have their Ambassador and Embassy here. We have
our Ambassador and Embassy in Moscow. So I don't want to
speak to youabout that. What I wa-t to speak to you about is this:
The Soviet, has in recent months, been saying they would
like better relationships with us. They have been asking us if we would
give some earnest of our willingness and of our ability to improve our
relationships. To indicate to them in reply * hat we would like. They
would like to be. able to ensLure that they had bdtjter trade opportunities
with us too. In recent weeks we have been able as a government to show
the Government of the U. S. S. R. that we were prepared to make certain
concessions to them as an earnest of our intention. We have decided
and we have communicated this to the Soviet Government the
concessions we are willing to make. We will be delivering an aide
memoire setting out the details. The terms and conditions under which
the concessions will be made will be communicated to them in the next
few days. We have agreed at their request, that we will permit the Soviet
to establish a trade office in New South Wales I mention this
specifically Mr. Askin, not because i am a Sydneian, but because it
happens to be the place chosen by them. Primarily this office will be
for the purpose of commerce and trade, of trying to increase commerce
and trade between the two countries. I hope, looking at the balance sheet
it will be of advantage to us.
Secondly, because Russia has recently joined the Continental
Shipping Conference they asked that they would like the Biltic Shipping
Company to establish an office in Sydney. We think this will give us
access toport to the South of China, but also. Anian Russia and the
opportur. ity tc be able to sell our goods and services there.
Thirdly, they have asked us, if we could agree to visits by
Ministers. That has already occurred.
Their Minister for Agriculture, a member of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party, has visited Australia Sir John
McEwen has visited Russia.
They have also proposed, and we have agreed, that there
shouldi* ae missions, or delegations of Parliamentary Members tc move from
one country to the other. 
-6-
This, I believe, shows our good will and the fact that we
want under the conditions that I have mentioned to show an earinest of
our intentions despite the fact that we know they are building up their
forces in the Middle East, beyond what is necessary for perce-keeping
purposes there. They are suspect in some regards, and we are entitled
to be sceptical. Nonetheless they took the initiative and we have
responded. From . now on, at least the ball will be in their court, At
least we can say this that so far as Australia is concerned: They have
indicated clearly to us that their recent decision to purchase millions of
pounds of Australian beef was based on their desire for good relations
with us. That is our position with regard to the U. S. S. R. I now turn
to the part of my speech that I want to emphasise tonight.
I want to emphasise to you that every phrase I use was coined
some time ago and certainly a long time before the ping pong diplomacy
was invented and practised under the skilled guidance of Mr. Chou En-lai.
The China Paper was prepared in February of this year. Let me talk
about the People's Republic of China and let us look at our relations in
both a multilateral and a bilateral way.
In multilateral terms. We believe they are anxious to -become a
member of the United Nations. The suggestion has made from time to
time that China wants to adopt a global approach. They are entitled to do
so as a great power. Consequently, those who have watched the U: nited
Nations have been asking themselves the simple question What do we
think are the prospects of the People's Republic becoming a member of
the United Nations in the course of the next year or two?
I want to say to you clearly a;-d emphatically that there is
little doubt at all, in fact it is almost certain that this year or next year,
Mainland China will become pcrticularly if it makes certain concessions
a member of the United Nations and will hold the permanent seat in
the Security Council that is now held by Taiwan China.
In the face of this inevitability, we will do nothing to obstruct
it. We do so against this background.
The Government in Peking is the defacto government and is
responsible for 700 million people. It controls the land mass of
Mainland China. So too does the Government of Taiwan China excercise
power and control over 141 millior people And over the territory,
that is comprised within the jurisdiction and central writ of the
Government of Taiwan. It is our view, therefore, that as the government
of Taiwan has lived up to the principles of the United Nations we should
assist it to remain a member. We are trying with all the influence we can
to sustain the position of Taiwan, and give it the opportunity to remain
in the United Nations should it, in its own wisdom wish to remain there. 
. So that then is roughly our position on a multilateral basis, so far as the
People's Republic of China and the Government of Taiwan are concerned.
I now want to turn to our bilateral relations with Mainland China.
And I want to state our reservations.
I want to express those reservations coolly, and not stridently. When you
are making a diplomatic approach of the kind I will mention the less strident your
approach, the better your prospects of success will probably be.
I don't want you to think that there have been any great changes so far as
Mainland China is concerned. They are masters of tactics. They control the news
media there and they can more or less do what they want to do without great trouble
from the domestic population.
We in all our dealings must remember the domestic population exercises
a powerful influence on what we do. No democratic government ought to get too far out
of line with the trends of thought of the people of their country.
I remind you of an incident that occurred in 1969, not very long before the
last Federal elections. One phrase in a very well-presented and prepared speech
by one of the most cautious diplomats we have in Australia's foreign service a phrase
relating to the presence of the USSR Navy in the Indian Ocean caused a degree of
controversy that every one of us would have preferred to have avoided. In other
words, eight or nine words, caused difficulties and a tremendous amount of public
disapproval. This is why we have moved with a great degree of care. We have not wished
to move in a way that we felt would insult public opinion.
I want you to understand, too, that the People's Republic of China, that is
Mainland China, still proclaims in most of its public statements, and particularly in
its latest May Day addresses, that it believes in revolution and believes in achieving
its purposes by force. It is still bitterly critical of the United States and it uses the
words " All its mad running dogs" that is those who co-operate with the USA in its
desire to sustain the liberal democracies.
In those circumstances, what policies have we adopted? We have decided
that our long-term objective will be, I now use the phrase that was coined in the
documents that I mentioned and was used before by my colleague, Mr. Bury, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs or if it wasn't by him, by the Acting Minister on his
behalf. The words used set out our predetermined goal. That we want normal
bilateral relations with the People's Republic of China.
We want those relationships, but we have decided to proceed cautiously.
Because as I have said, we must always be adding up the sums to see that the major
advantages are with this country.
We decided to take the first step towards a diplomatic detente and took
the initiative to open up discussions with them. I used the phrase one day this
week I think on Tuesday that we want a dialogue between the two countries. 0 0 / 8 
Initially we hope that we will be able to move in certain areas I will mention
latdr. Before I mention these areas, I want to dispel certain doubts that have arisen
about our attitude to Mainland China. I think there is so much misunderstanding
about what our present relationships are that I ought to stop the rumours and let you
know the facts so that you will be able to judge what the prospects for the future are.
Our present attitude to Mainland China is pretty clear. There is no
restriction whatsoever on the movement of Australian people to Mainland China,
providing only that they can : get a visa from the Chinese and providing that security
considerations are not involved. In other words, we don't stop our people going
there and we ' don't stop their people coming here. We will give them visas on the
conditions, or subject to the conditions that I have just mentioned.
Secondly, but for several restrictive lists on trade, we do permit trade with
Mainland China. Now at the Canton Fair, we have many, many Australians trying
to fill their order books. And indeed they have met with success in many cases.
Thirdly, our cultural activities. Not so long ago there was an approval for
the Peking Opera Company to come here. Because the only theatre that was available
for them had closed down, they were not able to come.
I want now to illustrate the way misunderstandings are occurring. I want
to mention the facts relating to wheat sales to Mainland China. They are these.
Continental China has had nine good production seasons for wheat. They
don't need to import any other than special varieties to mix with the wheat that they
produce themselves. They have had very good rice production which they normally
sell at a premium in order to buy the blending types of wheat that they need. Rice
is now in abundance. Consequently we did not expect that we would be making large
sales of wheat to them this year. As they have built up the stocks they have, they
need only the blending varieties.
Our position is therefore clear. Until a few weeks ago, our contracts for
the sale of wheat in other countries were far greater than they have * ever been.
We now think that we will have a carryover, which won't be a large one the present
carryover from last year's crop is about 365 million bushels much less than
200 million bushels. I believe it will be substantially lower than that.
In the cour se of the last two or three days, we have negotiated a sale to
the United Arab Republic of something like one million tons.
It is argued that Peking China is playing politics with the purchase of
Australian wheat. Not only do the facts deny it, but it wouldn't be a sensible sort
of politics. Our sales are pretty good and our stocks will be pretty low and of the
kind that we will need in the intermediate period between seasons.
Now we are moving towards a dialogue. Shortly we will be taking the
preliminary steps. We have already taken other action. see / 9 
% The present restrictive lists are now being analysed and liberalised. The
only. restrictions that we will impose on trade and this will be of interest to every
one of you businessmen are those invdving defence interests or where there are
strategic Implications of a kind which our Department of Defence, Foreign Affairs
Department and my own Ministry feel require restrictions.
I want to remind you that China is a great and powerful country and is
starting to indicate that she is interested in becoming a great world power. We feel
that simply because it is Communist there is insufficient reason to prevent us
improving our relations with her. Secondly, we have to recognise that China wants
to exercise a world role and to be able to play a part in the future trend of world
affairs. There is growing evidence that since the Cultural Revolution and the change
in the power structure of the Peking hierarchy, particularly under the Premiership"
of Chou En-Lal that they are searching for the opportunities to do so. It would be
extremely foolish for any of us to think that this trend could be resisted because Mainland
China is strong and determined. This is one of the reasons why we feel that a dialogue
may be important to us.
We want to probe their feelings. What they are thinking about the
Western democracies. In our turn to be able to take some action to influence the
decisions that they might make.
We are now moving along a different track. I have mentioned trade to you.
I now want to mention various other kinds of activities. The issue of visas, the
protection of Australian personnel who are in Mainland China, cultural and other
types of activities, particularly the arts.
Shortly after I announced on Tuesday that we were attempting a dialogue
the irrepressible Dr. Coombs was on the phone and asked me would I give him
authority to negotiate with the Chinese to bring out ballet companies, opera companies
and any other type of artistic team that he felt might be entertaining to the
Australian people.
We will be moving in these and other directions to try and see whether
there is a basis on which we can have a rapport.
And I want to say this clearly. We will be moving cautiously. Every single
step will be weighed up before we take it. Every single step will be included in
the balance sheet that I mentioned.
We don't want to be pushed into taking action because somebody else has
done so. I warn you that recognition or admission will not make a great deal of
difference to Mainland China. Many countries have realised that even though they
have recognised Mailn. China it hasn't meant that they . havj incioascd their trade.
At least in the casc of two ccuntrics there has been a reduction, Th -re 1-wo riot been
an increase in trade. The Chinese Govornmient hais lot th
aren't goad enough and-that political influcncco are not sufficient tc win them the kind
of contracts that they could not win in competitive company. 1 
This is the attitude we'll take. We want to move. But we will only move
if movement will be for the benefit of the Australian people and we do not prejudice
our negotiating strength.
That brings metherefore to the conclusion. In all our international
relationships, we in the Foreign Off ice and in the Government and the Prime
Minister's Department particularly, will be seeking to protect and enhance your
interests as Australians. Not only our vital defence and security interests, but
also our trade and our cultural relations.
One of our objectives will be to provide aid and to participate in the
economic development of the less developed countries of South East Asia.
Everywhere I have gone over the period of the last two years as Foreign
and External Minister, I have been delighted but' surprised to find that there was
so much goodwill for us. In some international conferences, when a stalemate has
occurred, some countries have come to us to find a solutioiu
We are, I believe, a phenomenal country. Our aid programmes the money
that comes out of the pockets ofc the Australian taixpayer are substantial. We are
making a large contribution.
I come back to where I started. Our objective must first of all be to
protect and enhance our vital interests. And I use the phrase again we want political
stability in the Pacific Basin. We also want economic development because we
know it is a two-way traffic. As other countries develop so too will we. Above all
we want peace and we want to make our contribution-to the hopes and aspirations
of these people. If in time we achieve peace in Indo-China, Laos, Cambodia and
South Viet-MNm the kiddies there will be able to look forward to a future just as
bright as ours. 



FOR PRESS SPM No. 54/ 1971
DEATH OF SIR PETER HEYDON
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Sir Peter Heydon was one of the best-liked and respected
public servants in Canberra.
His untimely death is a tragic loss to Australia.
I have known and valued his friendship for many years. His
death came as a great shock to me.
An outstanding Australian who spent a lifetime in service
to this nation, Sir Peter Heydon had a long and very distinguished
career with the Department of External Affairs both overseas and in
Australia. He often acted as Head of that Department. He became
Permanent Head of the Department of Immigration in 1961.
He was a warm and human person and he was an international
authority on immigration.
My wife and I extend our deepest sympathy to his widow
and family.
CANBERRA 16 MAY 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. NO. 55/ 1971
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
The Government has approved the preparation ef
final design drawings based on sketch plans for the Australian
National Gallery in Canberra.
It is expected that this design work will take
eighteen months to complete.
The approval is in accordance with the earlier
Government decision of April last year, directing that the design
of the Gallery should commence.
The Government decision that design work should
proceed does not involve any commital of funds nor does it
constitute any approval for construction to take place. These
matters will be the subject of subsequent Government consideration
after the completion of the detailed design work now authorised.
CANBERRA, 21 May 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 56/ 1971
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
The Government has been giving consideration to ways
of improving the effec tieness of the periodicecorbmic consultations with
representatives of industry and commerce. After obtaining the viewgt of
participating organisations, it has been'deci-ded for the future to hold one
longer set of consultations each year instead of the present practice of
two meetings. It is intended that the annual consultations extend over
three days so that more time will be available for discussion of issues
of particular concern to organisations and to the Government. The
Government believes that the new arrangements will increase significantly
the usefulness of the consultations for all participants.
Invitations have been extended for the next consultations
which will be held from 7-9 July. On 7 and 8 July, Ministers will meet
national organisations in three groups: primary industry, manufacturing
industry, and commerce and mining. Also on 8 July, Ministers will
meet with the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council. On 9 July,
meetings will be held with the Export Development Council and the
Australian Council of Trade Unions.
The organisations invited in the primary industry,
manufacturing industry, and commerce and mining groups are shown
below Primary Industry Group
Australian Farmers' Federation
Australian Woolgrowers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Wheatgrowers? Federation
Manufacturing Industry Group
T he A ssociated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Commerce and Mini Ggroup
The Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers
Australian Mining Industry Council
CANBERRA, 23 May 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 57/ 1971
ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Statement bjy te Prime Minister, Mr. W illiam McMahon
" I am pleased to announce that. Australia has-been invited-to
accede to the Convention on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development E. C. the Prime Mfinister, the Rt. Honourable William Mcl\ ahon,
said today. " The Government has decided that Australia should accept the
invitation and hence become a full member of 0. E. C. D. Mx. McMahon added that
these formalities would be completed on 7th June during the course of the 0. E. C. D.
Ministerial Council Meeting to be held at the Organisation's headquarters in Paris.
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Industry, the Honourable
J. D. Anthony, will lead the Australian delegation to the meeting.
Mr. McMahon described the 0. E. C. which includes among its members
the major industrialised countries, as one of the most important consultative bodies
in the world today on economic and related matters He said the decision to join
0. E. C. D. represented a significant step in Australia's foreign economic relations. In
addition to its main function of consultation on financial and economic policies, the
Organisation considers such matters as science policy, manpower questions and a
range of social issues.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs will have the general administrative
responsibility for 0. E. C. D. but other Ministers and Departments will of course
have the principal interest and responsibility for those activities of direct concern to
them. ," Australia will, I am certain, benefit considerably from participating in the
Organisation's activities and looks forward to close involvement in the work of the
Organisation", Mr. McMahon said. " The invitation to join the Organisation can be
justly regarded as clear -recognition of Australia's economic standing and of the
valuable contribution Australia can make on major international economic questions."
The Prime Minister recalled that the 0. E. C. D. was established in 1961 to
succeed the former Organisation for European Economic Co-operation E. E. C.)
whose functions were revised and extended in various ways and whose membership
was expanded to include the United States and Canada, and later Japan and F inlandi.
Thbe broad aims of the 0. E. C. D. are to promote policies conducive to balanced
economic growth of its member countries, to contribute to sound development in
developing countries and to contribute to the expansion of world trade. With these
objectives in mind, regular consultations take place within the 0. E. C. D. at both
Ministerial and senior official levels in all major fields of economic activity. Its
22 members account for over 60% 0 of the world's trade and industrial production, and
provide over 90% 0 of the aid granted from all sources to developing countries. e a / 2 
2.
Mr. McMahon said that Australia had already been participating in part of
the Organisation' s activities since February 1966 when Australia joined the
Development Assistance Committee A. Australia had derived considerable
advantage and understanding from the contacts with other aid-giving countries which
membership of the D. A. C. afforded, and had been able to contribute to the D. A. C.
the benefits of Australia's experience in the aid field.
Mr. McMahon said that at the 0. E. C. D. Ministerial Council on 7th-Sth June
Mr. Anthony viuld be assisted by representatives of the Departments of Foreign
Affairs, the Treasury, and Trade and Industry. The delegation would include
Australia's Am-bassador designate to the 0. E. C. D. Sir Ronald Walker, C. B. E.
Sir Ronald would head a permanent delegation to 0. E. C. D. which Australia mould
establish-in Parts in June.~
CANBERRA May 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM Io. 5 '! 971
UI~ DEPENDErTF ENQUIRY INJTO REPATRIATION SYSTEM
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
From time to time, representations have been made to the
Government, particularly by the Returned Services League of Australia, to
have an enquiry into the rationale and principles of the Repatriation system.
In response to these requests, and following discussions with my
colleague, the Minister for Repatriation, Mr. Mac Holten, we have now
decided that an independent enquiry should be set in train.
I am sure that all the ex-servicemen's organisations will welcome
this decision, as also will the critics of the system, most of whom have
expressed a preference for an-indepe. det non-parliamentary enquiry rather
than the one which the Government had earlier directed to be carried out by
the Repatriation Department.
The exact terms of reference of the enquiry will be settled as
soon as practicable, after which consideration will be given to the selection
of a suitable person to conduct the enquiry and to the appointment of people
to assist him. It is probable that certain evidence will be taken in public, but
this will depend to some degree on the terms of reference which are ultimately
decided upon, and on the general framework of the enquiry.
These matters and others w ll be the subject of a separate statement at
a later date by the Minister for Repatriation.
The Government feels that the course of action it is now adopting should
meet the wishes of most of those people in terested in the problem of war
compensation for those who have disabilities related to war service.
CANBERRA 27 May 1971 



FOR PRESS PM No. 59/ 1971
RELIEF FOR EAST PAKISTAN REFUGEES IN INDIA
Statement-bythe Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The Government has been following closely developments in
the regio-n of East Pakistan. Great distress has beer, caused by the fighting
there and by the resulting economic and social disruption. Large numbers
of people have crossed the border into India where they have claimed
refuge. This has caused a serious problem for India.
The Government has always had a deep concer-. n for the plight
of refugees and victims of emergencies. Similar humanitarian considerations
have influenced the Government in deciding to contribute to the international
relief effort which is being organised by the United Nations for East
Pakistani refugees in India.
The Government has decided to provide half a million dollars
in relief for the refugees. Emergency aid worth $ 239, 00 will be-provided
immediately. This will consist of $ 50, 0-30 in cash and the despatch by air to
the official Indian Government relief agency in Calcutta of vaccines,
medicines and materials to provide shelter from the mron;-soon which is
expected to break shortly.
The further $ 3010, 030 of supplies, to be made available
subsequently, will be shipped as soon as possible.
The Government has already been in touch with relief
organisations in Australia and will provide them with any iinformation
and advice received from international bodies and other authorities which
are concerned with the relief operation in India.
CANBERRA 27 May 1971 



PRESS, RADIO AND TV CONFERENCE GIVEN'-BY
THETPIVIMI fNYTE-M W[ IEAI McNAHO
AT PARLTA METFH-OUSE, CANBERRA 27 MAY 1971
PRIME MINISTER : Before I ask you to ask questions, I would like to make three
announcements to you, and they all relate to Government policy. The first one
is that Mr. Peter Howson will be appointed the Minister in charge of the new
portfolio. Yesterday afternoon, I had an audience with His Excellency the
Governor-General and he agreed to commission Mr. Howson on Monday, probably
at three o'clock. I have already stated the functions of the portfolio in the House, but if
you want to get complete details so that you can use them tomorrow morning, they
will be available from Mr. MacDonald, my Press Secretary. The name of the
Department will be the Environment, Aborigines and the Arts, and I hope that
Mr. Howson will be able to take up the appointment quickly and come to grips
with many of the problems that are so urgently in need of being answered and
solved. The second one relates to our Repatriation system. For some time
now, many organisations, many reputable ones, and particularly the Returned
Servicemen's League, have asked for an independent enquiry into the repatriation
system its objectives and its rationale and we have agreed to the independent
enquiry. Later on today, I will be issuing a press statement about it and all
the details relating to principle will be contained in that press statement.
Subsequently, of course, we will have to appoint the independent authority and
then draft the terms of reference. These will be announced as soon as we can
by the Minister for Repatriation himself.
. And the third one relates to our contribution to the East Pakistan
refugees that is those who are going into India. The Government has agreed this
morning that we will contribute $ 500, 000 to the East Pakistan refugee organisation
in Calcutta, of which $ 200, 000 will be made available immediately, and after
discussion with the Calcutta authorities, the other $ 30-0, 000 will be made available
as and when it is needed. The initial $ 200, 000 will be a cash grant to the Red
Cross, a certain amount of money for medical supplies that are desperately
needed, and the third amount will be for temporary accommodation such as tents
which have been asked for by the refugee authorities themselves. This is, as you
know, a tremendously serious affair with over three million refugees moving from
the North-East of Pakistan into India. We have expressed our great sorrow at
what has happened and we hope by this means that we will be able to make some
contribution to the assistance of the refugees themselves.
Now having said all that, may I ask those who want to ask questions
either to please stand up or put up their hands and I will call them in turn.
Q. In announcing the appointment of Mr. Howson, you made no reference
to the appointment of the Assistant Ministers whom the Parliament also approved
the appointment of. When will you be appointing these? / 2 
PM I can't finalise the decision relating to the Assistant Ministers until
Mr. Anthony returns. I had discussions with him a few days before he left but
he wasn't in a position to announce those Assistant Ministers whom he wanted to
appoint, and so I will have to leave it for the time being. But I have decided that
Ministers to assist other Ministers will be appointed in two cases. The first one
Is that the Minister in Charge of the House, that is Mr. Swartz, Minister for
National Development will have a Minister assisting him. And Mr. Snedden will
have a Minister assisting him as well. In the first case it will be Mr. Chipp, who
will also be the Deputy Leader in the House, and in the case of Mr. Snedden, it will
be Mr. Andrew Peacock. These are the only appointments I can announce at the
moment. In Mr. Snedden' s case, I think you will agree that it has to be done so that
the Minister assisting him will be able to go right through the Budget papers and
help him not only in the preparation but in the presentation of the papers to the
Cabinet.
Q. So we will have another six Assistant Ministers on top of these two
assisting Ministers....
PM. Well one is Assistant Minister and that is an official title. The other
is a Minister of State who will be assisting another Minister.
Q. Well Assistant Ministers, how many of those are we going to get?
PM. Well I don't know yet. I haven't made up my mind, but I will be
discussing this when Mr. Anthony returns.
Q. Does Mr. Peacock's appointment in this role, Sir, mean that you will
not have a Minister of State assisting you?
PM. At the moment. I want to give him greater experience. He is an able
bloke and I think it is wise to put him into different portfolios to get the experience,
and in particular I think he vwill do well in the Treasury with Mr. Snedden.
Q. In the context of the appointment of the Minister will it mean an
increase in the Public Service?
PM No.
Q. I can recall Mr. Gorton said there would be no further recruitment.
PM I haven't yet approved off any increases in the Public Service because
of the action taken.
Q. Sir, reverting to your first announcement does the change in title and
your description of its functions mean that the Executive Council Secretariat will
not now be moved from Prime Minister's Department as originally planned?
PM I think you can take it that the probability is that the Secretariat of
the Executive Council will remain with the Prime Minister's Department. But it
is not of great importance or significance, and in deference to the wishes of the
Governor-General the probabilities are I will leave it with the Prime Minister's
I haven't made up my mind about it. / 3 
Q. That means that Mr. Howson will be Vice-President of the Executive
Council?
PM No.
Q. Sir, will he be No. 27 in the order of priority?
PM Yes.
Q. Can I open up another topic, Prime Minister? On May 11 you
announced the Federal Government had decided to try to initiate dialogue with
the People's Republic of China. What steps have you taken since then to initiate
this dialogue?
PM We have taken steps to open up the dialogue, but this is one occasion
where quiet diplomacy is essential. If we were to divulge the source that we
have approached in order to open up the dialogue, we think it could do harm.
And as I have said, and I want to repeat this we want to do this carefully. We
want to measure every step we have taken, and to consider the gains for this
country. And every step taken will be in terms of a profit and loss account and
we want to see that that turns out for the benefit of Australia. So I have got to
handle this with the maximum of subtlety and caution, and I am unable at the
moment, anyhow, to mention the area where we have opened up the initiative.
Q. Again on China, Sir, doesn't the sale by BHP of $ 6-1 million worth
of pig iron represent a cut across the Strategic List?
PM No it does not. And I have made that plain already. It does not cut
across the Strategic List in any way. Every part of the supply by the BHP to
Mainland China can be provided from other sources. And if we don't do it, someone
else will.
Q. Sir, can you say whether you have had anything that you can consider
a response at all to your announcements for the Government's desire for
dialogue?
PM Yes, we have had a response. VWe have had at least two responses.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you have stated quite secret sources and
careful and quiet diplomacy...
PM I didn't say " secret sources" I didn't use those words. " Quiet
diplomacy" I said.
Q. Any chance that this same quiet diplomacy can be used in trying
to get access to new information about the Australian journalist Francis James?
PM In time, perhaps, but we had already approached other sources ' who
had immediate contacts with the Peking Government and asked if they would make
further enquiries for us about Francis James. They informed us, after some
delay, that they thought it was better that we went elsewhere to try and get the
information. / 4 
Q. Sir, are you considering Government, as distinct from private trade
missions to China, to deal with commodities other than wheat?
PM Not at the moment. I can't answer that question in fact, but we are,
as I said in the statement I made in the H ouse, giving visas to private
interests to go and over one hundred Australians went to the Canton Trade Fair,
and we can at least account for $ 12 to $ 15 million worth of contracts from this
source.
Q. Sir, you have said you have had at least two responses from China.
Have they been positive ones? Do you feel that the Chinese are interested in
dialogue with us
PM I can't tell you that. They have been probing enquiries.
Q. Sir, are the responses from China or from a third party that we are
dealing with?
PM I won't go any further than I have gone at the moment, because as I
said, if ever there is a case where we need quiet diplomacy, if we want to be
successful, this is the occasion.
Q. Can you take it this far, Sir? Can you say whether they are at a
significantly high level?
PM No, I will go no further, Mir. Reid.
Q. Mr. Snedden was reported earlier this week as saying it would be a
tough Budget. You are reported in this month's issue of the " Australian Liberal"
as having said the same thing either to the State Council or the N. S. W. State
Liberal Party. Have you discussed this with Mr. Snedden2
PM First, I never used the words " a tough Budget" anywhere. I certainly
didn't use it at 8-private meeting of Liberal Party members. Secondly, Mr. Snedden
is in control of the Budget, and it is up to him to use the descriptions that he thinks
are best. After all, I believe in Ministerial responsibility, subject, of course, to
overall control by the Prime Minister and by the Cabinet. But it is his Ministerial
responsibility to conduct the public relations associated with the Budget and I want
to make no comment about it whatsoever.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, following this, do you think it is wise to have your
Treasurer making comments on the nature of the Budget so far ahead? In this case,
one has to think of the concern this has caused the business community.
PM I think Mr. Snedden was wise in making the statement he did at the
time he made it. Equally, too, did he make a statement today or tonight I am
not quite sure when he is making it to the manufacturers. I approved of it, and
those who have good memories should compare it. with the statement I made in
the House of March of this year. You would think we were both making the same
speech.
Q. Does this mean then, that the nature of the Budget is going to be divulged
in advance... 
PM No it does not. I don't think Mr. Snedden will be making any more
speeches about this. What you have got to remember is that up until the present
moment, we have no papers whatsoever in frort of the Cabinet or the Cabinet
Secretariat.
Q. You have said that the rate of inflation in Australia is now running at
over 5% per year and this is an increase that is almost double of what it was about
two years ago. Is this Government now prepared to live with this rate of inflation
or does it want to cut back on inflation.
PM Of course we want to cut back on inflation. In a country like ours that
is a very big exporter, and has to compete in the international markets against
the international giants, and particularly, too, in the case of a country that has
so many primary producers dependent upon their income for the export of their
own products, the lower we can get inflation, the better it is for them. Now our
position is different to any other country, and it is no use saying that relatively
our position is better than others. That is not the answer in our circumstances
and we have got to do everything we can to get dovn the rate of inflation to
something that is lower than increases in prcoductivity.
Q. In January or February this year, the G. vernment, as it was,
announced decisions which wver: e ainiad at redkucinrg Is the C vcmrnmeit
now satisfied that thesc h . d some effect or does it sc; il believe that further
measures will be necessary?
PM I think your words are the best description that I can give of it
" satisfied that they are having their effect"... I can't better those words.
That is the best I can say about it. But of course we coulddo better and if we could
get inflationary pressures down, and we could have the consumer index reduced,
we would want it. This is the biggest problem we face at the moment in the
economic field, and we must do everything we can in order to see that the
pressures are reduced. But I do not believe that any measures, any other measures
will be needed until the Budget. And if I can say this in one area that is
monetary policy and interest rate policy I believe we have been pretty successful
because now we find we will have a Budget surplus, an internal Budget surplus of
$ 450 million we thought a few months ago it would be ever so mu. h lower. We
think that the interest rate structure now, subject to movement of anomalies from
time to time, is just about right. And thefact that we had $ 193 million contribution
to the recent Loan and a large number of subsc. rptions to the Loan that has just
ended is, I think, a remarkably successful res:-it from the Governmnts point
of view. I could say more about this problem of monetary control because I think
it is acting well, but I think oiiher questions have got to be asked before we get
into that.
Q. Sir, well on that very point, on the Loan result, when he announced it,
Mr. Snedden did say there was some evidence, not precise evidence, he said, that
the result was not a matter of foreign money chasing high interest rates it was
the first indicaticn, in fact, of the new measurement of capital inflow. Can you
actually say where the foreign money is coming from? / 6 
PM I think we can, but Mr. Snedden's description was the best one. From
a Treasury point of view, and from a detailed economic analysis point of view, the
word " precise" is the accurate word to use. But I remember the time when I was
in the Treasury, I instructed the Reserve Bank to devise better means of
determining both the origins and the components of capital inflows. And we
strengthened what was called the ticket system, that is the system used by the
private trading banks and the Commonwealth Bank under which they ticked off
various entries in tickets, and when money was received in Australia and sent
them to the Reserve Bank. And that was an indication but only an indication
of both source and component. At the same time, we asked additional questions
when approval was required for the moment of funds into Australia. And I think
you can take it that of the components, and no more than the components, that
a large amount of the money was in terms of private investment. A large amount
was because of the maturity of the Australian money market system and Australian
corporations have been able to borrow large sums particularly in the United
States. This is called iustitutional loans. It is obvious, too, that there isn ' t a
great deal in portfolio investment because if there was the Stock Exchange would
be rising and not falling. Other amounts, too, are what are called lags. We do
find that, wisely, Australian importers are now delaying payment for the goods
that they have purchased and this is another reason why the capital inflow is
somewha,-t bigger than you would have otherwise expected. In other words, while
we can't get the figures accurately enough for statistical purposes, at least we
have got a pretty good idea that there isn't very much hot money involved.
Q. Bearing in mind your recent statement that the Government wanted
the South African rugby and cricket tours to go ahead as planned, and that
Mr. Whitlam has been rather silent on this in the last few weeks, and some trade
unions in recent days have said they would not ban the tours, do you expect there
will now be little difficulty with the South Africans touring this country and staying
at the hotels, and if there are some bans by the unions that affect the tours, has
the Government promised to make Government air transport available to get the
tours around the country?
PM I have made one statement and that is that we want the tour to go on
and we will do nothing which is likely to obstruct it. If it so happens that an
attempt is made by Mr. Hawke to obstruct it, then, of course, we will look at
the position and decide whether the Government is to take action. But that is
hypothetical. But can I now that you have opened up this subject, state the
Government's policy clearly to you. First of all, we don't believe in the
interference in the affairs of other countries as we resent other countries
interfering in our affairs. Secondly, we b~ ilieve that politics ought to be divorced
from your sporting and recreational, artistic and other cultural types of activity.
I don't believe, and no-one in my Government believes, that an ACTU or any
political party should interfere in what are purely domestic matters. For this
reason, we feel the tour should go on, and I believe this is the wish of the great
majority of the Australian people. A Gallup Poll was decisive in saying that the
people wanted it. The Queenslander view was more than decisive, and
consequently, I believe the tour should continue. And I will continue, too, in
this way. We don't like apartheid, and I made this clear and the Australian
people's feelings clear to the South African Government. But we don't think that
clumsy methods, methods that depend upon intimidation are every likely to be
successful. On the contrary, they are likely to be counter -productive. And I 
think the-attitude taken by so many African States now Malawi, Sierra Leone,
Lesotho is the right course to follow they are but a few of the countries I can
mention. They believe the proper way to handle this problem is by dialogue and
by co-operation. Those are phrases I heard used by the President of Malawi
myself, and I think if we want to get a solution to this problem, we had better leave
it in their hands rather than the clumsy methods that I mentioned just a few moments
ago.
Q. Do you think Mr. Hawke should have corresponded direct with
Mr. Vorster?
PM That is Mr. Haweke's business. I don't want to make any comment
about him. But if the previous implication can be implied as aimned at Mr. Hawke,
then you are entitled to make the implication.
Q. Qantas was held to-ransom for half a million dollars yesterday. It is
a Federal Government airline the Federal Government is in charge of Civil
Aviation. The New South Wiales Government has today offered a reward and your
Government hasn't. Do you have any plans along these lines?
PM Yes. We have decided to offer in addition to the New South Wales
Government a reward of $ 30, 000D.
Q. On that subject, are you involved otherwise than in the offering of
a reward. As you ultimately, through the Treasury, will be the donor of the
$ 500, 000 that was paid, have you any views on the course of action that Qantas
adopted in this?
PM No, I haven't. When I was telephoned by my Press Officer at the
Governor-General's residence yesterday, at round about 5. 40, my first thought
was for the safety of the passengers and the crew. And I consequently felt I
should get the senior civil servants into my office immediately and as many
Ministers as I could who were in Canberra, and I contemplated getting Billy
Snedden back from the Treasurer back from Melbourne, so that we could
discuss it. But then I find in my first telephone conversation with Sir Donald
Anderson of Civil Aviation that the decision had been made.
Q. Have you got any viewis or, the....
PM No, I have got no viewis. i will leave that for Mr. Cotton to handle
with the Treasurer and they will have to put up any thoughts they wish to me.
Q. Prime Minister, to get back to the China dialogue for a minute. In
viewi of the Government' s initiatives, do you think they could receive any setback
by the Labor Party mission which is to visit there next month?
PM I don't think so. The Chi nese are calm and collected people in making
these decisions. Increasingly the power in the hierarchy seems to be shifting to
the professional officials and away from those engaged in the Cultural Revolution.
And if the power structure is altering, we feel that the Foreign Office, and
particularly the Premiership, will be handled in a much more subtle way than was
done previously. I don't think they can do very much harm. They may perhaps
be able to do some good. 0 0 0 / 8 
Q. Back on the domestic political scene. There is a group called the
Businessmen for Democratic Government. who apparently doesn't like your reign.
What can you tell us about this group? Do you regard them as a serious threat to
you?
PM No I don't. As you know this is pretty old hat stuff because they tried
it when Mr. Gorton became the Prime Minister and wanted to run my colleague
Alan Fairhall against himn. It petered out fairly quickly.
Q. You don't say who it was...
PM Mr. Pat Sayers. But if you have read the National Times on Sunday,
they had an interview with him and he then stated that his fundamental objective
was to destroy the L~ beral and Country Parties and it wasn't an attack on me
personally. Now he hao disclosed that he is a front for the Labor Party, a front
probably for left wing socialists. And he refuses to deny that of the so-called
Liberals who he says are supporting him, or to confirm whether they are
American concerns, and it is these American concerns that will be providing some
of the funds.
Q. Apropos the Treasurer speaking to the manufacturers, there has been
some suggestion the 20 per cent investment allowa-ce might be restored the
per cent investment allowance that was suspended last February. There was
one report, I think in the " Financial Review" about that. Have you been thinking
along those lines for the Budget?
PM What do you mean? ' That it might be reinstated?
Q. Yes.
PM No, it won' t.
Q. Sir, we have all read " Time Any comment?
PM The " Time" article?
Q. Yes.
PM No, I don't want to comment about it. Personally I wasn't very much
affected by the article. There were some quite complimentary things and others
that were untrue. But my Press-Officer, who is very much like you he belongs
to your group, and to your clan he felt that there was a matter here of
professional ethics involved when there were two statements that were not correct.
On his own initiative, he wrote a letter to " Time" stating what the two mistakes
were. He was right, and frankly, getting to know him better and better every
day, I think the attitude he adopted was the correct one. i other words, he said
he had put some questions to me. He had not done so. Secondly he said that
he asked me a question on Australia in the 1970s. He didn't do so at the formal
discussions, but as he got to the door., and I was moving out to get a plane, he
then asked me the question. I said, " Look, wouldn't it -be better if I got a few
notes for you and you had a word to one of my officials my Private Secretary,
Kim Jones". He said, " Well, perhaps I may". But the " perhaps" was the right
words. He didn't.' / 9 
Q. Prime-Minister, what are your thoughts on the future of Australia?
PM On which?
Q. On the future of Australia.
PM I live here. I am proud of it. I wouldn't want to go anywhere else and
if I was anywhere else, I would want to come here.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, in the uproar of the last week of the Session of
the House of Representatives, it was the view that this was partly caused by the
bank-up of legislation towards the end of the Session and that you had instituted a
Departmental enquiry into how this could be avoided. How is that enquiry going?
PM We have moved a long way. The first action that has been taken is to
reform our Legislation Committee. Previously the Legislation Committee only
acted to ensure bills brought before the H ouse conformed to the decisions made
by Cabinet. We have now widened its jurisdiction to provide for continuous
programming of bills during the whole of the session of the House. And we want to
ensure that instead of coming in in a rush in the last days of the House, they are
systematically and progressively introduced as the House proceeds. Now you know
just as well as I do that this has been a problem every since Federation and
that we can't completely overcome the problem, but I think by this method we will
be able to go a long way to get bills introduced in the early and middle parts of
the Session and we will be able to reduce the tensions and the rush right at the end.
The Departmental officials are also looking at the problem of this committee and
what other methods can be taken, and I think you k now that a Party Committee
under Malcolm Fraser has been appointed to I ook at the whole procedures of the
House. We are proceeding steadily. I hope that by the time the House meets we
will be able to say what we think ought to be done. But I have already mentioned
to you the major steps.
Q. Sir, there was a fairly simple way of overcoming the problem created
by the rush of legislation on this creation and that was to have extended the Sittings
of the House by an extra week or two as in fact the Senate finished up doing. Could
you tell us why this wasn't done?
PM Look, that would take me all day. But I will give you three explanations
if you like. The first one was no doubt due to the fact that we had a change in the
leadership of the Liberal-Party and of the Government, and consequently in the
personnel of the Attorney-General and of the Leader of the House. The second
one was that if you look at the bills, you will see that six of them were surrounding
one substantive bill and five of them were a matter of consequential amendments
to other bills. Now the main bill itself, Commonwealth Employees' Compensation
Bill, I put the original elements of the bill on the table of the House when I was
the Treasurer. That is how long ago they have had it, and the Labor Party wanted
it and didn't want any amendments to it, so you count out that six. That left
eleven. We then had three more one on the science blocks which we could very
easily have left, and that reduces it to ten, and thc othtur two were two normnal
orthodox Treasury Bills that are necessary always brought in at this time and
didn't introduce any novel features whatsoever. So we had eight. We had one other
real difficulty. -~ And I don't think we would have struck any real problems but for
this diff iculty. 
Normally in a guillotine, it runs on from a particular hour to another particular
hour from 3 o'clock on one day to five o'clock the next day am or pm whichever
you like. On this occasion, we introduced it in the form of so many minutes or
hours for each particular bill and that gave the Opposition a glorious opportunity
in order to exploit the Standing Orders of the House in order to frustrate the
passage of the Government's legislation. But that is past history. That won't
happen again, particularly that type of guillotine. I can assure You of that. What
is important, and it is critically important, is that I do everything in my power to
see that in f uture, there is adequate time and that we schedule the bills
so that we give the important ones plenty of time for discussion and we put them
through the House in accordance with the programme that can be approved of by
the Legislation Committee.
Q. A related question You elaborated your new China policy first in a
press statement after the invitation arrived for the Labor delegation, and then at a
dinner which was originally going to be a private dinner. Why didn't you explain
the Government's China policy to the House of Representatives which rose only a
few days earlier? And don't you think that is what Sir Robert Menzies and possibly
the late Mr. Holt would have done?
PM I don't think he would have done it. I don't think Mr Holt would have done
it and I have heard no comment whatsoever from the Labor Party about it or asked
that it should have been done there. So that is the point. The second point is it was
an enormously important meetLIg of businessmen and commercial people in New
South Wales and I thought it was a suitable opportunity to do it. I wanted it to
receive wide publicity and it did. But above all, I feel that this was a matter of
such.... I wanted to get the widest publicity for it and it did. And I believe that the
overseas reaction to that speech has been as great as any overseas reaction I have
known, certainly known, during the course of the last five years. And it did a lot
of good.
Q. The Senate Committee on Securities and Exchange has been very much in
the news, particularly with this decision calling for brokers' accounts for the last
five years. Are you quite satisfied that the Committee acted properly in doing this?
And if the Committee, in your opinion, overstepped the line, would you initiate
some action?
PM This is a S enate matter and I would not interfere in any -way.
Q. You took a personal hand in negotiations with the Australian Medical
Association over doctors' fees. Last week, the Health Minister announced that
more than 20 per cent of Australian doctors were chargi ng more than the common
fee. Do you not believe that this indicates a breakdown in the Government's
Health Service?
PM I don't think so. But if I can tell you the facts. When I first saw the
bill that would have to be paid for the increase in doctors' fees, it was more than
million, and after negotiations with them, we got it cut down to 3 million
which our own Health authorities thought was reasonable and fair. So if that isn't
an achievement, I don't know what is. Secondly the AMA itself said it would try
and persuade doctors to accept the common fee and they are doing their best to
achieve that objective. Third, in the case of the specialist fees, they will not have
.00/ 11 
an across-the-board increase. Butrwhat they-will do is look at an anomalies and if
they want to get an increase, they have agreed to discuss the facts with us before
they make a decision. All in all, I thii it is a remarkable achievement on the
part of a new Minister and I personally would like to give him a pat on the back here
and now for his achievement. If I could add this to you, I am proud of the three of
them.
Q. The question of the Securities and Exchange Commission apart, do you
believe that with the risc in the influence . and wo-r of ParL-mTentary Committees,
there should be some guidelines set down for the protection of witnesses?
PM I have submitted this to the Attorney-Gneral. He is giving me a report
with the Leader of the House, Mr. Svwart, the Parliament:-y Committee systcm,
particularly as it r-igh,:. te co tihe Hous. Re-:: r sentativp., tieo Constitutional
position and guidelines as well. And also some guidelines relating to protection
of the individual, but I haven't got the report yet and I won't receive it for some
time.
Q. Do you intend to widen the Committee system in the House of
Representatives?
PM Wait until I get the report, please.
Q. The investment allowance, Prime Minister. You said the Government
would not restore it. Various eiements in the business community have been very
anxious that it should be restored, and I would like to know when and why the
Government mace . dee cision not to retore it. What effect do you think this will
have on the Armco steelworks at Jervis Bay?
PM One, we have not made any decision not to restore it. It is suspended.
That is the first point I want to make. The second point the first question I
received was from you, David, David Solomon, relating to inflation. This is one
of tahen ti-in: ion measures that we've gct. And if you look at the latest statistics
relating to invtmn in plant and equiprr. . t from private sources, you will see that
the rise is a littl. bit alarming. And I just add this now, too, the increase
in commercial building and industrial buaii'ng is at boom levels and this has got to
taper off soon or we will have to be asking the indus try why they can't live up to
their promises to us.
Q. I thought you said in answer to an earlier question it would not be
restored.
PM Well I didn't mean permanently. I said perhaps. If I can explain it,
it is suspended. We have made no decision whatsoever with regard to ending the
suspension.
Q. Regarding the Common Market, and Britain's entry. Any opinions or
comment?
PM No, I can't. As you know, in one way or another over $ 360 million
worth of Australian exports into Continental countries EEC countries will be
involved. And it is Mr. Anthony's intention or objective in his present visit to see
what arrangemerts he can make with British and EEC countries to try and get a
better transi.'-nal period as well as making arrangements for our raw materials.
I can't add anything to that. / 12 
Q. Do you accept it as inevitable that Britain will go into the Common Market?
Do you accept that?
PM I would never say that anything is inevitable, but knowing Mr. Heath
as I know him, and I know him very well I know he has got his heart set on it
and he wil be difficult to divert from getting into the EEC.
Q. While you made the point quite effectively that the agreement with the
doctors was very satisfactory from both the Government and the doctors' viewpoint,
can you view it as satisfactory when your own Minister for Health says that
per cent are being charged more than the common fee? Isn't there some deg. ree
of satisfaction needed for the patient as well as for the Government and the doctors?
PM Yes, but there is a lot to be said, Mr. Reid, before you get to that
point of view. I don't like this 20 per cent and if I knew how to handle it, I would
do so. At the moment I have got oo recommendation before me, so I can't give you
a precise answer to your question. But there are two factors to be remembered.
The first one is that we have decided that the direct cost to the patient, him or
herself, will not be more than 80 cents in the case of a surgery visit, $ 1.20 in the
case of a home visit, or $ 5 in the case of any procedure that is the total procedure.
So to that extent, the patient is protected. The second important point is that we
want the best m-edical service that we can get for all people including the
pensioners. And so far as I know, there will be no drop whatsoever, and perhaps
even an improvement, in the care and the attention given to the individual himself
or herself.
Q. Recently in a glorious display of the operations of democracy in this
country, two of our colleagues were hauled before the bar of the Senate and publicly
rebuked for breach of privilege. You will recall that after the Frank Brownie scandal,
Sir, Sir Robert Menzies undertook to review the privileges situation. Would you
be prepared to revive this tired promise?
PM I have done it already.
Q. In what way, Sir?
PM I have now asked again I have got to refer, I am sorry, to the Attorney
but I have asked the Attorney to prepare a Cabinet submission and to co-operate with
others of my colleagues so that I can take it to Cabinet.
Q. Sir, Australia's international reserves are currently at record levels.
It has been argued that this is a bit like stuffing a mattress full of money. Do you
intend to allow them to increase much further, or adopt any new policy with regard
to our reserves?
PM So far as I am concerned, as a former Treasurer and one who likes
to see this country develop, I welcome this money coming into the place. You can
never tell when adverse conditions might occur and it is pretty good to have
reserves of the kind that we have got at the moment. But it must be obvious that
I didn't make clear what I said in answer to a previous question off the probable
size, but not necessarily a detailed and precise size of the component. When
you look at those components, to a large extent they are building up the greatness
of this country. And if they build up the greatness of this country, then we should
welcome them. 
Q. Continuing with the doctors. You term it a. remarkable achievement
that the doctors asked for $ 30-odd million and got $ 9 million...
PM $ 35 million.
Q. Is it not standard negotiating practice to ask for more than you expect
to get? Is that not just what the doctors have done?
PM I don't think so. They had their own formulas. They had statistics
presented. But if you don't mind me putting this to you, I don't want to come here
and make this a debating society. It will ruin these discussions if I do. I am telling
you the facts. Everyone can make up their own mind whether they agree with
my conclusions or they don't.
Q. When Mr. Malcolm Fraser resigned as Defence Minister, you revealed
that he had recommended, and his recommendation agreed with that of the
Administrator of Papua and New Guinea, that the call-out order for the Pacific
Island Regiment should be revoked. I think we went so far as to suggest that it had
an element of illegality about it. Has in fact that order been revoked?
PM As to the first part of your question I was not aware that Mr. Malcolm
Fraser had made that statement or that it might have had an element of illegality
about it. But I did discuss this matter with....
( iterjection) He said it in the House.
PM Did he? Oh, well, I don't always hear everything and I don't remember
that. But I did discuss this with the Minister for Defence, Mr. Gorton, sometime
ago, and instructions were then issued to revoke the order.
Q. It has been revoked?
PM Yes.
Q. Prime Minister, in Townsville on Sunday, ABSCHOL, the National
Conference of Aboriginal Education, accused you of selling out the Queensland
aborigines in your arrangements with Mr. Bjelke-Petersen. Will Mr. Howson be
asked to look at those arrangements before they are initialled or agreed to by the
Commonwealth?
PM May I put the position to you as accurately as I can? Mr. Wentworth
put 11 recommendations to me that came from the Council of Aborigines in
Australia, that is, each of the Local Reserve Councils combining together to put
their recommendations to us. I thought these were authoritative, and the best
group that we could get recommendations from. And I was anxious that their
opinions and their recommendations should be put into effect. I took them up with
the Queensland Premier and his officials, and nine of them were agreed to such
things as their right to leave the reserves if they wanted to, who should control
access again, and that was to be in the hands of the Reserve Councils vagrancy,
the separate rights of the Torres Strait Islanders, control over their own assets.
and the supply of liquor and matters of this kind. In every case, with the
exception of two, we agreed with the requests of the Aboriginal Councils themselves.
In two cases, we had variations. In the case of alcohol, we thought they should 
have the right of local option, and the aborigines on the Mission or the Reserveitself
should have the right to decide whether they wanted alcohol.-and. under what
conditions. I think that is fair. We have local conditions, even in Melbourne,
that staid city. Secondly, we had one other problem that I felt the recommendations,
made by the Queensland Government were right. And they thought that special
legislation should be introduced to protect aborigines who were given control over
their own assets and who were exploited by undesirable elements. In these cases,
special provision would be made to protect them. This is not discrimination. This
is protection in their favour. As to ABSCHOL, I am a little amazed that they
could make a comment at this stage, because as yet, they don't know the exact
details of what the Queensland Government is doing. They should wait until they
know and until we are told. And if we are not satisfied, I will immediately
approach Mr. Bjelke-Petersen again.
Q. It is not closed then, Sir?
PM No, of course it is not. But they couldn't be making a rational comment
about it because they don't know, I don't know, and the Queensland Government
itself doesn't know today the exact terms of the bill1 they intend to introduce into
the House.
Q. Sir, the Institute of Aboriginal Studies expects that as a result of
financial hardship it might have to cut back its research programmes. Do you
feel this is something of an anomaly with regard to Government aboriginal policy?
PM You would have to say that again, I don't quite follow what you are
driving at.
Q. The Institute of Aboriginal Studies is also being crimped by the general
cutbacks in Public Service spending, and may have to reduce its research programme.
Do you feel this is somewhat anomalous in view of the current concern with
aboriginal advancement and welfare?
PM It is not a justified concern of theirs. I don't think there is any
prospect of it happening.
Q. Sir, we have just had the first Member of Parliament, an aboriginal,
elected here he is on the verge of being elected. Do you foresee the time,
possibly, when an aborigine might even sit in the chair you occupy now?
PM I had not thought of it, but it certainly is not out of the question.
Q. Prime Minister, you indicated earlier that you agreed with Mr Snedden
that the Budget would be a tough one. Without..
PM I didn't say tbat. I didn't make that comment about it. With great
respect to you, I said I had not used the phrase myself, Mr. Snedden had used.
I believed it was up to Mr. Snedden to carry out his own public relations operations
himself and I thinik he is doing it well.
Q. In view of that, do you disagree with Mr. Sn edden that the Budget
won't be a tough one? 
PM I don't make any comment about it. Implicit in what I said is that I
will make no comment about his Budget. Look, could I put this to you. I don't
like people interfering with the Minister who is responsible not only for the
production of the Budget under my supervision, of course, and with Cabinet
approval. I don't believe in people expressing their own personal views about it.
I have lived there for twenty-one years and this will be my twenty-first succesfive
Budget, and I want to give him a fair go to be able to explain it in his own te":. ils.
And when the Budget is delivered, to be able to assure the Australian people wt
the best support that I could give him, that it is in the interests, of the -nation-and
the interests of the individual as well.
Q. Sir, did you always get-a fair go with your Budgets?
PM Who was that now?
Q. It was suggested in your recent term as Treasurer that you yourself
were anticipating a tough Budget. This didn't come to pass. This gives rise to
my question. Did you always get a fair go as Treasurer yourself with your
Budgets?
PM You know I wouldn't make a comment on a question of that kind.
Q. On the question of the Budget, do you still hold hopes of giving a pension
increase?
PM I will make no comment whatsoever about the Budget, other than you
can take it if I have made a statement in the past, I will be carefully watching to
see that what I said then was not forgotten.
Q. You are committed towards a pension increase aren't you, Sir?
PM Yes.
Q. Sir, what are your reactions to suggestions that public servants should
have greater freedom to make public statements, particularly in areas which are
not directly concerned with their own Department's work?
PM Here we. -get into an extremely difficult area because I don't know how
strong the movement is that increased rights should be given to civil and public
servants. Certainly they should not have a right to make public comment on any
matter at all with which they have been associated in policy or administrative
decisions. Secondly, there is another very big area that they previously imcntioned
themselves that they feel they would like to be able to make statements about.
Now, I don't feel they should make statements about people's incomes or their
private lives or what is likely to happen or the way in which they think Budget
changes or other social changes should be made. But this has been referred to the
Public Service Board for a recommendation to us. And the Council itself was asked
if it would make recommendations. So far they haven't made recommendations or
proposals to the Public Service Board, When they do and when the Public Service
Board let us know the facts, and what they recommend, we can have a detailed
look at it. Until then, we can't. But I do say this that the Public Service is in a
position where it must not be permitted to interfere with the rights of the individual 
or discuss individual rights and privileges when they might have access. to information,
that other people-outside the public service might rot have access to.
Q. What is the reason for thesix months' delay in finalising the nuclear
power station contract?
PM In anticipation of this question, thinking it might be raised, I discussed
it with Mr. Swartz yesterday, and he has assured me that he has had negotiations
with the interested parties and that he will shortly be submitting -either a letter
to me or some recommendations to me which I will probably hawre to take to
Cabinet.
Q. The submission has been ready to go before Cabinet for over a month,
hasn't it?
PM That is not correct. No.
Q. Prime Minister, the Labor Party's Federal Conference in Launceston
next month is to be open to the Press. The Liberal Party's Federal Council
Meeting in Canberra next week is not to be open to the Press. Is there any reason
in your mind why the workings of the Liberal machine fshould not be open to
public scrutiny as those of the Labor machine now are?
PM There are two immense differences between the two parties. Despite
what might have been said, the first one is that you well know that in a Labor Party
Conference everything is arranged beforehand, and ( laughter) I know you
laugh and you should and so you should it makes a farce of the whole
business but as you know at one, I think, probably two years ago decisions
were made on a " yes" or " no" immediately the conference resumed. We don't
do that. We in fact go in and discuss them at length. And the second critically
important point and this is the critical one that our own organisation, while
the custodian of principles, and a group that can make recoiinmidations for thern,
cannot enforce those recommendations. The third point is we regard ourselves
as a national government. And consequently while we examine in the closest
detail and as sympathetically as we can recommendations and reports that come
from the Liberal and the Country Parties, we don't regard them as decisive. We
make up our minds in the national interest. But nonetheless, as Prime Minister, I
will have a look next time we have an Executive Meeting after we have a Council
Meeting on Monday or Tuesday, I will raise this question myself.
Q. It is a fact also, Sir, that the New South Wales Liberal Conference
is conducted in the same way as the ALP2 conference and does not seem to attract
the disabilities that you suggest might be attracted in the Federal field.
PM Did you say New South Wales?
Qt Yes.
PM Victoria is. Not New South Wales. 
Q. The wool industry seems to be in a worse shape than every, despite the
establishment of the Wool Commission and emergency aid grants the government
gave last year. Can you say what action the Government proposes to take now,
particularly in the light of decisions by many woolgrower organisations that the
industry needs a price of 40 cents a pound to survive? And will this mean more
Government money for the Wool Commission to allow to lift its reserve prices?
PM First of all, I think I should make it clear what Mr. Anthony did say.
He made two statements. The first one was that he believed woolgrowers'
organisattons should get together and should themselves say what kind of action
they want the Government to take. But he equally made it plain that he didn't
believe in subsidies. Thirdly he made it clear that he felt that the big woolbuyers
of the world would accommodate a rise in the floor price of wool if it were raised
by the Commission. It is not a matter I feel that I can enter into a debate about
at this time, but it is a matter uriJW the closest scrutiny by officials and by
the Government and when the approMte time comes, I will be able to make a
statement about it.
Mr. Reid, you look a little puzzled about the answer to my question.
Now, in New South Wales the Liberal Party Council is not open to the public. I
have been at the last two, I think, and they were not open.
Q. Your speeches were reported, Sir, and so also was that of Mr. Askin.
I took it on that so also was much of the dialogue either that or someone was
leaking like a sieve...
PM They were, too, you were quite right. Well they might just as well
have been open. A better way of putting it. Perhaps that is the way I should have
put it, too.
Q. Sir, Mr. Anthony's new-found abhorrence of subsidies... Does
this mean there will be no more subsidies to the wool industry?
PM No, it doesn't.
Q. Next month, you will be facing up to the Premiers again, and as you
know, the Commonwealth hand-outs to the States constitute about one-third of
the Budget outlays. Now in the cort ext of Mr. Snedden's statement that we will
have a tough Budget, does this mean it will be less likely that you will be able
to make some sort of supplementary allowance as has been made in the last few
years and to the Premiers this year?
PM I think you would know just as well as I do that I would not make
any statement about what is likely to happen or proposals that are likely to be put
by the Commonwealth to the State Governments at the Premiers' Conference.
There is no greater source of irritation than to be giving indications of what you
are likely to do at Premiers' Conferences. And as I want their goodwill and
co-operation, I am not going to irritate them at this stage. They are the first
ones to hear what our proposals are. And the se cond point is, rather like the
Budget, I think you should hold your confidence until the last moment because you
can never anticipate what is likely to happen in this mobile country of oura.
Conditions can change so quickly. 
Q. PM
Q. PM Q. don't ask
moment. When you add the other words that Mir. Nixon used... " in his lifetime"...
me to be saying what kind of a mission I am likely to play at the
I find I have got my hands full.
WNould you like to visit China?
Yes, I would.
Any plans on that, Sir?
No, none.
Is Mr. Nixon coming here this year?
Not that I know.
States for Have you made any advance with your study of a growth tax for the
submission at the next Premiers' Conference?
Yes. I think that draft papers will be submitted to me by the
Treasurer Mr. Snedden in the first week of next month.
Can you give us any indication of what it will be?
No.
Has Taiwan reacted to our initiatives on China, Sir?
Yes. In what way?
I am sorry I can't tell you. 0. / 19
Does that mean then that Mr. Snedden's statement was perhaps a
little premature? No. It wasn't, and I read carefully Mr. Snedden's statement that he
made today. I think it is excellent.
On China, Sir. You said the announcement had a greater effect
overseas than anything for five years. Gould you tell us what sort of effect they
had particularly? No, I can't. I'm sorry. But I have watched the cables very
carefully and I have been informed of the various kinds of discussions that
have taken place and I can assure you that the statement that I made or, the
Thursday has been the subject of questions, that it has caused a great deal of
discussion overseas. Much of it, I think, very successful.
PreBident Nixon said about a month ago that he hoped to visit China.
Would you be in the same position?*
PM
PM PM PM
Q. PM PM PM 
Q. I was wondering how you reconcile your statement earlier this year on
Omega that it was not sufficiently accurate to be used by ballistic missile
submarines. hn Admiral Zummalt's statement this week, he said theoretically it
could be used.
PM Well Admiral Zummalt has said that. I got the text of what he said
today, but there are so many gaps in the tape recording of it that frankly I can't
quite make out what he did say. W1hat he meant, anyhow. But can I put two
proposals to you which are authoritative and come from the Americans in very,
very recent days. The first one is there is no receiver now known that can be
put into a ballistic missile type of submarine that can receive the Omega.
Secondly we have been assured by the United States Government that it has no
intention of putting Omega in any of its ballistic missile submarines and that is
h as no plans whatsoever to do so. And thirdly you can take it as absolutely positive
that there are so many better systems, far far better systems than th e Omega
that there would be no reason wvhy it ought to be included. Now to me there is a
lot of nonsense about this debate. I would like to know whether those who are
creating the debate want us to stop the Omega system in Australian waters for the
use of surface transp~ ort? It is a remarkably good system for merchant marine
and for that matter for naval purposes. And I have not heard anyone yet who has
said they want to see it abandoned for these purposes. It has a lot of advantages,
and as I say, at the moment while it is theoretically possible in anti-ballistic
missile submarines, there is no intention of putting them in, and no receiver yet
capable of receiving the messages.
Q. Sir, when you became Leader of the Liberal Party you spoke of the
desire for a greater flow of information from -the Government to the people and at
a National Press Club interview about six weeks ago, you spoike of an open door
policy. To some journalists it seems that in fact there hasn't been an increase
in the amount of flow of information, that it seems a long time between press
conferences. Is there any reason why you can't follow the precedure which
State Premiers have of hay ing Press Conferences, perhaps even daily, I am not
suggesting they should be daily, that you would find it possible to have them
daily perhaps weekly. Or of briefing the press, I mean the Press Gallery,
on what happens after Cabinet meetings on decisions. which have been firmly
taken?
PM As to the second part of your question, I think it is worthwhile studying
and I will put it to immediate study and make up my mind what ought to 2be done.
As to the substance of your question it is time. I can't fit in anything more. I
would like you to have a look at my diary and see if you can get a better set of
priorities than my staff give.
Mr. Barnes Thank you very much Prime Minister. We hope it is not too long
before we see you again.
At the end of the press conference, the Prime Minister said he regretted there
had not been a question about Mrs. Burns. o. 
19.
Q. I was wondering how you reconcile your statement earlier this year on
Omega that it was not sufficiently accurate to be used by ballistic missile
submarines. h3 Admiral Zummalt's statement this week, he said theoretically it
could be used.
PM Well Admiral Zummalt has said that. I got the text of what he said
today, but there are so many gaps in the tape recording of it that frankly I can't
quite make out what he did say. What he meant, anyhow. But can I put two
proposals to you which are authoritative and come from the Americans in very,
very recent days. The first one is there is no receiver now known that can be
put into a ballistic missile type of submarine that can receive the Omega.
Secondly we have been assured by the United States Government that it has no
intention of putting Omnega in any of its ballistic missile submarines and that is
has no plans whatsoever to do so. And thirdly you can take it as absolutely positive
that there are so many better systems, far far better systems than the Omega
that there would be no reason why it ought to be included. Now to me there is a
lot of nonsense about this debate. I would like to know whether those who are
creating the debate want us to stop the Omega system in Australian waters for the
use of surface transport? It is a remarkably good system for merchant marine
and for that matter for naval purposes. And 1. have not heard anyone yet who has
said they want to see it abandoned for these purposes. It has a lot of advantages,
and as I say, at the moment while it is theoretically possible in anti-ballistic
missile submarines, there is no intention of putting them in, and no receiver yet
capable of receiving the messages.
Q. Sir, when you became Leader of the Liberal Party you spoke of the
desire for a greater flow of information from -the Government to the people and at
a National Press Club interview about six weeks ago, you spoke of an open door
policy. To some journalists it seems that in fact there hasn't been an increase
in the amount of flow of information, that it seems a long time between press
conferences. Is there any reason why you can't follow the precedure which
State Premiers have of hay ing Press Conferences, perhaps even daily, I am not
suggesting they should be daily, that you would find it possible to have them
daily perhaps weekly. Or of briefing the press, I mean the Press Gallery,
on what happens after Cabinet meetings on decisions which have been firmly
taken?
PM As to the second part of your question, I think it is worthwhile studying
and I will put it to immediate study and make up my mind what ought to be done.
As to the substance of your question it is time. I can't fit in anything more. I
would like you to have a look at my diary and see if you Can get a better set of
priorities than my staff give.
Mr. Barnes Thank you very much Prime Minister. We hope it is not too long
before we see you again.
At the end of the press conference, the Prime Minister said he regretted there
had not been a question about Mrs. Burns. o. 
Q. What were you going to say about Mrs. Burns?
This is the lady that owes the 003?
PM Well the answer is this. I can put it to you in two different components.
First of all, she has a right of appeal to a court iA' she wishes to exercise that right.
If she does we will pay her costs. We don't at the moment knmow whether she wants
to or not. Secondly, as to the amount she owes. W-hen. I was the Treasurer, I made
a decision that if a person has been overpaid, and car, establish good faith in the
receipt of those moneys, that we will onl y insist upon the repayment of the amount
that was paid to them during the course of the last year. In her case, it would be
something of the order of 4C2, off which she has paid $ 5383, leaving a residue
of $ 944. So to that extent we ara~ prepared to negotiate with her, and we certainly
will not ask that our costs be paid by her. I thought I would get this question. I
was sure I would. And if I can say so, .1 am rather glad because it shows how
human you are because it is the first time I have know-n you to have been off the
mark. 



PM No. 62/ 1971
FOR PRESS: OUTCOME OF THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, JUE-1971
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. WILLIAM McMAHON
Like the Conference in April the discussion at today's
Premiers' Conference was both frank and extremely fruitful.
In my opening statement to the Conference ( copies of which
have been circulated) I said that the Commonwealth accepted the
States' need for some greater flexibility and freedom in revenue
raising. However, the constitutional position clearly debars
the States from imposing virtually any form of sales tax and,
on broad grounds of economic and social policy, the Commonwealth
Government has decided that it would. not be advisable to re-open
the field of personal income tax to the States. In these
circumstances, I indicated that the Commonwealth was willing to
transfer pay-roll taxation to the States on the basis set out in
the detailed Commonwealth offer on that matter which was
circulated to the Premiers following my opening statement.
The Premiers re-affirmed their previously expressed views
that the States need access to a new area of " growth" taxation
to assist them in financing improvements in the services which
State Governments provide. They indicated that, while some of
them would prefer that the States be given access to income tax,
they accepted that pay-roll tax would constitute-. a useful
addition to their resources for revenue-raising purposes. 
The Premiers pointed out, however, that the amount
of revenue that they might be able to raise from the tax
in 1971-72 would not in itself be sufficient to enable them
to deal with the large deficits facing them in that year,
even after taking account of other possibilities for
improving their budgetary outlook.
The Premiers emphasised strongly that, in these
circumstances, they would find it very difficult to cope
with their prospective 1971-72 budget deficits which, they
said, are abnormally high due largely to the unavoidable
" full year" costs of the extraordinary wage and salary awards
granted in 1970-71.
The Treasurer and I both indicated that the Commonwealth
recognised that the States were again faced  n 1971-72 with
abnormal budgetary problems. At the same time we pointed out
that the Commonwealth is itself faced with a very difficult
budgetary problem in 1971-72, and this in circumstances where
there is a need to do everything possible to combat
inflationary pressures. . I also again emphasised that public
authority expenditures are undpubtedly playing a leading role
in the generation of these pressures. After careful
consideration the Commonwealth came to the view that, as part
of a co-operative effort, it should be prepared to play
some further part.
On these grounds the Commonwealth agreed that it should
assist the States to meet their prospective revenue
deficiencies by providing total additional revenue 
assistance in 1971-72 estimated at $ 62.7 million.
Of this amount, $ 40 million will take the form of a
non-recurring grant to be distributed between the States in
proportion to their financial assistance grants. A table showing
the approximate distribution of $ 40 million is attached.
The remaining amount of about $ 22.7 million represents
the difference between the amount the States will receive from
pay-roll tax collections in 1971-72. and the amount by which the
1971-72 formula grants will be reduced that is,, the-deduction
from the 1971-72 grants will be-smaller by this amount, This
smaller reduction of about $ 22.7 million will also be made in
the " base" used to determine the formula grants for 1972-73 and
subsequent years so that the States will continue to benefit
from it in those years. Over the remaining four years of the
financial assistance grants the States should receive an
additional 8100 million or so in this way. The method by-which
the estimated amount of $ 22.7 million will be distributed
between the States is described in' more detail in the
attachment. A feature of the agreement betwebn the Commonwealth
and the States to transfer pay-roll tax to the 6tatee, and 
which is referred to in the detailed Commonwealth offer,
is that, as from the date of transfer sometime in 1971-72,
wages and salaries paid by local authorities, other than
in respect of their business activities, will be exempted
from pay-roll tax. The cost of providing this exemption,
which I feel sure will be greatly welcomed by local government
authorities throughout Australia, will be met entirely by
the Commonwealth. The cost in 1971-72 will depend on the
date of transfer and the cost in a full year is estimated
to be of the order of $ 8 million.
Further idetails of how the transfer will be'
effected are included in the attachment andithese and: other
technical and administrative aspects are tolbe the subject
of further early discussion between Commonwealth and State
Treasuries. However, there are two points I mention especially
in relation to the transfer.
First, it will be entirely up to each State to
decide at what rate it will levy its own pay-roll tax and
to decide what exemption and other assessment provisions it
should adopt. For that reason it is not possible to say
what additional amount of revenue the States might gain
from pay-roll tax'in 1971-72 or subsequent ryears. It is
one of the great advantages of the scheme" that each State
is able to determine for itself the extent to which
it should gain extra revenue 
from this source, having in mind its particular budgetary
circumstances. Secondly, I make it clear that# while pay-roll
tax will be transferred to the States, the Commonwealth
will continue to operate the export incentive scheme so as
to give exporters the same benefits, based on the existing
rate of 2J per cent, as they now enjoy. The Acting Minister
for Trade and Industry will be making a separate statement
about this scheme*
The Commonwealth Government believes that, with
access to this new field of taxation and with the substantially
improved arrangements for the payment of financial assistance
grants to the States settled at the June 1970 Premiers'
Conference, the States should be well placed, after the
difficulties of 1971-72 have been overcome, to meet their
financial responsibilities fully in future. In saying
that I am conscious, as I indicated in my opening statement
to the Conference, that no system of public authority
finance can reasonably be expected to contend with the
consequences of wage awards in fields of partidular importance
to public authority ! employment if they are going to be of the
well-nigh crippling kind which has beset the States in
particular, but alad the Commonwealth, in the course of the
present financial year.
It is fair to say that the severe restrictions
which have had to be placed upon ithe growth of much-needed
public authority works and services in the latter months of
1970-71, and which will have to be maintained and perhaps
intensified in 1971-72, have their origins in the events
in the field of wage ldeterminati6h to which I have referred. 
The additional revenue assistance of about
$ 62.7 million which the Commonwealth has agreed to pay to
the States in 1971-72, when added to the large increase
in payments under existing arrangements, gives an
estimated increase in total allocations to the States
from the Commonwealth, including the amounts the States
will receive from pay-roll tax, of over $ 340 million in
1971-72. This would be 12 per cent higher than in
1970-71. Further details of the estimated amounts
involved in 1971-72 are set out in the second table attached. 
ADDITIONAL REVEUE ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES FOR 1971-72*
million
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Total 13.1 9.8 6.2
4.7 1.9
40.0
Total of $ 40 million to be divided between
the States in proportion to their fihancial
assistancelgrants, including additional grants
of $ 2 per head to New South Wales and Victoria
and of $ 9.5 million to Western Australia as
well as the additional grants to Queensland
resulting from the $ 2' million addition to its
base. The distribution between the States is
approximate only. 
COMMONEI.: T-T A. LOCATIONS TO OR FOR TEE STATES
1970-71( a) Increase 1970-71
Over 1969--/ 0 1971-72
Freilnary Estimates Increase 1971-72
Over 1970-71
Seneral Revenue Grants
Financial Assistance Grants
Receipts Duty Compensation
Special Grants
Special Revenue Assistance
Net Gain to States From Pay-Ro11
Tar( e)
SDebt Charges Assistance
Sub-Total
Specific Purpose Payments( f)
TOTAL PAYMENTS
* Works and Eousing
Borrowing) Programmes
TOTAL ALLOCATIONS 1,358.8 59.7 18.7
43.0 11.5
1,491.7 524.5
2,016.2 823.0
2,839.2 217.5( b)
59.7 -3.2( b)
17.0 11.5
302.5 51.3
353.8 65.0
418.8 Per Cent
19.1( b)
-14.7( b)
65.4 S
25.4 10.8 21.3 Per Cen
1,534.9( c)
100.1( c)
18.7( d)
40.0 22.7
23,. 0
1,739.4 581.3
_ 2.320.7
8.6 860.0
17.3 3,180.7
The figures shown for the various general revenue grants are final in all cases.
for specific purpose payments is not.
Comparisons with 1i -70 fectedy the transfer of $ 10 -million from Tasmania's
its financial assistance grant in 1970-71. 176.1 -3.0
22.7
11.5-
247.7 13.0 67.7 t-O
400.0 16.6
56.8 10.8
304.5 15.1
37.0
541.5 12.0
That shown
special grant to-
Based on the assumptions that the increase in average wages in the year ending March 1972 is 9.0 per
cent and that percentage increase in each State's population in the year ending December 1971 is the
same as in the previous year.
Based on the bitrary assumption that these-grants ( which are paid to South Australia andTasmania on
the recommendation of the Grants Commission) are the same in 1971-72 as in 1970-71.
Net gain to States in 1971-72 as a result of deducting an estimated $ 22.7 million less from the
financial assistance grants than the States will receive from pay-roll tax in 1971-72.
Excluding natural disaster relief payments. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 60/ 1971
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND
AUSTRALIAN LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Arrangements have now been completed
with the State Premiers for meetings of the Premiers'
Conference and the Australian Loan Council to be
held at Canberra on Wednesday 16 and Thursday
17 June.
CANBERRA. 8 June 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 61/ 1971
ADDITIONAL AID FOR EAST PAKISTAN REFUGEES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The Government today discussed the plight of East Pakistan
refugees in India now aggravated by the serious outbreak of cholera.
It decided to authorise additional assistance of up to
$ 500, 000 for relief to be drawn upon in the light of advice from the
authorities in India as to what is most needed.
This amount is additional to the $ 500, 000 already promised
by the Government, of which $ 240, 000 has already been committed.
Other forms of assistance, including tax deductibility for
gifts were considered, but the Government concluded the most effective
help it could give was further direct assistance.
Further details of the Government's decision will be
announced by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bury, in a
subsequent statement.
CANBERRA 8 June 1971 



AUSTRALIA-TAPA N RELATIONS
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUJTE OF IN~ TERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 12_ JUNE 1971
&amp; ech by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you for asking me to come here today to speak to you
about the relationships between the Japanese and ourselves. As you know, I was not
the Foreign Minister for very many years, but the very first submission that I put
to Cabinet of any consequence was in April of last year when I presented a paper
relating to our future relationships with Japan. At the same time, I received the
approval of the Cabinet to institute what I regard as the highest level Inter-Departmental
Committee, headed by the Permanent Heads of the most important Departments of
State, to keep under continuous review the relationships between Japan and Australia
and, once they felt they had come to concrete recommendations, to be able to present
papers to us. I also want to mention the fact that subsequently the Government
also considered I think in February our relationships with the People's Republic
of China. Subsequently we were able to consider papers relating to a new relationship
with the Soviet and particularly what we could do with the Soviet Far East.
Mr. President, I hope my Department has had the good sense
to send to you a copy of my speech to a meeting of citizens in Sydney a few weeks ago.
Because I am sure it broke niew ground and I am as sure as I can be of this, that it had
to be done because we live in this changing area changing so quickly that we can't
be left behind. And I can more or less paraphrase what you have said. We must be
playing our part to see if we can make our contribution to peace and to the development
of the whole of this area. So I put it to you then that we have been doing a tremendous
amount of thinking. And with the recent reorganisation of the Department of Foreign
Affairs and its elevation in stature, and I believe in importance, and I hope that will
continue then I think you will find that continually we will be trying to make our
contribution wherever we can towards the goals that I mentioned to you a few moments
ago. The most important of them at least as far ahead as you and I
can see, will I think, be the two countries you have mentioned, Japan materially, of
course, and I hope politically as well but Indonesia too for many, many reasons
because it is a very vast country and one to which we will pay increasing importance
in the years to come. I mentioned to you the breakthrough we made in the middle of
last year when we decided on a three-year programme of aid something we had never
done before to Indonesia. And we extended our appropriations in a way that we had not
done in the. case of any other country. a 9 / 2 
So I think you can take it, therefore, Mr. President, that we
reflect in the Government t he views that you put a few moments ago of the enormous
importance of Japan, the enormous importance of Indonesia and the importance of
Papua/ New Guinea to us as well.
So, consequently, I now come to this responsibility that has
been given to me today. That is to officially open this Conference, which as I have
said, fundamentally relates to the bilateral relationships between Australia and
Japan in the 1970' s. I think you know, and I can repeat this, that it is of fundamental
importance, not onl y to us, but also to the Pacific theatre and particularly to South-
East Asia, but not exclusively because it is not exclusively a regional subject.
We live in a world of interdependence which involves Europe, America and the African
continent, as well as the great nations of the Asian mainland.
Events in the region have a bearing on changes in the power
structure politics and economics in most other places. But today I want to concern
myself mainly with Japan and Australia, and again I emphasise to you that in the speech
I made at the Citizens' Dinner a few weeks ago, I emphasised that in the immediate
future and as far ahead as we could see, Japan was the country that in material, and
I believe in political terms, can offer the greatest advantages of co-operation between
US. And I believe, too, that when the history of this decade is written,
the changes now occurring in Australian-Japanese relations, and what I hope will
happen in the next 10 years or so, will prove to be one of the most significant developments
of its kind. The War is far behind us, its tragedies and sufferings of the
past, and the impeiatives of the future, are, in fact, here. So we have to look ahead.
We must plan ahead, and we must aspire to a new world of peace and prosperity in Asia
and the Pacific. And I believe that Australia and Japan together in several ways, have
much to do so that they can make a contribution to that goal.
Today we are at the threshold of a new era in our relationships
with Japan. This isn't something that is going to be spelt out with a crop of new
decisions or dramatic changes in the relationships that exist already. But it is
something that will be reflected by an even closer relationship than the one we already
have, and one which will have superimposed on the developing economic connection,
some political overtones stronger than we have heard up until now.
Sometime ago, my Government felt it was time to do a
stocktaking, because the progress of our relationships, along a well-ordered path, had
beentaken up to a point vmh ere this could usefully be done. I n-e ntioned to you a few
moments ago, the formation of the Inter -Departmental Committee and the Report that
is now before the Government for detailed consideration.
There has also been a recent decision to form a consultative
committee on trade, and related matters at Ministerial level between Australia and
Japan. The Deputy Prime Minister, my colleague Mr. Anthony, was able to confirm
this during his recent visit to Tokyo. / 3 
Now I have for long taken the view that the co-ordination of
diplomatic relationships between any two countries ought to be the responsibility of
the-Department of Foreign Affairs. And I can assure you that in trying to work out
sensible and better relationships between the two countries, that with us now, our
Foreign Affairs Department will be taking the leading administrative role, advised where
necessary by the other Departments, in economics and finance by the Treasury, and
trade* by the Department of Trade, education and science by that Ministry, and
correspondingly, too, with the other Departments, such as National Development, or
in national development schemes, by Mr. Swartz, the Minister for National
Development himself. Now these developments alone at Government level will do a lot
to enlarge the framework within which we can plan ahead. I think, ladies and gentlemen,
when we look directly at the bilateral relationships between two countries such as
those between Australia and Japan we must be clear about our motives and our
objectives. It is also wise that we be completely frank about them.
And if I can say this to you about frankness, in the recent
discussions I had with the Japanese Prime Minister and the various many discussion * s I
had with Mr. Aichi, I have found them completely frank, willing to discuss the most
difficult of problems and anxious, I believe, to co-operate with us for the political and
economic betterment of the South-East Asian region.
Now the first motive on our part, naturally enough, as you well
said in your quotation from U Thant and if I can change it a little bit is national
self -interest. This goes for any country anywhere in the world, and I can assure you, it
goes for us just as much as it goes for anyone else.
Our relationship with Japan should continue to assist the broadlybased
development of the Australian economy and help us to maintain an independent
foreign policy. It should also seek to develop our relationships with other friends and
allies, regional neighbours and trading partners. I like to hope that every Australian
businessman, with an eye on exports, will regard himself as some kind of a latter-day
Marco Polo and go out in search of new markets. He will have the Government
supporting him when he does.
And the second objective is that our co-operation with Japan
should be directed more and more to meeting the needs and aspirations of the
developing countries in our region. We have a wonderland of new experience before
us where a " green revolution" is coming to the paddy fields and plantations of
Asian countries. The miracles of modern science and technology are beginning to
touch the lives of millions who, for the first time, can see the prospect of a better
life being added to the old, sustaining forces of their ancient cultures.
We want them, our neighbours to the North, to feel part of a
broader region, secure within it and being able to share in its progress.
And I believe, too, that we have a remarkable opportunity not
only to help, but to be able to draw them together, because in my experience as a
Foreign Minister, whilst I wasn't there for long, at least I visited South-East Asia and
Japan on several occasions. I think you can take it that they trust us. They know we
have no predatory intentions arid I think they recognise, too, that our aid is given
freely and generously. We don't put any bans or ties on it. We don't ask for repayment * ao/ 4 
and what we give we give because we feel we are making a contribution to their development
and at the same time, in a reciprocal way, adding to our own.
And the third objective is that we will be looking to the establishment
of a stable relationship with Japan and among the other three major powers in the
Asian-Pacific area the United States, the USSR and the People's Republic of China.
These considerations will, of course, have to be matched to the
continuing satisfaction of Japan's legitimate economic aspirations.
So, ladies and gentlemen, there you have our motives and our
objectives. They are, I believe, free of enmities, untouched by racism or compromised
by different ideologies. It is time for us in our thinking to move out from the shadow
of the great nuclear deterrents and the " curtains" and " walls" of the past into a more
positive world of progress. And I know in trying to achieve the kind of change we in
the government want to achieve that with you, Mr. President, and with everyone here
today, we will find the most willing companions and accomplices.
Now as to achieving our objectives in our relationships with Japan
we have a solid base to build on. The Trade Agreement or the Agreement on
Commerce, as it is called, of 1957, was a foundation stone of the first importance.
The beginnings were small, but the growith has been rapid.
Japan is now our largest trading partner and Australia is Japan's
second largest trading partner after the United States.
The political relationship has developed more slowly but it is
becoming significant both on a bilateral and on a regional basis. These links have
been supported by business, cultural and scientific exchanges and the encouragement
of tourism between the two countries.
The relationships are plain for everyone to see. I refer to
them because this is our starting point for the developments of this decade.
We also have to remember that there are great differences in
national power, differences in history and social traditions and differences in the
decision-making processes both in Australia and in Japan. To my Japanese friends here,
I can assure them that by now, I have just about learnt how difficult it is for a person
whose mind is cast in a Western mould to be able sometimes to understand quite how
slowly the Japanese work and how frequently a smile doesn't mean " yes" but all too
frequently means " no". Now the remarkable post-war economic growth in Japan has taken
her into the front rank of the industrialised nations. Her gross national product is now
third in the world after the United States and the Soviet Union, and she is emerging
as a major Asian/ Pacific and world power.
You may ask what will this economic strength do to us?
It has already done much, and we expect those benefits to increase
in the future. It is natural that we should because we have the commodities Japan
needs, mostly right in quality and price, and available on a relatively short haul,
while Japan can supply the exports we want and cannot yet make ourselves. 
In short, our great natural resources provide Japan with the raw
and processed materials she does not possess and we can get from her the products of
her highly advanced technologies those products we cannot yet provide economically
or in significant quantity to meet the demands of our industrialised society.
As you all know, vwe are twelve and a half million people,, and
the Japanese are over 100 million people. If we look to our relationship as a kind of
partnership, is it lop-sided? I don't believe it is.
Each of us has strengths to share which are not determined
by numbers. I think the relationship can be divided up into three phases.
The first followed the end of the war when Japan became a
substantial buyer of our primary products, mostly wool.
Then came the second phase when we found a fortune-in
minerals. This gave us the boom years of the sixties. Japan took our coal, our iron
ore, our bauxite, and our maganese in addition to our wool, our sugar and our be.-A
Today Japan takes 25 per cent of our total exports over four
times what she did twenty years ago and of this, minerals and metals takes up
54 per cent. Now we are into the third phase. This is where we move on
into a broader economic relationship. This third phase, as we see it, involves a
continuing, and I hope, an enlarging market in Japan for our rural products and our
minerals, the introduction of more joint enterprises, particularly in the minerals
and metals industries, and finally, new outlets for our manufactures.
To date, Japanese investment in Australia has been small. For
the last financial year, it accounted for only about two per cent of total direct
investment in Australia. Now, while I expect this to increase, and no doubt it will be
concentrated in the natural resources area, at this stage it seems unlikely tcb; very
large in relation to the total levels of private overseas investment in this cou:. r.
Now so far, most investment from Japan has conformed with
our preference for foreign investment in the form of equity participation with
Australian enterprises. There is, I am glad to say, plenty of movement at both
Government and business level in this third and latest phase.
There have been annual consultations at official level between
our respective Foreign Ministries since 1967 as well as ad hoc co'nsultations bc,
other Ministries. Frequent consultations at Ministerial level will now take a mn~ are
regular character with the formation of the Consultative Committee to which I have
already referred. At industry level, a Business Co-operation Committee bas
existed for the past nine years and meets regularly. This year tv, inpo~ ec onomic
missions have come to Australia. One was financial and the other was concrnned
with natural resources. */ 6 
I am confident, therefore, that the right climate now exists for
us to go ahead even better than we have done in the past and, I think to do so for the
benefit of both countries. Ladies and gentlemen, I believe that the consolidation and
development of our bilateral relationship with Japan advantageous to us both in national
terms is also of considerable importance to the economic and political stability of the
region and I believe that together, and with others in the region, we can take a fuller
part in regional affairs in the future.
Because of her economic strength, Japan has a formidable contributic
to make to economic aid in the region.
The Japanese Government last year announced a 1975 target for
foreign aid, both official and private, equal to one per cent of GNP. If this is achieved,
then something like 500 million will be given in that year just about three times
what was given in 1969. Already there has been a 40 per cent rise in Japan's foreign
aid for 19703 over the preceding year.
Now, two-thirds of Japan's total foreign aid contribution goes to
Asia. This makes Japan a force of tremendous importance to the economic fortunes of
the developing countries in the region.
Australia's role in this, compared with Japan's, must necessarily
be small, but it mus t be remembered that we rank very high among the aid-givers in
relative terms and we, too, are committing about one per cent of our gross national
production to developing countries. mainly in Asia and the Pacific and including the
Territory of Papua/ New Guinea.
Might I interpolate this comment to you on, DAC aid, particularly
the kind of aid Australia gives to the Asian countries, because last . year at the DAC
meeting in Tokyo, when we were starting to talk about the figures and I have never
had them analysed as well as I had them analysed by our own people in Japan we found
that when it came to official aid, that is, aid of a kind that is giver, by the Government
rather than private enterprise assistance, that without any doubt at all, we led the
way. Or, if I could put it a little differently, with the exception of France, in connection
with its colonial territories, and Portugal, there is no other country that makes the
same kind of contribution as we do to official aid. And the value of that official aid,
being on a non-repayable basis, and at the request of the country concerned, has the
highest possible quality. So we spectlcally asked that in future whenever the DAC was
considering aid programmes, it had first of all to divide the aid into official and private
aid so that we can come to our own conclusions about the contribution made by the
Australian taxpayer. And secondly, when we were looking at the components of the
official aid, we had to make up our minds as to its quality and, consequently, the debt
repayment problems, and the problems of the recipient countries, whether they
willingly participated, or the ones that were initiated, the kind of aid that they wished
to receive. You will be familiar with the multilateral organisations to which
we belong, and where we sit in Japan's company. / 7 
I refer to ECAFE, ASPAC, the Asian Development Bank, the
Colombo Plan, and the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD to which I
have just referred. WIe also share common membership of aid co-ordinating groups
assisting individual countries in the Asian region.
There are, inevitably, political associations which develop as the
result of increasing regional involvement, and I believe Japan will assume a larger role
in the future. It is true, too, that while we may separate trade and politics,
economic progress cannot take place in a political vacuum.
I think the presence of Japan at last year's conference on
Cambodia at Djakarta was one of the first signs of her growing political influence and
its deployment to the region's advantage.
I see no reason why Australia cannot work usefully with Japan at
the political level as well as the economic level.
And if I can come back: to Djakarta, I do comment very favourably
about the role taken by Mr. Aichi as the representatives of the Japanese Government
and people. And I do comment very favourably about the arduous efforts they made with
the Malaysians and the Indonesians to try and induce other countries to try and restore
the ideals of the Geneva Conference in 1954 and to try and get the various elements to
the conference table to see if we could establish peace in Cambodia.
I now come to the question of Japan's military strength, its defence
capability and how I see it now and in the future.
It was recently announced that Japan's Defence Agency would be
doubling its defence expenditure during the period 1972-1976. The amount to be spent
will still be only about 1 per cent of her gross national product, which is far less than
the percentages committed by other major powers. COurs, by the way is 3. 69 per cent
of GNP. Now these are the facts. For obvious reasons, we dislike any
increases in defence expenditure. Japan has given repeated assurances that she
does not intend to pursue a military role beyond that of self-defence. We fully understand
this attitude. We note that the programme has been public knowledge for a year
and that all expenditure has to be approved by the Diet. In other words, it has a full
exposure to the public, and is dealt with by democratic processes familiar to us.
The programme provides for only small increases in defence
manpower and for moderate increases in equipment. It will aim particularly at
strengthening the air and sea self-defence forces. 
Japan's defence role was set out in a White Paper last year. This
showed that while Japan would maintain its security links with the United States, it would
assume, because of its economic strength, greater responsibilities for conventional
defence. It would not possess offensive or nuclear weapons.
And I remind you, too, that Japan is perilously close to Mainland
China. Mainland China is in possession of thermonuclear weapons. Japan has none. I
want you to remember that Japan is in a very vulnerable position and that a few thermonuclear
weapons could, of course, do permnanent harm if they were ever used against
that country. And, of course, we have to remember that Japan would also have
had to-provide for enlarged defence responsibilities when the United States handed over
Okinawa. To sum up, ladies and gentlemen, I believe Australia and Japan
can enlarge the base of their friendship and co-operation to the benefit of both
countries. I believe that together we can do a lot to help stability and
economic progress in the Asian and Pacific region. I believe that what we do together
and what we do within the region will continue tc 11-s based on mutual respect and
trust, and I believe that we can know each other better.
So we want to help, and we want to help with the co-operation of
all Australian people. So for that reason I want to thank you for asking me here tod-ay,
and I want to thank you, too, for coming. Arid having said that, may I now officially
declare this conference open. 



EIMBA RGOED UNTIL 3. 30 PM lON SUNDAY 13 JUNE
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
TPI-M QUT! 7E'SL'' D LIBE ,? ALCONEV2
SPEECHI NOTES ; POR TEE~ P'. RL? 3 ViINISTEa
SUINTDAY, 13 JUNET, 1971. 
GENTLEMEN: THIS IS MY SECOND VISIT TO QUEENSLAND SINCE
I BECAME PRIME MINISTER. I AM GLAD TO BE HERE FOR
TWO PARTICULAR REASONS.
. ONE IS THAT I KNOW HOW IMPORTANT IT IS
FOR THE LEADER OF THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENTARY
LIBERALS TO KEEP IN TOUCH WITH THE ORGANISATION AND
ITS MEMBERS AT STATE LEVEL AS WELL AS FEDERAL
LEVEL. THE OTHER IS THAT THE SUCCESS OF THE
LIBERALS IN QUEENSLAND WILL HAVE A SIGNIFICANT BEARING
ON THE OUTCOME OF THE NEXT FEDERAL ELECTION
LET ME SAY I KNOW WE CAN WIN, BUT I WANT US
TO WIN HANDSOMELY. TO DO THAT WE MUST BE BUSY IN
THE RIGHT WAY AND WE MUST GET BUSY RIGHT AWAY.
THERE IS NO DOUBT WE WILL BE JUDGED BY OUR PERFORMANCE
AND OUR PERFORMANCE WILL DEPEND ON HOW STRONGLY
WE PULL TOGETHER WITH OUR COALITION COLLEAGUES. / 2 
SPEAKING FOR THL PARLIAMENTARY PARTY, WANT
TO HAVE A GOOD AND INTIMATE WORKING RELATIONSHIP WITHTHE
PARTY ORGANISATION. BOB SOUTH-EY STRESSED THE
IMPORTANCE OF THIS AT OUR FEDERAL COUNCIL [ N CANBERRA
THE OTHER DAY.
I AGREE WITH-WHAT HE SAID. I DO NOT LOOK AT THE
PARLIAMENTARY PARTY AS A LAW UNTO ITSELF. IT IS BOUND
BY THE PRINCIPLES AND PLATFORM OF THE LIBE:( AL PARTY.
THESE ARE BROAD ENOUGH AND FLEXIBLE ENOUGH FOR THE
PARLIAMENTARY PARTY TO HAVE EL3DW ROOM IN HOW IT APP3LIES
THEM TO SPECIFIC ISSUES.
THE ORGANISATION WOULD NEVER WANT US TO BE
" DUMB, DRIVEN CATTLE", LIKE OUR OPPOSITION, HAVING
LITTLE LATITUDE AND VIRTUALLY NO FREEDOM FROM THE
DICTATORSHIP OF A FEDERAL CONFERENCE. BY THE SAME TOKEN,
1, FOR ONE, DO NOT EXPECT THE PARLIAME~ NTARY PARTY TO
JUST RUN WILD ON THE RANGE.
THEN IT REMAINS ESSENTIALLY A LIBERAL CONCEPT
THAT THE PARLIAMENTARY PARTY HAS SUBSTANTIAL DISCRETION
IN WHAT IT DOES. BUT IT HAS TO USE THAT DISCRETION WISELY,
AND IT ALSO HAS TO SUCCEED.
LIKE BOB SOUTHEY, I BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE TO
LISTEN TO WHAT THE MEMBERS, THE BRANCHES AND THE
COUNCILS HAVE TO SAY. THIS IS ONE AREA WHERE WE MUST
LOOK FOR NEW IDEAS. THIS IS WH-ERE SO MANY OF OUR REFORMS 
BEGIN. TIS [ S WHERE THE ROOTS OF OUR SUCCESS OR FAILURE
GO DOWN. TI-EN IT IS UP TO TIHE PARLIAMENTARY PARTY TO
INTERPRET PARTY POLICY IN ITS OWN WAY AND WITH A TIMING
OF ITS OWN CHOOSING WHEN IT COMES TO LEGISLATIVE ACTION.
I BELIEVJE THE PARLIAMENTARY PARTY IS IN GOOD
HEART AND IT WILL BE IN GOOD SHAPE FOR THE NEXT ELECTION.
CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES
A GOOD DEAL HAS BEEN SAID LATELY ABOUT TI-E
FEDERAL SYSTEM AND I ACKNOWLEIDGE H-ERE THE LEADING
k~ 7 ROLE THE FEDERALS COUNCIL AND THE PARTY ORGANISATION
I-AS PLAYED IN UNDERPINNING IT IN A MODERN CONTEXT.
I BELIEVE IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM.
I RESPECT AND UNDERSTAND THE POSITION AND
RIGHTS OF THE STATES. I DO NOT BELIEVE IN CENTRALISATION
OR IN A CONTRIVED FLOW OF POWER TO THE CENTRE THAT
ERODES TI-E SOVEREIGNTY OF TI-E STATES.
IN SOME MATTERS LIKE NATIONAL ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT, DEFENCE AND TRADE, THE COMMON WEALTHMUST
HAV'E NATIONAL POWERS, BUT THESE CAN BE H-ELD WITH-OUT
DAMAGE TO THE STATES, GIVEN CO-OPERATION AND GOODWILL
ON BOTH SIDES. 
OUR INTENTION TO ARRANGE A GROWTH TAX
WITH THE STATES WHICh WE WILL BE DISCUSSING NEXT
WEEK IS A GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE EFFORT WE ARE MAKING
TO MAKE THE FEDERAL SYSTEM WORK MORE EFFECTIVELY.
CANBERRA AND BRISBANE CAN WORK TOGETHER
EFFECTIVELY. THE QUEENSLAND AND COMMONWEALTH
GOVERNMENTS HAVE COME SOME DISTANCE IN OUR RECENT
TALKS ON ABORIGINES AND ON THE INQUIRIES WE AGREED ON
TOGETHER, INTO OIL DRILLING ON THE BARRIER REEF, THE
CROWN OF THORNS STARFISH AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
REEF AS A TOURIST DESTINATION.
I QUOTE THESE ONLY AS EXAMPLES OF THE
VALUE OF GETTING TOGETHER. THERE IS A HOST OF OTHER
MATTERS AND MANY OF TH'EM WILL BE GIVEN AN AIRING AT
THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE IN CANBERRA IN THE NEXT
FEW DAYS.
THE RECORD AND THE FUTURE
I THINK THE PROBLEMS WE ARE UP AGAINST AS A
GOVERNMENT ARE THESE:
THE CONTINUING INDUSTRIAL UNREST WHICH IS
COMPOUNDING THE EFFECTS OF INFLATIONARY
PRESSURES ON THE ECONOMY. 
( II) THE NEED TO LIMIT SOME OF THE REFORMS WE
WANT TO MAKE BECAUSE WE H4AVE TO WATCH
PUBLIC SPENDING AS AN ANTI-INFLATONARY
MEASURE.
( 111) THERE IS A NEED FOR A POSITIVE DISPLAY OF VITALITY
IN THE ORGANISATION. THE AUSTRALIAN LIKES
TO THINK ABOUT HAVING A CHANGE EVEN WHEN
THINGS ARE GOING RIGHT FOR HIM.
NONE OF THESE PROBLEMS IS BEYOND US. I IKNOW
WE CAN H-ANDLE THEM TO TH4E SATISFACTION OF THE
ELECTORATE, BUT I DON'T WANT TO BE COMPLACENT ABOUT
IT, AND THERE ARE SOME ASPECTS OF THESE PROBLEMS
BEYOND THE AUTHORITY OF GOVERNMENTS.
WE MUST TREAT EACH PROBLEM AS URGENT
AND EACH DAY AS A DAY TO GET SOMETHING MORE DONE.
THE RECORD OF THE LAST THREE MONTHS IS GOOD.
SOME OF MY STAFF WENT THROUGH TH-E LIST
OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGISLATIVE CHANGES TH-E OTHER
DAY AND CAME UP WITH THIRTY OR MORE WORTHWHILE
ACHIEVEMENTS OF A NATIONAL CHARACTER WE HAVE DONE
AS A GOVERNMENT SINCE TE-MIDDLE OF MARCH. 
WON'T GO THROUGH TI-EM ALL HEAVEN FORBID
BUT LET ME MENTION TIHREE OR FOUR OF THEM.
FIRST, OUR MEETING WITH THE STATES WHEN WE
AGREED ON SOME EMERGENCY FINANCE TO HELP THEIR
DEFICITS WAS A GOOD BEGINNING. THE ATMOSPHERE WAS
CORDIAL, THOUGH-I RETAIN A HEALTHY RESPECT FOR THE
TOUGHNESS AND SKILLS OF THE PREMIERS.
I HOPE OUR FORTHCOMING MEETING WILL TAKE
PLACE IN THE SAME SPIRIT AND 1 SEE NO REASON WHY IT
SHOULD NOT. THEN THERE WAS SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO
PENSIONERS TO MEET THE DRAIN ON THEIR RESOURCES
FOLLOWING THE UNEXPECTED RISE IN THE NATIONAL WAGE.
THERE WAS THE DEPARTMENTAL REORGANISATION
IN CANBERRA TO SPEED-UP THE POLICY-MAKING FUNCTIONS
OF GOVERNMENT AND THE CREATION OF A NEW MINISTRY
TO GIVE SPECIAL ATTIN TION TO THE ENVIRONMENT,
ABORIGINES AND THE ARTS.
AND THEN, IN FOREIGN POLLCY, WE BROUGHT UP
INTO OUR FOCUS OUR FUTURE RELATIONS WITH RUSSIA, WITH
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND JAPAN. 
WE ALSO JOINED TUE ORGANISAT ION FOR ECONOMIC
CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT.
OTHER ACTIVITIES COVERED NEW LEGISLATION
ON LAW AND ORDER, A REVIEW OF THE ARBITRATION SYSTEM,
SPECIAL AID FOR OUR HARD-PRESSED RURAL INDUSTRIES AND
PLANS FOR A NEW PROGRAMME FOR PAPUA-NEW GUINEA TO
GIVE IT AN OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE ITS OWN CHOICE OF A DATE
FOR INTERNAL SELF-GOVERNMENT.
I WOULD LIKE TO ADD HERE A FEW WORDS ON THE
AID WE ARE GIVING TO REFUGEES FROM EAST PAKISTAN IN INDIA.
TI-IS IS THE SCENE OF A GREAT HUMAN TRAGEDY.
OUR RESPONSE AS A GOVERNMENT WAS IMMEDIATE.
THE FIRST COMMITMENT OF HALF A MILLION DOLLARS IN
AID WAS CONSIDERED EVEN BEFORE THE ENORMITY OF THE
DISASTER WAS FULLY KNOWN OR ANY APPEALS HAD BE EN MADE.
WE DOUBLED THAT COMMITMENT AS THE DISASTER
GREW IN SIZE. THE CRITICISM WE HAVE HAD IS UNFAIR AND
BASED ON LI. TTLE KNOWLEDGE. 
MY GOVERNMENT CONSIIDERED THAT TO BE EFFECTIVE
WE HAD TO SEND THE AID THAT INDIA WANTED AND SEND
IT WHERE THAT COUNTRY WANTED IT SENT. IT WOULD HAVE
BEEN ABSURD TO HAVE SENT SUPPLIES OF VACCINE, FOOD AND
SHELTER MATERIALS OFF INTO THE BLUE. THAT WOULD HAVE
ONLY ADDED TO THE PROBLEMS OF THE LOCAL PEOPLE.
IT IS DIFFICULT TO WAIT EVEN A SHORT WHILE
WHEN EMOTIONS AND SYMPATHIES ARE RUNNING HIGH FOR
SOMETHING TO BE DONE AT ONCE, BUT IN TERMS OF REAL
HELP WE DID WHAT WAS RIGHT.
I DON'T THINK ANY AUSTRALIANS NEED FEEL ASHAMED
OF THEIR GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE CRY FOR HELP
DFROM OUR FELLOW MEMBER OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
BEFORE I CLOSE ONE COMMENT ABOUT THE
FUTURE. IF WE CAN CONTAIN INFLATION AND THIS IS A
REALLY SERIOUS PROBLEM THEN I AM CONFIDENT WE CAN
KEEP UP A GROWTH RATE OF OVER FIVE PER CENT IN OUR
GNP EACH YEAR, AND GIVEN MORE FREEDOM FROM THE PROBLEMS
I HAVE ALREADY MENTIONED WE COULD EVEN DO MUCH BETTER
THAN THAT. 
BUT LET US NOT TIINK ONLY IN TERMS OF
STATISTICS. TH-EY ARE DULL AND INHUMAN THINGS. LET UIS
THINK RATHER IN TERMS OF THE QUALITY OF LIFE WE WANT
FOR OURSELVES AND OUR CH-ILDREN.
EACH ONE OF US HAS HIS OWN DEFINITION. IT
IS BOUND UP WITH-HOW WE LIVE, WHERE WE LIVE, WHAT WE
DO AND WHAT IS THE MEASURE OF OUR SATISFACTION AND
HAPPINESS AS INDIVIDUALS IN A DEMO0CRATIC SOCIETY.
GOVERNMENTS CAN THINK OF TI-E PROBLEMS OF
LIVING IN TERMS OF URBAN PLANNING, OF PROTECTING THE
ENVIRONMENT, CONTR~ OLL~ ING POLLUTION, HELPINGTHl-OSE IN
NEED, ENCOURAGING THE ARTS.
BUT IN THE FINAL RESULT IT IS THE WAY THE INDIVIDUAL
RESPONDL'S, THE PART HE PLAYS IN ALL I HIS TH-AT MAKES UP TH-l
QUALITY OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE.
AND I THINK( THE FREEDOMS THAT GO WITH LIBERALISM
AND WITH A FREE ENTERPRISE SOCIETY ARE THE ONES THAT
ALLOW US TO MAK( E OUR QUALITY OF LIFE GOOD, REAL AND LASTING.
I AM SURE OF THIS THE FUTURE OF QUEENSLAND, NO
LESS THAN THE FUTURE OF AUSTRALIA, LIES IN THE HANDS OF THE
LIBERAL-MINDED, CONTROL-FREE PEOPLE IN OUR SOCIETY.
TH-AT IS HOW IT HAS BEEN FOR TWENTY-ONE YEARS OR
MORE. LET US KEEP~ IT THAT WAY. I TH-ANK( YOU. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 63/ 1971
BELL BAY PROJECT
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister ( Mr W. McMahon)
and the Premier 6 Tasmania ( Mr W. A. B ethune
The Prime Minister ( Mr McMahon) and the Premier
of Tasmania ( Mr W. A. Bethune) this morning discussed the
financing of the Bell Bay Railway Project
This project is being planned by the Tasmanian
Government to serve the development in Northern Tasmania of
a wood chip industry based on large export contracts with Japan.
The improvement in rail services will also assist more generally
the development of the Bell Bay region.
Today's discussions were against the background
of Commonwealth assistance already approved towards the
construction of a new rail link between Nelson's Creek and Bell
Bay at an estimated cost of $ 3.5 million.
In the light of further submissions now made by
the Premier, the Commonwealth has agreed to extend this assistance
so as to relate to a total cost of $ 5 million to take in the upgrading
of the Nelson's Creek/ Launceston sector of the existing line and
certain minor associated works.
It was understood that responsibility for arranging
the provision of the necessary additional rolling stock would lie
with the Tasmanian Government.
CANBERRA, 17 June 1971 



EMBARGOED UNTIL 7.30 PM
' THIS DAY TONIGHT"
TELEV! SION INTERVIEW ON ABC NETWORK GIVEN BY
THE PRIME MINISTER, MR W. McMAHON
Interviewer: Richard Carleton 18 JUNE 1971
Q4 ' Mr McMahon, rather than ask you what you have achieved
in your f-Irst 100 days, let me ask you instead What have you
failed to ch3eve in that time?
PM: i. s very little that I've set out to achieve that
hasn't beer_ Jone, Very little. That must be judged against the
backgrour,., d tof. problems as I saw them at the date I took over
the Primer ?' Asi : crship. Most of those prob . ems have been either
removed or to a considerable extent the tensions have been taken
away.
Q. You are a fit and healthy man, Sir, at the age of 63. But
has the office been a strain on you physically?
PM: No, no physical strain no. It's been a lot of work yes.
But I couldn't concede that it's been a physical strain, dnd in fact
I think I feel a little better today than I was wheA I started. So
that while you keep going ccntinuously, the word " sttfain" doesn't quite
fit in. You do, of ourse, on occasions, get a little bit disturbed
because of the rush you haven't got enough time to think of the
problems and give the right answers. But it hasn't been to an
extent that I would regard it as doing any harm to myself personally.
Q. Mr McMahon, your term as Prime Minister 100 days
has been active and possibly Volatile. Many major economic and
political issues have arisen. And some of them remain to be
resolved. Can I go through with you now some of those issues and
ask you to comment on Australia's changing positions?
PM: Yes, of cotrse you can.
Q. Well, let me start with China. In the past three months,
Austrglia's dttitude to China has done an almost volte face. On
the 27 May you said that you've taken steps to open up a dialogue
with China. How far has that gone?
PM: May I first remind you that a little over eighteen months
ago I became the Foreign Minister of this country. A. nd that gave me
a deeper insight into -oreign affairs than I had previously had.
And I felt then that we ought to have a look at our relationships between
the Mainland of China, Japan and the Soviet, in order to see if we
couldn't come to a more pleasant accommodation with them. The
whole three were interlocked. Particularly, we wanted better / 2 
-2
relationships and better trade with Japan because this was of
enormous material importance to us and our economic success.
But I also felt there was one great country of over 700 million
people and that is Mainland China, that ought to be brought into
the comity of nations and we should try and find out what China
was up to and what it intended to do in the future, knowing that it
has been a source of great embarrassment to many of the countries
immediately to the North of us, because obviously they have inspired
insurrection and insurgency in those countries or many of those
countries. So I knew that I had to embark on new policies,
initiated from Australia, for the benefit of Australia. And we've '! one
all that. So I did announce that we wanted to open up a dialogue
to have better bilateral relationships and we have been making
whatever soundings we could in international embassies throughout
the world to see the wisest courses we could follow. Admittedly,
I can't go too far and tell you explicitly what we have done because
I think if I did it would undo all the good that has been achieved
already.
Q. But just let me ask specifically one point on that. In
the last three months, as a result of that time, are we now closer
towa) ds recogrising Mainland China?
PM: I don't think so. We've taken all the initiatives. We
haven ot as yet received any favourable replies from the Peking
Government.
Q. Before we leave China, Mr McMahon, could I put one question
to you Mr Whitlam is to go into China two weeks from today.
Still Australia has no wheat order from China for this year. Do
you still expect one?
PM:-No. I don't expect one, but I'm not in a position where
I'd be a good judge. And other people who are much better judges
than I am think that there is a prospect of getting an order. But
might I put this into perspective, because I'm sure you don't want
to get a false impression. It doesn't matter to us this season
whether we have substantial sales of wheat to China or not.
Q. It would be preferable though.
PM: It A ould be preferable, yes. But we're selling very large
quantities in other parts of the world, and I think we've got better
sales this year, in this crop year, than we've ever had previously
in our history. So we're doing very well. And only in the last
twenty-four hours, we've been able to announce sales of flour, to
South Korea and to Taiwan. Our carry-over will be much smaller
than in the last few years, so we're not very worried about whether
or not we have substantial sales of wheat to China. But I've gone through
all of this before, but I don't think it's really a question of great
political importance in Australia today. / 3 
-3
Q. Well, I won't persist with the wheat industry, but may
I ask another question about the rural industry the wool industry
in particular. In many people's eyes, the wool industry is in
queer street. Is your Government going to spend millions of
dollars now rescuing the farmers that are in hopeless straits?
PM: I've got to put this in three different ways to you if I
can. The first one is, of course we are worried about wool, and
we are worried about ot her rural industries as well. I've
appointed an inter-Departmental Committee of the top, efficient
people to look into it and to give recommendations to us as to what
we can do to help. Secondly, I have had, within the last few days,
discussions with Sir William Gunn, the Chairman of the Wool
Board, aud with Mr Vines of the Commission that is, the
Wool Commission. I have had their advice. I will shortly be having
Cabinet together to be able to consider what I know and the papers
that are presented by the various Departments, and then we'll make
up our minds what we're to do.
Q. As a basic principle, would you reject the idea of spending,
say, $ 200 million to rescue the wool industry?
PM: I will not make up my mind, or announce it until I've got
the recommendations of the various Departments. I'm not one of
those who believes in going off half-cocked or making instant coffee
decisions. When I get the reports, when I discuss them with my
colleagues, and we come to a common conclusion, I can assure you
I'll make an announcement to the Australian people. But I want you
to understand we know their problems, I think. We know them, we
are anxious to help, and we've already shown by the fact that we've
appropriated $ 100 million for reconstruction schemes, of our
anxiety and willingness to help when we know we're on the right track.
Q. Sir, let me turn to a major, and continuing issue. The
South African sporting teams tours. They are due here next
week. Now let me paraphrase something you said on 15 April.
You said " If I have to take some action, it's best to leave it until
the last moment." Well, it's almost the last moment. What are you
going to do about it?
PM: I don't think it is the last moment, and I'm not prepared
to say what we as a Government are likely to do. But I will repeat
what I said before, because I believe in it today just as much as
I did then. We don't believe that the ACTU should be poking its nose
in what is political business, or the business of the Australian
community, outside their industrial functions. / 4 
4-
Q. But given that they are doing that....
PM: Given that they are. Yes, and we'll do all that we
can when we decide that it is wise for us to act to do what we
as a Government regard as sensible to let the Australian
people themselves have the opportunity to make up their minds
whether they want to go to the sporting functions or not.
Not to be prevented by the ACTU, but to let the Australians
decide whether they want to go. And if they want to go why
shouldn't they, why should they be intimidated into not going?
So I repeat what I said before, with emphasis, that I don't
believe that these movements should get into the politics of
Australian life. I don't think politics should ecome involved
in sporting enterprises, and I see no reason why these people
should be punished because of the actions of the South African
Government. And I believe that if you look at the Gallup Polls,
the true Gallup Polls, most Australians share that view too.
Q. Sir, let me turn to what might be called your favourite
area now the economy. For six months now, the Government
has been warning of inflation. The Treasurer threatens a tough
Budget. The Government cnlls for restraint and even possibly
austerity. Let me ask, just what's wrong with our economy?
We're supposed to be a booming nation, and overseas our own
publicity says we're a land of milk and honey.
PM: We are a great country, and we are developing well.
If it had not been for the unbelievably high wage increases that
have occurred in Australia in the last year, we would have had very
few problems. In fact, we would have been under real booming
conditions, with everyone joining in the advantages of the boom
conditions. But what is happening now is because of the National
Wage Case, and because of the over-award payments that are
occurring outside the ArlVitration Commissbn, costs are going up
too rapidly, prices are increasing too rapidly, and instead of
getting the real benefit of growth and progress, too much is being
dissipated in higher prices.
Q. Mr McMahon, you seem to put all the blame on the
Arbitration Commicsion. But the Arbitration Commission is a
properly constituted body. If this is not going to happen, must
you now change the Arbitration Commission?
PM: I didn't put all the blame on the Arbitration Commission.
I said it had to take a fair measure of responsibility for giving
a 6 per cent increase in the National Wage Case. That I believe
was economically foolish. I go further than that though, and say
that there has been a 40 per cent wage drift. In other words, e. 
not only have the Trade Unions taken advantage of the Arbitration
system, but outside the system, they have been enforcing big
increaises in wages by use of the strike methods and intimidation.
So I didn't put all the blame upon the Arbitration Commission. I have
gone further and I have said the time has come when we must have
a good look at the Arbit ration system and we are doing this now.
But this is a case where you cannot make judgments in a moment. It
requires the most detailed and croteful thought, and we will give it that
detailed and careful thought before we move any further.
Q. Sir, the front page story on every Australian newspaper
today is the McNamara papers on Vietnam. Have the revelations of
the New York Times cast doubt on the propriety of our original
commitment announced by Sir Robert on 29 April 1965?
PM: No, I don't think they have. I don't thin~ k they touch us other
tha n at the edges. And I want first of all, though, to put this in
perspctive. We had our reasons for putting troops into South
Vietnam, and I do know the history just as well as onyone, with the
possible exception of Sir Robert, because I believe I was at every
Cabinet discussion that dealt with this problem. So I know it well. I
know all the cables and I know the history and the background of it.
So first of all we were there we were there because we felt there
was a real danger at that time of the whole of South-East Asia falling
to Communism. South-East Asia has been saved. So let us remember
this. Secondly, we wanted to join with our very great friends and
allies, the United States a great liberal democracy with which we
have the ANZUS Treaty that v irtually guarantees our freedom.
And, thirdly, we want and this is a great principle with me and my
Government we want the smaller oountries of South-East Asia to
determine their own future. This is why we were there
Q. Sir.
PM: Wait a minute, because unless I put it in perspective, it
wont t be understood. So what happens then the McNamara papers
come out. Sir Robert made his statement yesterday, I have referred
the whole problem to the Defence Committee; the highest officials
we have got in Defence and Foreign Affairs will report to me,
and shortly I will be able to make a comment on it. But at this stage,
to my personal knowledge, everything that Sir Robert said was
correct. We received our first request through Mr Howson and with
our Ambassador up there Mr Anderson now in our Foreign Office
that the South Vietnamese Government wanted us to help them and give
military assistance.
Q. Well on this point, Sir, can I ask you, I think fairly, for a
' Yes" or " No" answer to the question: Is there a piece of paper in
the Government archives that has come out of Saigon signed by the
Saigonese Government, to Australia, saying: " Please give us one
battalion of troops" / 6 
not only have the Trade Unions takenadvantage of the Arbitration
system, but outside the system, they have been enforcing big
increases in wages by use of the strike methods and intimidation.
So I didn't put all the blame upon the Arbitration Commission. I have
gone further and I have said the time has come when we must have
a good look at the Arbit ration system and we are doing this now.
But this is a case where you cannot make judgments in a moment. It
requires the most detailed and cateful thought, and we willI give it that
detailed and careful thought before we move any further.
Q. Sir, the front page story on every Australian newspaper
today is the McNamara papers on Vietnam. Have the revelations of
the New York Times cast doubt on the propriety of our original
commitment announced by Sir Robert on 29 April 1965?
PM: No, I don't think they have. I don't think they touch us other
tha n at the edges. And I want first of all, though, to put this in
perspective. We had our reasons for putting troops into South
Vietnam, and I do know the history just as well as enyone, with the
possible exception of Sir Robert, because I believe I was at every
Cabinet discussion that dealt with this problem. So I know it well. I
know all the cables and I know the history and the background of it.
So first of all we were there we were there because we felt there
was a real danger at that time of the whole of South-East Asia falling
to Communism. South-East Asia has been saved. So let us remember
this. Secondly, we wanted to join with our very great friends and
allies, the United States a great liberal democracy with which we
have the ANZUS Treaty that v irtually guarantees our freedom.
And, thirdly, we want and this is a great principle with me and my
Government we want the smaller wtuntries of South-East Asia to
determine their own future. This is why we were there
Q. Sir.
PM: Wait a minute, because unless I put it in perspective, it
won't be understood. So what happens then the McNamara papers
come out. Sir Robert made his statement yesterday, I have referred
the whole problem to the Defence Committee; the highest officials
we have got in Defence and Foreign Affairs will report to me,
and shortly I will be able to make a comment on it. But at this stage,
to my personal knowledge, everything that Sir Robert said was
correct. We received our first request through Mr Howson and with
our Amibassador up there Mr Anderson now in our Foreign Office
that the South Vietnamese Government wanted us to help them and give
military assistance.
Q. Well on this point, Sir, can I ask you, I think fairly, for a
" Yes" or " No" answer to the question: Is there a piece of paper in
the Government archives that has come out of Saigon signed by the
Saigonese Government, to Australia, saying: " Please give us one
battalion of troops" / 6 
6-
PM: L There are all the cables coming through diplomatic sources,
commencing in December 1964, requesting us to give military
assistance to the South Vietnamese.
Q. Is there a specific paper from the Government....
PM: I will as soon... * as I said to you, I don't move quickly.
I move when I know exactly what I am dcing and I am able to verify
evt~ rything, and I will, as soon as the Defence Committee has
reported to me, then I will make another statement about what has
hapr-ened. But I verify now, and this can come out from personal
evidence of two people, the Ambassador up there, Mr&amp; A nderson, and
the Minister for Air, Mr Howson, and they can both testify that they
were requested by the then Premier of South Vietnam to supply
military assistance to South Vietnam
Q. Sir.
PM: No, look, wait a minute. Let me tell my story because I
don't want to be interrupted and get a hal-story across. And I w~ on't
permit it in fact. From then on we gave several. we had several
meetings of the Cabinet Sub-Committee, the Defence and Foreign
Affairs Committee on it. I was at each one and we decided that we
would be prepared to provide troops, providing only the Americans
thought it was wise and wl got an official request from the South
Vietnamese Goverment
Q. Can this be produced in writing? The official request.
PM: I've said to you that I have to wait until I get the report of the
Defence Committee. What I can say is that the best evidence that you
can bet in the land, particularly the kind of evidence that would be
accepted in a Court of Law, is the witness of those who get the request.
And we have the two witnesses.
Q. Sir, let me turn now to three quick straight political qte stions.
Mr Gorton is your Deputy Leader in the Liberal Party. What help
is he to you?
PM: He plays his part in Cabinet as the Minister for Defence and
does it well. He is there, elected by the members of the Party to be
the Deputy Leader. He wanted to be the Deputy Leader, he was entitled
to stand as the Deputy Leader and he has been appointed. And he comes
into Cabinet as the Deputy Leader and the Minister for Defence and
he plays his part there and does it as you would expect him to do it.
Q. Is he a help to you?
PM: Of course he's a help to me. He's a very efficient Minister for
Defence. e. ./ 7 
-7
Q. Mr MoMahon, the day you became Prime Minister, half the
Liberal Party, 33 men, voted confidence in Mr Gorton. Of those
33 men, how many have you now swung round to your point of view?
Pn Look, I don't want to be going over the past like this and I'll
andwer this in an indirect way because I haven't counted heads and I've
no intention of doing it. What I do know is that the relationship between
the Country Party and the Liberal Party couldn't be better. tve Deen
mending whatever fences had to be mended between the Parliamentary
and the organisational. wings of the Party, and I believe it is in
remarkably good shape, and I think my own Party is in remarkably
good shape, too. IM other words, if I had had my way a few months
ago, I would have been having an election round about now, and I
would have guaranteed we would have won several seats.
Q, That's an interesting point, Sir....
PM! And that's what I feel. I feel the position
Q. You've never said before that you did hope to have an election
PM: Well, I left it vague, yes. I left it vague, that's true, because
I never believe in giving away your tactical advantage until you have
to do so.
Q. In hindsight now, with hindsight, was that a mistake not to
call an election now?
PM: No, I don ' t think so, because I think we are going from good
to better an I don't worry very much about 4t
Q. Sir, if it was not for Mr Malcolm Fraser's resignation, you
would almost certainly not be Prime Minister now. On the 10th of
March you said of Mr Fraser: He's an able, perhaps a very able
man. Is there no room for thTr man in your Cabinet?
PM: Of course there will be room for Mr Fraser in the Ministry
when the opportunity arises. He is an able man. I've expressed
my views about his ability but, at the moment, there isn't a position
that I could fit him into. I will constantly keep him in mind. 0 0/ 8 
-8
Q. Sir, to conclude with, whether you acknowledge it publicly
or not, many people believe that you have now achieved your life-long
ambition to be Prime Minister. Now that you have sat in that
seat for 100 days, is it all that you expected it to be?
PM: I haven't looked at it in that way. This is a novel way of
putting this question to me. But it is not very much different from
what I expected it to be other than in the sense that previously I had
much more time to think. In other portfolios, you can call your
officials in and you can cross-examine them and then come to a
conclusion as to what you should do, But you have only one
portfolio to think of.: In this portfolio, that is the Prime Ministership,
you have every other Minister's portfolio and Cabinet business as
welt, So every day you have got half a dozen different kinds of
questions to which You have to give an immediate answer. In other
words, here it is long experience and the experience that I have
had in.. what is 13 or 14 portfolios, that has stood me in good
stead. So it is the rush and the need to make quick decisions that
are so important in the Prime Ministership, and I am making them
constantly and I hope I am making them fairly well.
Q. Mr McMahon, thank you.
PM: PGM. ood, thank youj too. 



IZ
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT' 1 ASSOCIATION
ANNUAL MEETING -SYDNEY 21 JUNE 1971
Speech Notes for the Prime Minister
Mr. President, Gentlemen,
I have, Sir, glanced through your annual report with interest ar~ d I recognise
the frank way you have put forward the writer's views.
There are some statements with which L don't altog~ ether agree. There
are others I prefer not to comment on because it is getting too close to Budget time.
And some I am in complete agreement'
I must first confess as a basic assumption that the Government recogn~ ises the
importance of manufacturing industries to the* Australian economy or to put it
another way it is vital to have goods" made in Australia", by Australians, for the
Australian people and for export.
I wo uld like to see private enterprise pushing ever so much more strenuously
its " made in Australia" campaigns.
Your industries are a key segment and a large one in our industrialised
society because of the employment they create,
the domestic and export needs they satisfy and
the growth elements they provide.
Simply because of your remark able diversity you don't have a single image
like our rural industries or a glamorous one like minerals. Yet your diversity is
your strength and it brings in a tremendous range of technical skills and industrial
" know-how". I urge you to give away too much introspecion and not to accept the notion
that you are some kind of a cinderella in our industrialised society. The Government
doesn't think so and is giving close attention to the special interests which are
mentioned in your Report. And I know too, from nersonal discussions, that many of
you don't think this way. On the contrary, you are optimists and rightly proud of your
own industries and your performances.
It is true that, despite our current problems inflation, industrial strife
and the rural crisis our national prosperity has -increased in the past year. And it
might have been greater had there been more voluntary restraints by all parties to the
labour contract. A lot will depend on how industry and organised labour respond to the
call for price and wage restraint from now on and what contribution they make to
industrial stability.
The Government's Aims
I not Mr. President, that A. I. D. A. thinks the country might have done 
better in the past year if our national aims had been more clearly defined and more
directly pursued. It is a statement that is easy to make but which I find difficult to sustain. The
Government's aims are clear enough. Let me summarise them in the briefest way I
can. We believe in our national security and that we should take a
responsible place in our geographical region and in world affairs.
We want growth and progress, with a balanced economy. In a
diversified and industrialised society.
We stand for progressive social welfare policies, an educated
people and the right of the individual to the basic freedoms and
a good life.
We stand for minimum interference by Government in the free
workings of private enterprise.
I believe we are pursuing these objectives with vigour. But Governments
must not over-order the affairs of it's citizens and industries.
May I sound a note of caution about too much Government direction and
too much dependence on Government by industry. This would send us all high-stepping
down the socialist road. Believe me, that road does run downhill..
At a time like this, when everybody has to accept some restraints and perhaps
modify some expansion plans it is tempting to agree on the need for sacrifice and then
expect the other fellow to do all the sac riificing.
, The Commonwealth Government accepts its fundamental responsibilities.
The first of these is to make the Federal system work effectively in the interests of
all Australians. It has to give leadership. It also has to accept primary responsibilities
in matters like defence, trade and national economic management.
But it cannot be exclusive in the discharge of those responsibilities. It must
and I believe it does recognise the cardinal importance of co-operation with the
States, and co-operation with business and industry in all its forms.
I have not long come from the Premiers' Conference in Canberra where we
settled on a growth tax. We offered the States pay-roll tax which they accepted, and
made other financial arrangements generally acceptable to them.
Nothing is perfect in an imperfect world, populated, as it is, by human
beings instead of supermen. But we have, I believe, broken with an unhappy spat in
Commonwealth-State financial matters by agreeing on this growth tax which will
give the States more revenue-raising rights directly geared to growth.
I am the first to acknowledge that a final solution to Commonwealth-State
financial relationships may perhaps lie in a review of the Constitution. But let us take
one step at a time through this difficult maze. ./ 3 
And let us remember that many of those who say " change the Constitution"
don't say what changes they want or suggest how the voting public can be persuaded
from their traditional habit of voting " no" when it comes to issues of this kind.
What I am doing is to underline the fact that Constitutional review is a
difficult and lengthy business and wouldn't help us with our immediate problems.
As I have said before I think the long-term outlook for Australia is still
healthy and soundly-based but the current problem of inflation is still pressing
heavily upon us.
I made this clear I think, at the Premiers' Conference last week and I
won't go over the ground again other than to say the need for restraints in both the
public and private sectors and particularly in the public sector continues to be
great. Tariffs The subject I want to talk most about today, is however tariff policy.
Mr. President, your report refers to tariffs and to the statement recently
made in Parliament by my colleague, Mr. Anthony. There are three points on which
I want to comment. They are
Your request for more information about protection.
Your request for a more positive approach in the conduct of
the tariff review.
Your request for a clearer expression of the Government's tariff policy.
I agreed that there is a need for much more -information in some Tariff
Board reports about the effect on individual manufacturers and industries, and
) n the economy as a whole.
I think the demands which your organisation and others in the communityare
making for more information about protection is quite justifiable. That the
demands are now being made is evidence, I think, of a growing awareness in the
nousiness community of the many direct and indirect ef. Lfects of protection.
More and more businessmen are properly asking that decisions by the
Government to change levels of protection should not be made without more knowledge
of their likely effects.
Both the Government and the Tariff Board appreciate the need for more
information about protection. Mr. Anthony took Up this point in his recent statement
on tariff policy, in Parliament. " The Government" he said, " needs as clear advice
as the Tariff Board can give in its reports to enable the Government to reach
judgements on the likely consequences of implementing the Board's recommendations".
The Tariff Board also has said that more information about protection
is essential if it is to do a proper job. I am informed by the Chairman, Mr. Rattigan,
that the Board has already taken steps to get this information. For example 
It is about to un~ dertake demand, supply and inter-industry studies
to assist in estimating, how the domestic production of particular
commodities is likely to be effected by changres in their tariffs.
It is assisting in a project being undertaken at Monash University
to study the longer term effects of protection on the economy.
Itis collecting data on the profitability and capital structure of
Australian manufacturing industries to enable it to assess trends
in the financial performance of protected industries.
It has acted to improve the data it gets on imports by increasing
the detail on individual shipments and covering more shipments.
Now facts and statistics cannot be manufactured overnight and the Board's
timetable depends to some extent on the rate at which the data becomes available from
the Statistician. However, the Board has already compiled and published a good deal of
new information about the structure of protection in Australia and it has begun to
recruit the specialised staff needed to complete the job.
I turn now to another aspect of tariff policy, Mr. Chairman. You have
expressed some anxiety about inadequate provision in the Tariff Board's review for
'~ positive action to encourage desirable new industries".
This anxiety is based, I gather, on the idea that the review will deal only
with existing industries and also on the idea that it may result in more decreases than
increases in tariffs. You are worrying unduly.
While I think that a number of very difficult practical problems would arise
if the Government attempted to review industries which did not exist in Australia,
this is not to say that protection can never be afforded products in advance . of their
local manufacture. But I also think it is right that consideration of such a question would be best
made after an intending manufacturer had studied the feasibility of manufacturing in
Australia and was able to provide useful data at the Tariff Board inquiry.
Now Sir, most of the public discussion on the tariff review has been about
what might happen to highly-protected industries. Little has been said about the
Board's declared attitude to industries needing less protection.
I think the phrase " destructive selectivity" as used in your Report doesn't
put the Government's or the Board's attitudes either accurately or fairly.
It should be noted, Mr. President, that the Tariff Board has said in a number
of its annual reports that positive encouragement should be given to manufacturing
industries requiring only low rates or protection. Every industry even the most
highly-protected contains some activities requiring only low rates of protection.
Thus if the review of a highly -pr;-; otect ed industry pro duces some duty
changes which you could regard as negative it should also produce some duty
changes which you could regard as positive. 
In fact, of course, the removal of unnecessary protection in those cases
where tariffs are higher than needed to protect local production of the goods concerned
also has quite positive and beneficial effects on the industries which use the goods as
inputs in their own production.
it makes their costs, and the prices of their own outputs, more competitive
without jeopardising the competitive position of the protected inputs producing industry.
I don't think the view will be contested that consequences of this type, which
may be expected to flow from the systematic review, would be viewed as doing anything
else than benefiting not only using industries but the economy as a whole.
I was surprised, Mr. President, at your comment that, even after
Mr. Anthony's recent statement in Parliament, investment decision makers are
' still without a clear expression of Government policy and are confused as to the
circumstances under which tariff protection might be anticipated.'
Investment decision makers must now have a clearer idea of the
Government's tariff policy than they did several years ago before the Government
had indicated its general attitude towards the Tariff Board's proposals, or before
the proposals had even been made.
As you know, the Board has said that it will probably-but not necessarily.-
recommend that activities requiring high r ; ates of protection will be discouraged, and
that those requiring low rates of protection will be encouraged.
It has, furthermore, defined what it means by high and low rates of protection.
Investment decision makers who can estimate the protection which their proposed
activities will require thus have a clearer indication -now than in the past of the
likely attitudes which the Tariff Board will adopt towards those activities.
To give you an even clearer expression of Tariff policy one that will
allow accurate predictions of the amount of protection which particular activities
could expect would involve one of two things
Either the adoption of the B oard's points off reference
as the sole criteria for making tariff changes
OR
( II) The production of an unvarying list of other factors
t o be taken into account, whose relative sig-nif icance
would be fixed for every inquiry.
1. th-ink you will agree that the first alternative is unacceptable.
And for that matter so is the second. I base my comment on what you said
in the A. I. D. A. bulletin of May last year, when you listed the " circumstances to
be reported on by the Tariff Board".
You -then said that your own list was not a total list and that the Tariff
Board should be obliged to examine any " other relevant circumstance not listed". 
6.
Succinctly put you want flexibility and so do we. To be completely
definitive or much more precise than we have been would mean being inflexible.
Mr. Pr esident, I have spoken long enough but I thought it proper to let
you know the Government's view on tariffs and to tell you what the Trriff Board
is doing to develop its expertise. I have mentioned a number of points from your
report and I hope I have removed most of your fears.
I f you hadn't taken the line you did with such positive crit icism I would
have had no case to put. But there it is I have put it and I hope what I have, said
is helpful. The Government wants the confidence of its manufacLuring industries.
It knows their value and is anxious that they should continue to prosper. This is
a time when frankness and confidence must go together and this way I believe
lies success. Thank you, Mr. President. 



FOR PRESS: PM NO. 64/ 1971
NEW YORK TIMES ARTICLES ON VIETNAM
Statement by III _ Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Following a series of disclosures in the New York Times of confidential
documents belonging to the American Government relating to Vietnam, statements have
been made concerning the commitment in 1965 of Australian troops to fight in Vietnam.
Many of these have been irresponsible and4 obviously politically motivated.
Much controversy has centred on the question of whether or not the Australian
Government had been requested by the South Vietnamese Government to supply military
assistance. It will be clear from what follows that t~ l-e appropriate request was in fact
made and that we did not intend to act unless such a request was made.
Statements to the contrary are demonstrably false.
The matter was referred to the Defence Committee which asked the Secretaries
of the Departments of Foreign Affairs, the Prime Minister and Cabinet and Defence to
study the relevant documents and report to me.
They have been assisted by the officer who was Australian Ambassador to South
Vietnam at the time the commitment was made and who handled personally, in Saigon,
the exchange of letters following which the combat forces were sent.
It is clear from this study that the Government of t he day acted with complete
propriety throughout the events leading to the commitment of a battalion to Vietnam and
that it faithfully and honestly informed the public of the decisions it had made and the
basis on which they were made.
The Prime Minister of the day, Sir Robert Menzies, has already made a public
statement which, in th e clearest terms, rejects the charges made against his Government
and himself. I confirm the accuracy of his statement.
Australia's actions at that time must be seen in perspective and in the context
of the worsening situation in South-East Asia.
As I said in a television interview on 18 June, we were in South Vietnam because
we felt there was a real danger at that time of the whole of South-East Asia falling to
communism. We joined with our friends and allies, the United States, to resist the
threat. We wanted the smaller countries of Asia to be able to determine their own future.
It will be remembered too, that this was the period of " confrontation" between
Sukarno's Indonesia and Malaysia, and that Australian forces were already involved in
Malaysia. In South Vietnam the military and political situation was close to collapse. North
Vietnamese infiltration had increased substantially and there was clear evidence of the
presence in~ the South of formed units of the North Vietnamese regular forces. 9 0 0 0 / 2 
The question of sending a battalion to South Vietnam was under discussion by
the Government from December 1964 until the commitment was announced on 29 April 1965.
During this period, the Government was in close and continuing communication
with the United States.
Whilst there was a broad identity of view on the gravity of the situation, the
decisions taken by the Government during this period were firmly based on its own
independent assessments of our national interests.
The Government was considering a significant enlargement of our assistance
to South Vietnam which at that stage consisted of a team of military adviser" and a
flight of RAAF transport aircraft. Our own interests were deeply involved. We had a
direct interest in the security of . South Vietnam and we had then, as now, obligations
under the South-East Asia Treaty.
The Defence Committee and the Chiefs of Staff Committee had each made a
close study of what further action Australia could take.
At all stages in the Government's consideration it was known and accepted that
if combat troops were offered and were to be sent they would go only " at the invitation
or with the consent of" South Vietnam. This was required under article IV of the
South-East Asia Treaty to which we were a party.
This was not, as some want to present it, a matter being considered for the
first time on the eve of our announcement of a commitment. It was basic throughout.
It should be remembered that in July 1964 the Prime Minister of South Vietnam,
then Major-General Nguyen Khanh, in a published letter addressed to the Heads of State
of 34 countries, including Australia, had appealed for " all the support you deem possible
arid opportune in order to help us successfully fight the communist aggression".
And as I have pointed out on another occasion, the Prime Minister of South
Vietnam, Mr. Tran Van Huong, in December 1964 in discussion with the Australian
Minister for Air, then visiting Vietnam, and the Australian Ambassador, asked for an
increased Australian military contribution.
Mr. Huong said the situation was now such that large scale assistance was
urgently needed from all free nations " in every form but particularly military".
On 29 April there was an exchange of letters between the Australian Ambassador
and the Prime Minister of South Vietnam.
In these letters, the Australian Government offered to send a battalion if one
were requested, and the South Vietnamese Government accepted this offer and made its
request in terms conforming with the requirements of the South-East Asia Treaty.
Sir Robert Menzies, then Prime Minister, made a statement in the House
of Representatives on the same day.
He said we had received this request and that a battalion would be provided
for service in Soitth Vietnam. 
3.
He said the deeision thint we wnuld be willing to send troops if we received
the ucg regpim-tfrom the Oovern-Iment ( 4 South Vietnam was made in pwinciple
Henv1dedtht thfere had~ been dose-consultation with the Governmea -of -the
Onttdft The-SwjttilietramfeeGovernrment also -publicly isso. 6ommunique fm
ftrwdaybichraid, -~ upon, thec request-of the Grovernment 6f the Re~ public df
Vietnam, . tfriCermnm fif L tralia-today -approved-despamh to Vietnamn ofan
iiifartryhbatnaizn . ttg ber-vitlhJAt1CaI suppcrtpersernnel. to -assist -the. Republic
ft: VIerm armedA 6veinim -sruggle-. against aggreasion...~ 2
ftaurning to the-substance, of the matter, there hae-stneebeenr a-dramatic
IffVemenm -it the jsecurity-a3 the--stability off the generaL region of SoutbhEost * Asi&amp;
Webavesowtibuted to-this fIprov~ erneft.
" m South Vietnam, communist aggression has. been checked and the pacification
p~ a~~ mm ~ dvel~ e&amp; and -extended.
The Government took the--responsible course a course based on-tts-owr
4899sment of enlarging. the contribution it was already making in South Vlemnm on
the -basis . that. the military situation required it and the ceountry under. agpsa&amp; nak~ d
ier it,
NMERRA 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 65/ 1971
SPRINGBOK TOUR
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
The Prime Minister ( Mr McMahon) said today
that the Government had decided it want-ed th( South African Airways
flight bringing the Springboks to Australia serviced at Perth airport
in the normal way. As a precautionary measure, it had also decided that
it will make arrangements, if necessary, for the flight to be refuelled
for its departure from Perth. South African Airways have been
informed of this decision. The flight is due to arrive at Perth early tomorrow
morning ( Saturday). The Prime Minister also said that RAAF transport
assistance will be available if necessary to convey the team to South
Australia. These decisions have been taken by the Government
in conformity with its stated policy that it regarded the visit of sporting
teams as a non-political matter to be arranged between the sporting
bodies concerned. It is the Government's view that this should not be
prevented or prejudiced by some groups within the trade union
movement. Australians are renowned for their fine sporting
instincts and sense of fair play.
I ask all Australians to show these great qualities
during the visit of the Springboks.
CANBERRA, June, 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 66/ 1971
THE SPRINGBOKS' TOUR
Statement by the Prime Minister, MrWilliam McMahon
The Prime Minister said tonight it was desirable once
again to set out clearly and precisely the Government's attitude to the tour
of the Springboks in Australia.
" The Government is deeply concerned", M~ r McMahon said,
" that three principli cf tae greatest importance for the proper functioning
of responsible government in Australia should be preserved. These
principles are
that the Australian people must have freedom of choice within the
law at all times. Nobody has the right to deny them that freedom.
( ii) that no group or organisation should be permitted to intimidate the
lawful government of the country. The Government rejects
absolutely any attempt by elements in the trad e union movement to
achieve their objectives industrial or otherwise by force and
intimidation.
( iii) that politics and sport should not be tied together and that sporting
organisations should not be under duress from any source for
political motives. A few trade un ion leaders have no right to
attempt to interrupt sporting arrangements.
itI believe the great majority of Australian people shares the
Government's view forcibly expressed by me that apartheid is a repugnant
political and social philosophy.
" Elements of the trade union movement are merely using
apartheid to mislead the public about their real motive which is to impose
their views on the Government an~ d the Australian people by force and
intimidation. " I believe Australians value the principles I have
stated and I also believe they wili jealously guard their world -wide reputation
as sportsmen. " I hope the Springboks' tour will continue to be treated
for what it is an international sporting event which interests a tremendous
number of people.
CANBERRA, 27 June 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. NO. 67/ 1971
BRITAIN AND THE E. E. C.
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
The Prime Minister ( Mr McMahon) said that a decision by
Britain to join the European Economic Community would create special
problems for a number of important Australian industries. It would also call
for adjustments in Australian trading arrangements with Europe and an
increasicng emphasis on the development of new markets.
" We have always recognised th-qt the decision to join the
Community was one for Britain herself", M/ r McMahon said, " but, at the sametime,
we have consistently pressed for recognition of, and consideration for,
Australia's substantial trading interests with Britain.
" As it became more apparent that the Six would be willing to
admit Britain, Australia made further representations to ensure that there
would be, in respect of her own trade with Britain, a reasonable transitional
period in which any necessary adjustments~ required by Britain's entry could
be made. " The Government decided that the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Trade and Industry, Mr Anthony, should go to Britain and
to the member countries of the Community, to bring personally before them the
case which Australia had been pressing through Ministerial and diplomatic
channels and in other ways over an extended period. Our purpose was to
ensure that, in the crucial stage of the negotiations between Britain and the Si,,
Australia's case would be received and appreciated at the highest level.
" Mr Anthony has pressed Australia's case strenuously in the
face of formidable difficulties. The Government commends the effort he has
made on behalf of Australia and the industries and communities concerned,"
Mr McMahon said. " It is a matter for regret that Britain has not pressed our case
with the Six to an o~ utcome satisfactory to us.
' The Governmen-t will seek to maintain, as far as possible, its
trade with Britain and the countries of Europe. At the same time, it will continue
and increase efforts to develop new markets throughout the rest of the world.
" I am informed that some time will elapse before the full impact
of any decision by Britain to enter the Common Mairket is felt by those industries
and communities in Australia li kely to be affected. However, the Government
will, in the meantime, be giving urgent and close attention to the problems which
will be posed in these areas by such a development and to ways and means of
meeting them."
CANBERRA, June 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. No._ 68/ 1971
DEATH OF RUSSIAN COSMONAUTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
The Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon, tonight
sent the following message to the Soviet Prime Minister, Mr Kosygin
" I was very saddened and shocked to learn of
the death of your three cosmonauts.
Their loss will be felt by all people of goodwill.
We have all followed with intense interest their record-breaking
journey. On behalf of the Australian Government and people,
please accept my sincere condolences and convey my
sympathy to the bereaved families of these three gallant men.
CANBERRA, June 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 69/ 1971
TRAINING ASSISTANCE FOR SINGAPORE
Statement by the Pr.' s Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Singapore has recently asked for training assistance in
Australia for certain of its Armed Forces. The Australian Government
has been considering the request this week and, in accordance with its
long-standing policy of assisting the build-up of the defence capabilities
of both Malaysia and Singapore in the Five Power context, has agreed
in principle to allow the use of training facilities.
The Government is proposing that Singapore send a
technical team to Australia to make an on-the-spot evaluation of the
facilities which could be provided and to discuss practical aspects
including logistics and maintenance. Firm details would then be
worked out. The facilities would be provided at existing Australian
defence installations and the types of training under consideration are
field and anti-aircraft artillery, air weapons and armoured vehicles.
CANBERRA 2 July 1971 



114TERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR WILLIAM McMAHON
ON TVW CHA NNEL 7 PERTH 3 JULY 1971
interviewers Mr. John~ Hudson
Mir. Syd. Donovan
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, do you and the Government intend this rugby tour,
and then the cricket tour to go on, despite the protests of demonstrators?
PM So far I've only looked at the problem of the rugby tour, and it will go on,
and it will complete the number of matches that it said it would go into. We are
not going to be intimidated and blackmailed by certain sections of the Trade
Union Movement, and for reasons that I've made abundantly clear both on radio
and to the media.
Q. In other words you believe that the police will be able to maintain sufficient
control regardless, to keep this tour flowing?
PM Yes, I do. And not only do I think the police will be able to maintain
control, but I'm certain that the vast majority of the Australian people want the
tour to go on and to be successful. We're a great sporting country, and we're
not going to let the few intimidate the rest of us.
Qr For those people Prime Minister, who are anxious about Australia's
attitude to apartheid, who have done their best to show the world that Australia's
against it. What do you say to them tonight?,
PM I believe that the attitude to apartheid is one of individual conscience. Now
we as a Government dislike the system, we think it is a bad one. But we think that
so far as Australians are concerned, and their consciences are involved, then it
must be a matter of individual judgment what they do within the law. In other words,
providing that they make up their minds they don't like it, if they like to persuade
their friends too, that their friends should not like it then let them stay away from
the matches, but don't let others, whose motives perhaps are not yet fully disclosed
to the Australian people, don't let those other people exploit the position, and try and
intimidate people not to go. In other words, conscience is a matter of very deep
personal concern, and that personal conscience shouldn't be affected by the
judgments and the influence of others.
Q. The bigger attitude that's arisen out of this, of course, is the people who
wonder why the Government was so quiet in the early days of the proposed tour
according to the ACTU, and then the much broader issue of whether such power
policies in Australia will be effective is the Government is the crude way of
putting it.
PM Well you used the words " according to the ACTU". The point is that
from the very earliest days when I became the Prime Minister, I made it clear ./ 2 
that we would place no impediment whatsoever in the way of the tour proceeding and
being successful. From then on it generated, I believe, into a struggle for power
by certain elements within the Trade Union movement, and blatantly and obviously
they showed that they were prepared to force a kind of tyranny on this country.
And from that moment on, the question of apartheid degenerated into a squabble
between these members of the AGTU, some of them, and the people of Australia
as a whole. And I'm abundantly certain of this that the people resent the fact
that this small group of people want to force their opinions upon others. Now we
are the Government. But we hear very little from the Opposition today. In other
words instead of the Opposition being able to express a view they've abdicated
their position to Mr. Hawke, and a few people like him. And if ever an Opposition
has given way to a small minority, we see it in existence in Australia today. But
we are the legitimate Government, elected by the people, and we will do what we
think is right in their interests, rather than the interests of that small minority
who obviously are hell-bent on tyranny.
You seem to be saying that there's an important principle at stake here,
one of the most important principles that we've ever been confronted with perhaps.
It's not just a matter anymore of wihether a few football matches should go on or
not. It's degenerated now into three principles -four perhaps if I can put it that
way. The first one is the right of Australians themselves to choose, providing
they obey the law and act within the law. And why shouldn't they? They were born
free, and they want to remain free. Why should someone else deprive them of the
opportunity of free choice, and the opportunity to do what they want to do to watch
a football match, it doesn't matter whether it happened to be the Dynamos from the
Soviet, or whether it happened to be a football team from South Africa. The
second one is far more important who does govern . this country? Is it to be a
very small minority of people, or is it to be the duly elected people of this country
representatives of this country. I believe in a liberal democracy here, and
consequently when it comes to the question of Government, I believe it is the
representatives of the people themselves who are to govern, and we're not to be
coerced by a small section of the Trade Union movement. And there is another
question involved too. I don't like people to prostitute their political position by
saying there's some moral issue involved. I think sport ought to be divorced from
politics and I believe that's the view of the Australian people, too. If people like to
mix the two up together, driven purely by a political motive, and in the attempt
to use this as a way in which they can enforce their views on the Australian people,
then we have to resist it, and we've done so. And the last one, and I know I'm
taking a long t ime in this, and consequently you have to forgive me. Frankly this
is not the way to go about ensuring that the South African people themselves come to
grips with apartheid, solve the problem to the benefit of all people in South Africa.
I think the way we're going about it is bad. It strengthens the very conservative
elements in South Africa and doesn't give the young people and the liberal elements
an opportunity to express themselves quickly.
Of course, Mr. Hawke answers that and it is convincing to many people,
when he says that the rest of the world has cut itself off from South Africa over this
question of apartheid, and then he enumerates all the sports who have done this,
names a number of other bodies and lets it go at that. And that sounds very
convincing, because in fact this has happened, but what is your answer to that? / A 
PM My answer to that is that I've just given the answer. We make up our minds
what we think is right and what is the proper way to go about settling a problem of
the kind that I have just mentioned.
Q. Even if it does happen to conflict with what the United Nations or anyone
else has decided?
PM Yes, even though it might conflict with others. Because we're an
independent country, independently minded and we do what we think is right. But
I can only say this, we've adopted exactly the same attitude to the Chinese coming
here. We've adopted the same attitude to the Soviet coming here, we let their
ballet companies and their football teams come. Now their system is abhorrent
to us too, they're tyrannical and dictatorial but we haven't mixed up the two. And
we hope, we can hope in time, and all of us must hope in time, we'll be able to
solve the problems in a way that gives fereedom of choice to the individual, lets
them exercise their own individual consciences, permits them to go about their
lawful business, in a way that is most pleasing and satisfactory to them. And we
don't believe, and I want to emphasise this, in interfering in the business of other
countries. Because whenever others at United Nations, or anywhere else, start
to interfere in ours, we tell them where to get off and we've been remarkably
successful.
Q. There's the element Prime Minister, which is frightening to a lot of people.
The element is blackmail as called by some. We've reason to believe that the same
principles which have been drawn out the power, fight, protesting could be used
in Australia, after August, to force the Government, or persuade the Government,
to do something more for the aborigines. I think you're aware of this.
PM Yes, L am.
Q. Again from the ACTU of course. Now the country doesn't want that to happen.
So drawing out a stage further, have you promises to offer to our own coloured
people?
PM This would take me quite a long time to answer. But can I go back a little
over the history of this problem? Immediately after I became the Prime Minister,
Mr. W. C. Wentworth, the Minister for Social Services, and then in charge of
Aboriginal Affairs, came to me. And he said, the native councils, the aboriginal
councils have asked me if I can get you to agree to 11 reforms, and to take them
up with the Queensland Government, and to get our own Department of the Interior
responsible for the Northern Territory to carry out some reforms too. Within
a matter of days I was able to go up to Queensland, and 9 of the 11 reforms asked
for by Mr. Wentworth, that had been promoted by all of the Aboriginal Councils
in Queensland were agreed to immediately. Two others were not, and I believe
that the changes were made in the interests of the aboriginals themselves. The
two changes that were not immediately adopted were one regarding alcohol
the -free supply of alcohol on the Reserves. And there it was suggested to me, and
agreed to, that the local Aboriginal Councils should have the right of local option.
The second one was relating to those aboriginals who were given control of their own
property by the Queensland Administration, and here vwe agreed that they would
have a form of protection. If found they had been exploited and people had taken
their money away from them, or otherwise exploited them, we would, that's the
e. 9 / 4 
Queensland Government, would administratively ensure that justice was done. So
on each one of the I I cases put to us, we did what we were asked to do, and
recently Mr. Neville Bonner,. who I believe will be a very distinguished member
of the Senate, or he is now a distinguished member of the Senate, he has said
that. their claims have been fulfilled and their requests have been agreed to. So too
in the Northern Territory we've set aside land for them, we've set aside funds.
I wish time was available to me to explain to you what was done but. 1-think most
thinking Australians would agree that we're acting responsibly and fairly, and
when I go home I'll ensure Mr. Ralph Hunt, my Minister for the Interior, makes
another statement to indicate clearly what we've done and the Australian people will
be pretty procud, because they're the ones who are paying through taxation.
Q. We haven't mentioned the name Bob Hawke, or Mr. Hawke at all, but if the
reply to his letter, or the ACTU letter about land rights and so on is not satisfactory
this was the point I was trying to make he gave reason to believe that protests
would be organised again, and black bans and disruption of industry.
PM I think you can take it that there has been a course of action by Mr. Hawke
and those who go along with him. Since I've been the Prime Minister this course of
action has always been in terms of threats and intimidation, and the kind of action
that he's. tried to drum up over the South African sporting tour. Always force to
be used always coercion. But I'd be prepared to make this statement to you, that
Mr. Hawke hasn't a glimmer of knowledg( ElWhat happened in Queensland or in
the Northern Territory. He's concentrated on the Yirr'kala case, and he's been
critical of the judgment of Mr. justice Blackburn. Now Mr. justice Blackburn was
acting as a lawyer. And I believe it is a brilliant judgment and ought to be read
by every thinking citizen. We should not be criticising him, what we should be
doing is looking for worthwhile ways of reform, and when we get sensible suggestions
we will adopt them. I'll see that Mr. Hunt, Minister for the Interior issues another
statement, and I'll be certain that the Australian people will say " Well done. You're
acting as our representatives, but they ' re native Australians, just the same/' Ryone
else, they're entitled to a fair go, and they're entitled to justice and we'll ensure
that they'll get it.
Q. In a moment, Mr. Prime Minister, I'd like to switch topics, but firstly,
just one final apartheid question Have you or other mem bers of the Cabinet perhaps,
had any discussions with top Ministers in the South African Nationalist Government
over the question of apartheid, and particularly over the question of these tours?
PM Not that I'm aware of, but I have written to the South African Prime
Minister, and I've informed him of the views of the Australian people, because
I said they were bitterly disappointed when the ban was imposed upon native South
Africans that's coloured South Africans taking part in the tour. But we haven't
had any personal discussions with them, face to face. : They know our views anyhow,
they know our dislike of apartheid, and they know that we'd like a much more liberal
system introduced, and equality introduced there as soon as it was practicable.
Q. All this then has thrown into highlight a whole range of Australia's life.
And here's a good opportunity for pensioners who are watching, and farmers and
others who feel out of it a bit in this country, give some good words for them. 0 
PM Yes, I can. First of all as to the pensioners. I confess immediately, that
I felt that in the last Budget, we had not been -fair to them. And the first action I
took as the Prime Minister was to increase the pension for the married couple and
the single couple too. And I gave also certain assurances relating to the base rate
pensioner, and the changes we would introduce the kind of changes we would
introduce with the next Budget. Naturally I can't tell you exactly what can be done
because I think the Budget has to remain secret. But nonetheless this is one of the
problems we have to give careful attention to. As to both the woolgrower and other
sections of Primary Industry.
Q. Mr. McMahon may I interrupt you just for a moment....
PMV Yes, of course you can.
Q. Mr. Wentworth's statement then about the superannuation scheme is
a very much long-term plan.
PM Well, look I haven't read what Mr. Wentworth has said, and I understand
that on radio today, television anyhow, he has said that he'd been misunderstood.
I wouldn't like to make a comment about superannuation until I hear from him. But
what I can say is that there is no Bill before the Government, and we have no
proposals, at present before the Government, that I know of, relating to
superannuation. But nonetheless, I come back to what I said My funda mental
responsibility is to look after the more needy sections, and I regard that as the
paramount objective of Government.
Q. Farmers then?
PM On farmers what we have done and I took a leading role in this myself
was to ensure that the strongest interdepartmental committee we could get together
would look at the problems of the wool industry, and of rural industries in general
or those rural industries who want or who are in need of assistance. I understand
the papers are just about completed, and we will set aside a special Cabinet meeting
to consider them. This should be done within the course of the next two to three weeks.
Q! Might I mention Vietnam? It's not so long ago Mr. Prime Minister, that
moratorium marchers stirred the same sort of scenes that we're now seeing with
apartheid. But now people seem to be accepting them fairly peacefully. And in fact,
almost saying, Well perhaps we were wrong, perhaps we should get out of Vietnam
generally speaking, the allies, right now. And certainly Labor is making a lot
of capital out off this. What's your attitude?
PM My attitude is a clear one. I've stated before why we are in Vietnam. And
-if you'd like me to refer to the principles involved I'll mention them now. I believe
we're taking the correct attitude. -What we are doing is trying to ensure that the
people of South Vietnam have the right to determine their own future? We want to
determine our own future why shouldn't they have the right. And I believe we've
been remarkably successful Who would have thought two years ago that South
Vietnam would soon be able to stand on its own feet. To be able to protect itself.
To be able to give their citizens the right of choice in the same way as ours have
got the right of choice too. But Vietnamisation is being successful, and our own
role is steadily diminishing. We've already withdrawn one battalion. The Americans
are withdrawing their forces quickly too. 
Q. Are you impressed by the latest Viet Gong offer?
PM I haven't read I've read it and I haven't been able to give it enough
consideration to be able to be precise about it, to be definitive. I can't do that just
yet.
Q. Seems to be impressing the American Government, if we can believe the
reports we're getting. They seem to be accepting the Viet Gong as being at last
realistic, and perhaps genuine, in saying that they will allow American troops to be
handed over, prisoners of war that is, providing American troops withdraw in
other words the whole thing simultaneously. Now this seems to be impressing
President Nixon...
PM Well I have to go this far. I didn't get that impression from the cables
that I've received. But I don't want to be precise because I only received the cable
rather late last night, and you know you can't read them,. and give an immediate
judgment about them. But if we could get to the stage when the North Vietnamese
will say " We will leave the South Vietnamese alone", and we could get assurances
that there would be freedom for both the North and for the South, well then of course
we'd want to get out as quickly as we could and we'd want to give aid and assistance
programmes to the South Vietnamese so that they could build up their standards
of living, so that they could give their own people the opportunity to have the kind
of life that we'd want for them.
Q. I wonder whether you've been in touch with the United States recently about
further withdrawals. That there's a chance that more of our troops will be
coming home soon?
PM I have had, since I've been the Prime Minister, under constant review the
problem of the withdrawal of Australian troops. And the Defence Committee keeps
it under constant review on behalf of the Government. We will, as soon as we've
made up our minds what we're to do, announce it to the Australian people, most
probably in Parliament, because Parliament will be sitting at the time when we'll
make our decision. I've been watching the problem carefully, I've been asking
myself the problem when can we get out of Phuoc Thuy Proviyice, when will the
South Vietnamese there be able to look after themselves?~ Based upon all the facts,
and the implications that are put to me, we'll make up our minds what we're to do.
I want to assure you that of course it's our objective to get out. The problem is
one of timing when we can do it, and above all when we car, give the South
Vietnamese the opportunity to live in peace and in freedom.
Q. Now Labor is saying " We told you so", Mr. Prime Minister, and making
-capital out of recent revelations from America published by American newspapers.
And to some this might be seen as a way of damaging your image at the ne-xt
Federal poll. Could it?
PM Well I don't believe that. Labor will of course jump on a bandwaggon and
say " I told you so". But Labor never thought that South Vietnam could be preserved
as an independent and free coury. They wanted to get out and to let them be
overrun by the North. In other words they were prepared to have a tyrannical
and dictatorial government in North Vietnam dominate the freedom of the people
of South Vietnam. We're not lik-e this. Australians traditionally have fought in 
the cause of freedom World Wars I and 11 in the case of Malaysia, in the case
of South Korea and South Vietnam. And now that victory is there and we're giving
the South Vietnamese the opportunity of freedom, surely we just don't want to run
out now run out on them now, and ensure that the North Vietnamese have a better
chance than they should be, given. But this doesn't really matter. The point is
Vietnamisation has been successful, and as soon as we find that the South
Vietnamese can protect Phuoc Thy Province themselves, of course as soon as that
happens, and it won't be too far distant either, as soon as that happens of course
we'll go through our proposals for withdrawal of Australian troops and announce
them to the Australian people.
Q. I'm not sure Prime Minister, whether after having been involved with all
the finer detail of Government and Australia's policy in the whole range of life,
whether you step back every now and again and look at the general picture.
Certainly with regard to the democratic system, the international scene, who we're
going to be friendly with next, or with whom we can be friendly. First the
democratic principle in this country. Are we too cumbersome? Are elections as
we conduct them now, and elected Governments and so on, an anachronism in our
way of life? Isn't there something better we could have?
PM No I don't think so. I happen to be a liberal democrat and I have fought
for liberal democracy ever since I've been in Parliament. This is the greatest
goal one of the greatest goals we can fight for, apart from making certain that
none of our people go short of all the things that are necessary in order to survive,
and to give them the opportunities of a better life too. But I'm sure you'll achieve
your purposes far more easily and quickly under a democratic system of government
than by permitting some element of tyranny to creep in.
Q. But we can't exist as an island. And although we were in Asia a pretty good
example of a liberal democratic system, we know that we've got to deal with
other countries...
PM Yes.
Q. And it seems more and more there's an insistence that our political
system should be aligned with their political system. And if there's a growing
tendency to national socialism in the world, doesn't this put us in a precarious
position?
PM I don't think it does, because I think we'll do ever so much better as a
liberal democracy than we would do with the kind of system that would be forced
on us if Mr. Hawke and people like him, dominate the Labor Party, and compel
us or try and compel us to introduce -the systems of socialism or even of communism.
Q. What's the best thing to fight it then? Is it education, or is it simply a
liberal democratic system ad nauseam almost? Which part of our society can
preserve what we've got now?
PM By keeping a liberal democratic government in power. And it is a
fundamental duty of a liberal democratic government to educate the Australian
people and keep them informed of what they are doing, and why they are doing it.
0,9 0 / 8 
And similarlytoo, and you obviously recognise this because of the questions you
asked at the beginning of this discussion you pointed out, or implicit in what you
said to me was the fact that today there is an element that waits tyranny to be
established here, and wants to enforce ft~ will against the wishes at the
Australian people. When you get television of the kind you had here a few days
ago with Mr. Hawke appearing on It,, then that alerts the Australian people of the
dagrsand it ts once they are alerted you can make abnatycertain that they
wor agree to it and they wcm't permit it to be the kind of Government that's
operative in this country.
Q. Are you saying that Mr. Hawke damaged himself from what you saw of
I that Interview we did with him last week, and the Labor cause in this country?
PM I am sure he did. But Ildon't want to comein very much against
Mr. Hawke I'e known him for a long, long time. I was Minister for Labour
for about eight years,, I you know haven't got a very great regard for him, but
I'd rather leave him out of it and draw attention to the Issues In sight and thp
political issues.....
Q. In terms of life and deathMr. Prime Minister,, perhaps of far greater
problems even than Vietnam I mean~ for examplej we see the enormous death
toll on our roads here which makeathe Vietam toll pae into almost Insiginficance.
Is there anything that you have in mind to perhaps do about that nationally?
PM * There are several things that we have done When I was the Treasurer
wihwasn't very long ago, we decided that we would give a very big increase in
the grants for roads to the State Governments to let them have a better road system
In this country. I think the phrase I then coined -an addtuioi~ dhalf
a billion it is a catchy phrase, but catchy phrases are rather good these days
we gave them half a billion In order, over a period of three to five years to be able
to better the roads system of this country and so to reduce the toll. For the rest
of it such as seat belts and control ot the roads and safety measures that can be
taken, these reside within the field of the State Governments.
Q. Would you personally like to see seat belts compulsory all over Australia?
PM I don't mind. I don't thinklIknow enough about itto be able tobe precise.
But If the safety authorities think it is desirable then I believe we should enact the
laws to make them necessary -and rd be one of the first to admit thatif they want
it done it ought to be done.
Q. Prime Minister, time goes by very very quickly. But again in order to
improve the country roads, Vietnam, labour relationships I was trying to fish
in the previous question towards education I was thinking that In our country most
of the-money ough to be spent perhaps on education. And more and more and
more for my children, for your children. Do you agree?
PM You can never spend enough on education. But I think you have to take
a balanced view as to where the money should be spent. Well first of all we must
remove pockets of poverty wherever we can. We must see that we've got a
first class and? an improving health system. We must have increasingly better
education because we've got a wonderful lot ot people with pretty high K~ s native
intelligence of the highest order. And I say this as a man who's travelled the
world and knows the capacity of the Australian in comparison with others.
Arnd of cwre We then-have to make our provtsion for defence. Bu~ t what we always
0 0 / 9 
.4 it a s.
e.
' 9.
p 4.
C
V -' 4
4. .1 
9.
have to remember, is that we are not a very big country, and we have to act
within the limitations of our natural and physical resources and our people. What
we want to do is to ensure thcat we get that happy blending that blending that
means that it's in the best interests of the Australian people as a whole. And we
will increasingly give a greater advance, a greater amount of money for education.
I think you know that only a few years ago we did give the States enormously
increased advances what they call general revenue grants. And out of that we
hope they'll be able to develop a better education system.
Q. If we had a federal election any time between now and the arrival say of
the Springbok cricket team.-do you believe that you could win on one simple
platform law and order who's running this country myself the Prime Minister
and his Government or the ACTU lead by Bob Hawke?
PM It' my own belief tha: if we had an election today we would win at least
two seats in Western Aust:--' Uia, and we would win seats in very nearly every other
State as wellwnnn at Least three in New South Wales. So it does show that
the Australian people are interested in the problem of public order, they are
interested in ensuring that a truly democratic system is protected and they want
the right of freedom of choic~ e within the law themselves. In other words we're a
pretty responsible and decent community and we don't want thelarrikin few the
demagogue or the brash we don't want them to be telling us what we're to do.
Q. And this suggests that you should have an election quick and lively.
Q. Why not today?
PM Well, you know you can't have elections in a matter of days. I once, if
I could now make a simple confession to you, did contemplate one shortly after
I became the Prime Minister. I felt, well, this was the day. But we weren't very
well organised, and there were other views, that felt it was too soon after
becoming the Prime Minister, too precipitate, and of course I thought about it, but
never got to the stage where a decision had to be made. But if I had I know what
the consequences would have been. It would have been a very, very unhappy day
for the Labor Party, and an extremely unhappy day for the socialist left, and for
those who Mr. Hawke told what he should do during the course of the last few
weeks.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, thank you.
PM Thank you too. 



FOR PRESS-: PMI No. 71/ 1971
DEA7H OF SIR FREDERICK SHEDDEN
Statement by-the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
It is with deep regret that I learnt of the death of Sir
Frederick Shedden. Sir Frederick had a long and distinguished career in the
Commonwealth Public Service and was an eminent figure in defence
administration. He was Secretary of the Defence Department from 1937 to
1956, spanning the critical years of World War 11 and the unsettled period
which followed. From 1.939 to 1946 he was Secretary of War Cabinet and from
1943 to 1945 Secretary of the Advisory War Council.
Earlier in his career Sir Frederick Shedden was attached to
the British Cabinet Office and the Committee of Imperial Defence where
he was closely associated with Lord Hankey.
Sir Frederick participated in many important overseas
missions with the Prime Minister and Minister for Defence.
On the basis of experience during World War II, Sir Frederick
Shedden had developed arrangements in the Defence Department which had
laid the foundations for closer co-ordination and direction of defence policy
and administration. The Prime Minister said that Sir Frederick Shedden would be long
remembered for his outstanding service to Australia.
On behalf of the Government I extend sympathy to his widow.
CA NBERRA
9 July 1.971 



FOR PRE&amp; u. PM6 No. 72/ 1971
t CCNOMIC CGNSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Over the last three days, the Government has had extremely
useful and wide-ranging discussions with the ACTU and organisations
representative of major sectors of industry and commerce.
These discussions were much greater in scope, and more
time was allotted than previously to enable the organisations to put
their views to the Gover:! ment on the trends in the economy generally
and on aspects of particular concern to them.
Ministers w-3re given up-to-date and first-hand information
and assessments of the problems concerning the rural industries,
particularly wool. The manufacturing, commerce and mining represent atives.
provided an appreciation of the prospects and problems affecting their
industries. The Ministers also had the benefit of advice from the
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and the Export Development
Council which have a special advisory association with the Government.
In the course of these discussions, representatives put forward
a number of proposals, some of which will require careful consideration.
The Government appreciates the preparatory work undertaken
by the organisations in presenting well-documented submissions. These
greatly facilitated the full and fruitful discussions which have now just
ended. The organisations represented at the consultations are shown
on the attached list.
CANBERRA 9 July 1971 
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTED AT
ECoToC9f07BgCT!^ 3GTT
Primar IndustryGroup
Australian Farmers' Federation
Australian Woolgrowers' and Graziers'
Council
Australian Wool and Meat
Producers' Federation
Australian Wheatgrowers' Federation Vice-President Mr. J. P. Cass, 0. B. E.
President Mr. B. A. Wright, O. B. E.
President Mr.
President Mr. R. V.
L. V. Sewell, O. B. E.
Price, O. B. E.
Manufacturing Industry Group
Associated Chambers of Manufactures
of Australia
Master Builders' Federation of
Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive
Industries
Commerce and MiingGroup
Associated Chambers of Commerce
of Australia
Australian Bankers Association
The Australian Council of Retailers
Australian Mining Industry Council President Mr. H. N. Herford, E. D.
President Mr. R. S. Prentice
Vice-President Mr. N. W. Lawrance
President Mr.
Chairman Mr.
President Mr.
President Mr. N. M. Blyton, O. B. E.
G. F. Bowen
E. L. Byrne
J. B. Massey-Greene
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council
Sir Ronald Irish, F. C. A.
Sir James Vernon, C. B. E.
Mr. T. M. Ramsay
Mr. F. W. Wiltshire
Export Development Council
Chairman Mr. D. H. Freeman
Deputy Chairmen Mr. R. V. Sewell, O. B. E.
E. P. McClintock
Executive Members Mr. H. McE. Scambler
Mr. N. G. Wilson
Member Mr. 0. G. Meyer, E. D.
Australian Council of Trade Unions
Junior Vice President The Honourable R. B.
Secretary Mr. H. J. Souter. Marsh, M. L. C.
Chairman Members 



YOUNG LIBERALS' RALLY
MET-L BOUR NE 12 UjLY 1971
 Sechby the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
-Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:
I want to talk to you tonight about China the People's Republic of China.
I do so for two reasons.
First, because that country will be of tremendous significance in our
region for as far ahead as we can see and therefore it should properly engage the close
attention of Liberals. And then because I feel it is time to expose the shams and the absurdities
surrounding Mr. Whitlam's excursion into " instant coffee" diplomacy. You will have
been reading thousands of words about his visit to China and his talks with Chou En-Lai.
He has spelt out a policy which is dangerous for Australia. I doubt if I
have ever read such a damaging and irresponsible series of declarations by any political
leader in all my time in politics in Australia.
. The Whitlam Policy as it stands would isolate Australia from our friends
and allies not only in South-East Asia and the Pacific but in other parts of the Western
world as well. This policy must be disowned by us. We must not become pawns of the
giant communist power in our region.
The Labor mission to China began, of course, as an ingenuous exercise
by the Australian Labor Party, instigated by Mr. Mick Young, which wanted to play
Party politics with wheat sales to China. It was turned instantly and skilfully into an
international propaganda exercise by the Chinese Premier, Chou En-Lai, who committed
the Labor Leader to a position Australia could never accept and from which Mr. Whitlam
himself cannot withdraw.
In no time at all, Chou En-Lai had Mr. Whitlam on a hook and he played
him as a fisherman plays a trout. It was done in public and in a way that guaranteed a
world-wide coverage. There are, of course, certain rules of courtesy which are observed by
visitors to a foreign country. Mr. Whitlam went far beyond what was necessary in
responding to his hosts when sensitive matters were raised. In the process he managed
to insult just about most of our friends and allies in Asia and the Pacific.
Chou En-Lai set out to denigrate the United States and Japan the first
being our greatest ally in Asia and the Pacific and the other being our best customer
in trade. He even told Mr. Nixon how to run his Administration or get thrown out.
What an impertinence to the Leader of the United States., and it is not likely to be
forgotten by the American Administration. 
Mr. Whitlam just stopped short of denouncing the ANZUS Pact, presumably
because he wants the benefits without sharing any of the responsibilities.
Chou En-Lai raised the fear of a revival of Japanese militarism when
there is no evidence to support that fear.
Mr. Whitlam accepted Chou En-Lai's statement about Japanese militarism
without question. And yet only a few months ago he was telling the Australian Parliament
that Japan had a diplomatic role in Asia and that we, in Australia, were well placed to
make an effort to have Japan become the West's bridge with China.
One voice at home, a different voice abroad. This is a typical sample of
his inconsistency. I remind you, Ladies and Gentlemen, that only a few days ago the
American Administration reaffirmed that nuclear protection for Japan would be available
from the United States if the need arose. This statement was a response to reports
that the Japanese would have to develop a defensive nuclear weapon by 1980.
It is obvious that Mr. Whitlam didn't know the facts and fell easily for a
very, very clever piece of propaganda.
He spoke contemptuously of the Soviet Union, with whom my Government
is slowly building bridges towards a better understanding beneficial to us. He described
the termination of the Sino-Soviet friendship Treaty as an " abominable" act by the
Soviet Union. He sneered at Thailand, Taiwan, the Philippines and Cambodia all
countries with whom Australia has trade and friendly relations. He said Thailand and
the Philippines were " trying desperately to insinuate themselves" into China's good
graces. What a presumption to talk about third Governments in this way, and on
what grounds. And so he went on playing his wild diplomatic game knocking our friends
one by one until he was virtually alone in Asia and the Pacific except for the communists.
The things he did not mention cried out for notice. He ignored recent
history, and the fact of China's involvement in military action on her frontier with
LIndia, the, Korean War and in Tibet.
He had nothing to say about China's part ini wars of national liberation
in Vietnam, Thailand and Laos. He did not ask what the roads China was building into
Northern Laos were for. One will run East to Vietnam and the other towards North-
Eastern Thailand. He did not make a plea for Mr. Chou to use his good offices to secure
an honourable peace in Vietnam.
Not only did he fail to do that but he allowed himself to be put forward as
a kind of intermediary and spokesman for the latest manoeuvres of North Vietnam and
China at the Paris peace talks. ./ 3 
He cabled me professing to have confidential information from the highest
source that the latest communist peace proposals were intended to " differ in kind and
extent from all previous proposals."
Without the slightest knowledge of what the other side of the picture was
-because he was travelling in a closed society, he said " 1 am convinced that America
is being given an honourable opportunity for early disengagement.
Now, this " confidential information" has already been published in the
" People's Daily" the official newspaper in Peking and references -in a similar vein are
in the transcript of Mr. Chou's public interview with Mr. Whitlam.
He must have known that the United States haS, been trying to initiate
private talks in Paris to ascertain the North Vietnam ese intentions, but the communist
negotiators there keep evading the opportunity to seriously discuss any proposals.
This is history. I told him by cable that the proper place for the Chinese to press their case
was in Paris. I have no doubt that once again Mr. Whitlam has let hinself get caught up
on a stunt. I can only think that he is doing this for such cheap notoriety as it may
bring him. It does harm both to Australia and the cause of peace in Vietnam.
I find it incredible that at a time when Australian soldiers are still engaged
in South Vietnam, the Leader of the Labor Party is becoming a spokesman for those
against whom we are fighting.
Now let us look for a moment at the question of Taiwan, because this is
the crux of the matter so far as Mr. Whitlam's recognition plans are concerned.
He had declared bluntly that a Labor Govern ment would recognise the
People's Republic on the lines of the Canadian formula. He goes further. He would take
the initiative in severing relations with Taiwan and he would visit Peking as " the sole
capital of China". By accepting Peking as the sole capital he is abandoning Taiwan, whatever
he says about the Canadian formula.
Mr. Whitlam says Mr. Chou made no reference to Taiwan in their public
discussions. But the transcript of those discussions which is freely available in Australia
and has been published in several newspapers shows that MrI. Chou did in fact do so,
and he described the island as China's " province of Taiwan"
Mr. Whitlam has made his choice. Without morality, without responsiility
he would go " all the way" with one and dump the other. He would dump fourteen million
people on Taiwan. Now, Mr. Chairman, let me tell you where the Government stands on
China with the People's Republic on the one hand arid Taiwan on the other. 
As you know, we are seeking a dialogue with the People's Republic Mil
call it China for convenience sake with the long-term object of establishing normal
diplomatic relationships. This was not a new or recent idea. It was the outcome of a study begun
long before those ping pong games were played. We have already had diplomatic
contact with China but I cannot yet report any progress. But we are not surprised.
Progress will be slow and we must be patient. We are acting cautiously and privately
as is the way with proper diplomacy and I hope the Chinese will react in the same way
if they really want to get down to a solution of the problem.
What an unpleasing spectacle Mr. Whitlam's public diplomacy makes. A
Government engaged in diplomatic activity in sensitive areas of international relations
cannot perform in public. It has to put the trappings of propaganda aside and get down to
realities. That is what we are doing with China.
The first major movement in China's bid to enter the community of nations,
so far as Australia is concerned, is likely to be her admission to the United Nations and
the security council. If it doesn't take place this year, it will almost certainly take
place next year. We have said that Australia is not opposed to this. It would be reasonable
to accept this as a recognition of a fact of life of the Chinese Government's established
authority. But there are other considerations when we come to the next stage
recognition. That may be a long way off but we are prepared to work towards it if we
get any co-operation from China as we go.
But we are not prepared to do so at any cost to our own country. Our own
vital interests will come first.
In all we are doing, we are naturally consulting with our allies and our
friends, particularly with the United States and Japan.
We are morally bound to consider the position of Taiwan. It would be our
hope that Taiwan would be able to and ready to retain membership of the United Nations
when China is admitted. We would also want to see the separate rights of the people of
Taiwan protected. We are consulting with them and with our friends on this, too.
That, in short, is the position. I believe it is the only honourable course
that Australia can take. The judgments we make must be long considered and soberly
made. Now, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Whitlam's undisciplined foray into a league that
is far too big for him began with wheat. So let me say something briefly on this point,
and on the relationship we already have with the People's Republic.
Wheat has been one part only of our trade with China, and let it be
remembered, we sell a lot of wheat to places other than China. e a 
I a There is no discrimination against China in our tariff and import policies.
Although China is not a member of GATT, we have applied GATT rules against nondiscrimination
to China and we will continue to do so. We give her, like other countries,
most favoured nation treatment.
Furthermore, we have no barriers to visitors from the People's Republic.
They can come like any others and are subj ect only to those normal procedures which
apply to visitors from any country.
On its part, China usually exercises the strictest control over visitors
from here. Now about wheat in particular. The intervention of the Labor Party in
the wheat question has not helped matters at all. The Labor delegation has played the
Chinese game by introducing politics into wheat. We think our best interests will be
served by leaving it to the Wheat Board and keeping it out of politics.
If you read the recent Chinese communique on the subject carefully
you will see they have not given any guarantees for future purchases of Canadian wheat.
They say, in effect, they will continue to treat Canada in the future as they have treated
her in the past that is to consider her first as a source.
That's not a new position. It applied before Canada decided to recognise.
It is not even a decision to buy. And what's more, even if China were applying a little
blackmail there are other markets for our wheat right now.
Now, Ladies and Gentlemen, that is the position as the Government sees
it. The Labor Party is putting politics into wheat at a time when our rural industries
need help, not hindrance. Mr. Whitlam is putting personal notoriety before the national interest.
He is showing slickness that even his critics would not have believed of him.
He has made sweeping judgments " on the voices" as it were, the voices
of skilled propagandists all on one side of the fence.
It would be laughable if it were not tragic. It would be pathetic if it were
-not so dangerous. I ask you to see this as a sample of the kind of diplomacy the Labor
Party would exercise if ever it came to power. Let this be our incentive to see that it
never does. 



EMBARGO Not foz publication or broadcast before 5.00 PM, THURSDAY
JULY 1971
FOR PRESS: PM No. 73/ 1971
POLICE ACCOMMODATION IN QUEENSLAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The provision of Commonwealth accommodation for
Queensland police during the visit of the Springboks to Brisbane
was made in response to a request by the Queensland Government.
This was in the interests of public safety.
The Commonwealth Government stated it would
provide accommodation only as a last resort.
This meant that the Qucensland Government had to give
an assurance to the Commonwealth that it could not provide the
accommodation from wihin its own resources. This assurance was
received. in the ligh: of the Queensland Government's Order
in Council, I had an enquiry rnzcde through official channels yesterday
whether the need for Ccrnimonwcaith accommodation still existed.
We were infojymsd that the need for Cbmmonwealth
accommodation 3: iil ex;:. r.. e
CANBERRA July 1971 



FOR PRESS PMK No. 74/ 1971
PRESIDENT NIXON'S STATEMENT ON CHINA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
I welcome without reservation President Nixon's statement
concerning United States relationships with the People's Republic of
China and his intention to visit China early next year. I was informed
of the purport of his statement in advance.
The President's purpose of normalising relationships
with China has been the public ly-announced policy of the Australian
Government for some time.
Indeed, President Nixon's anxiety to " seek normalisation
of relations and exchange views on questions of concern" precisely
describes what we ourselves have been seeking to do by our approaches
through diplomatic channels in Paris.
In particular, I want to draw the attention of the Australian
people to President Nixon's statement that the action he is taking will
" not be at the expense of old friends".
In the future, Australia's policies and actions will be
guided by these principles as they have been in the past.
I share wholeheartedly the President's view that all will
gain from a reduction of tension between the United States and the
People's Republic of Chi na. I wish him good fortune in an initiative
that has the full support of Australia.
I emphasise that President Nixon's statement relates
to the normalisation of relationships with China in the interests of
world peace.
CANBERRA, 16 July 1971 



OPENING OF TASMANIANT-STATE COUNCIL LIBERAL
PARTY OF AUSTRALIA DEVONPORT 16jLYj 1971
 p! eScby the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, Senator Wright, my Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies
and Gentlemen: While I am here I want to pass on, if I can, something of the spirit
that is abroad in Australia today on behalf of the Liberal cause.
As our President has said in the last four months I have visited fair of
the six Australian States. Of course I don't count in New South Wales because it's
the State in which I live. But what I can say to you, and I can say it to you with
emphasis, is that I have been heartened by the obvious vitality of our movement, the
enthusiasm of the Party members and the readiness of the organisation and the
political wings to get together and to get things done.
Only a few days ago my Press Off icer and my Department gave me a
record of our achievements of the last four months 430 independent and separate
initiatives taken successfully by the Government. Frankly it gave me a great cause for
pleasure. We've got a good team in Canberra, and I've been conscious of a new
unity among the Branches and the councils of the Party. There is a coming together
and a gathering of the clans, as I see it, in readiness for the next election. I honestly
believe we have the team and the policies to win, and not only to win, but I believe
we will pick up seats. It's the size of the victory I want to be sure about. Now is the
time for all of us to get cracking and to make that victory, and the numbers that we
have in the House, a big one.
I'd like to get Franklin back for a start. As I said a few moments ago,
I believe that our record in the last few months has been pretty good -over 40 initiatives
successfully taken. I've met the Premiers of the States on two occasions in that time,
and I believe each time successfully.
I think I've made it clear that the Commonwealth doesn't want to play the
role of Headmaster. For political and economic and for social reasons I believe in
a Federal system of Government. But what I do want is to work together and to
co-operate closely, as we are meant to do under the Constitution. And that
Constitution belongs to you and shouldn't be altered unless it is with your consent. I
want it to survive until you change it, and I want to be able to play my part in making
it work better. The things we've done so far have included growth taxes for the States.
We gave a special increase to the pensioners, and in many other aspects of our social
welfare we have shown new inititatives. In particular I want to emphasise what has
been done for our aborigines. Because here I believe the story has been imperfectly
told. All the reforms that William Wentworth asked me to carry out as a result of
consultations with the aboriginal councils themselves, were in fact either carried out
or bettered. And our massive programme for aboriginal development in the Northern
Territory is, I think, a very good one. / 2 
We've-also been tackling a variety of problems arising from the pressures
of the-economy including a review of the arbitration system to see what can be done
about cost inflation arising largely from excessive wage increases. I'll say more to
you about this subject in a few moments'time.
We are giving very special attention to the crisis in our rural industries,
especially how we'll be able to help them when Britain enters the European Community.
But before I touch on these subjects, let me come back to Labor Party activities.
Because I believe that by their tolerance and tacit encouragement of industrial disputes
they are indifferent to the problems of the economy.
In the time that I have been Prime Minister I have nct heard one Member
of the Opposition other than Alan Fraser of Eden-Monaro, who is a Liberal in mind
and in thought raise his voice in opposition to the activities of the left-wing trade
unions and the activities of the left-wing in his own Party.
There has been an indifferent and a gross affront to law and order in
the community by elements in the trade union movement during the Springboks tour. I
believe most Australians want that tour to be successful. They don't want politics to
get mixed up with a sporting event.
You know too, the waterside workers cut off Tasmania from the Port
of Melbourne as part of an industrial campaign against the Springboks. That was a
blatant political act without any industrial motive whatsoever. And in recent weeks, in
defiance of a promise given to the ACTU and the Australian people, they're again engaged
in these tactics of depriving you people of the ability to carry on your businesses
effectively. Now the Labor Party also wants to write down our rural industries.
They said as much at their Launceston conference. Mr. Hayden, a not very eminent
member of the Labor Party, and not a man who can be regarded as gifted or knowledgeable
in rural affairs, but he said, speaking as it were for an-industrial metropolitan community,
that our primary industry should be controlled on a self-supporting basis and that
whatever reforms were to be carried out should be carried out in a defined period.
What he meant was that many of our great industries the wheat industry
and the sugar industry, both of which have stabilization schemes, should be deprived
of them, and the wool industry shouldn't be givenpprotection because it has to be
self-supporting. Those industries should be permitted to fight their own battles within
a definable period, and be permitted to fight an international company without the
support of the Government and the Australian people.
Now he, and those who voted it through just didn't know what they were
talking about. Their one so-called expert in primary industries, Dr. Patterson,
virtually disowned it publicly on television on the night the decision was made or if it
wasn't that night it was immediately after the conference. But it is the self-same
Dr. Patterson who is now playing the games of the Communists in China, by being
critical of our attitude to the sale of wiheat to China. We don't want to interfere, because
we know what a magnificent job the Wheat Board is doing, and we're faily certain that
if these attacks had not occurred, then our Wheat Board had reasonable prospects of
commencing negotiations with the China purchasing agency within the course of the
Inn foxiv u-4: 4-o it thair activities have harmed the cause of the Wheat Board, and
having harmed the cause of the Wheat Boardhave. I he-lieve. hni-mod ite anLis MIe'
Australian wheat producers. / 3 
Now if I may go further, the Party Leaders have been on parade in Peking,
in a massive propaganda exercise, skilfully contrived by Chou En-Lai, offending as
many of Australia's friends as they could. In fact, Mr. Whitlam and his entourage,
and I ask you to remember who they are, and the type of people they are, are the
advocates for China against the interests of this country. And it must be our task as
Liberals to expose the shallowness of all these activities.
Let me take two of them, and two only because as our President has
said, my time and your time is limited. I'll talk first of all about the industrial
intrusion into non-industrial matters as one subject, and our attitude to Mainland
China as the other. Let's have a look into the industrial fields first. You've heard of
Mr. Hawke I take it he's our new foreign demagogue. But he's doing a cook's tour
of Europe at the moment, after stirring up a hornet's nest here, and finding it pretty
angry one. For some months now, we have seen some elements in the Trade Union
movement, Mr. Hawke as their principal spokesman, butting into all sorts of fields
where they have no right to be, and where no industrial issue was involved, poking
their nose in because they wanted to tell you exactly what they wanted you to do. They
tried to stop the export of merino sheep and they failed. Mr. Hawke busied himself
with some gratuitous advice to a television station on the kind of programme it should
have. If he could do that, couldn't he do it to the media, all the media press,
television, radio and other kind of activities that he thought came within his sights.
He led the way in an attempt to stop the Springboks tour. And what they did was really
an attempt to deny people their freedom of choice within the law, and an attempt, as
a final result, to have a showdown with the Government.
They inspired and provoked demonstrators into actions which became a
challenge to public law and order within the Commonwealth. I believe the Australian
public is fed up with all of this, and I believe a lot of responsible trade unionists the
bulk of whom are good, hard-working Australians are also fed up with it too.
I have said many times that my Government and I find apartheid repugnant
as a political and a social philosophy. But apartheid wasn't really the issue in the challenge
to law and order when the Springboks arrived. It was a pretext and it was an excuse
by Mr. Hawke and some of his colleagues to show their form and to show their capacity
for intimidation. And the professional demonstrators and dissenters and a lot of them
were jumped on the band wagon without wasting a second of time.
Now the Government, our Government in Canberra, had to make its
position clear. And at the time I stated three important principles that were dear to
us, and that we would ensure were followed and observed. I think that they're worthwhile
repeating at the moment. And they are and I repeat what I have said but a
few moments ago that the Australian people, the you and me's of this world, the
people that constitute not only the Liberal and the Labor Parties, the uncommitted,
the young and everyone in the community, have a right of freedom of choice within
the law at all times. Nobody has the right to deprive them of this freedom of choice. e / 4 
And the second great principle is that no group or organisation should be
permitted to intimidate the lawful Government of the country whether it happens to
be State, Local Government, or Federal Government as it exists in Canberra. Now
we reject absolutely any attempt by elements in the Trade Union movement to achieve
their objectives, industrial or otherwise, by force and intimidation.
And the last one a fairly simple one is that frankly we believe there
is an area of politics, we believe there is an area of sport. We believe there are areas
of cultural relations such as musical activities, or the movement of ballet companies,
and we do not think for one moment, that the sporting and other organisations should be
under duress from any source purely for political motives. I also remind you too, if
I can~ of the basis on which we operate.
I believe that the principles that we have held ever since we were first
formed as a Party remain just as valid and absolute today as they did when they were
first announced. So what I want to read to you now is a part of what was said by us
in a little document published by Sir Robert Menzies called " We Believe". It's this:
" The Liberal Party offers the spirit of adventure, the
fire freedoms of thought and speech and choice, the
great human right to choose an avocation and fail,
or to choose an avocation and succeed.
In other words, to put it in my own way, to act as men and women, and to
be able to do what you want to do, providing you do it, as 1 said before, within the law.
I think we should keep on remembering this against the possible background of
increasing industrial outrages in the months to come.
May I now come to the other subject I want to mention and that is China.
And before I come into the body of my speech, may I just mention two facts to you.
The first one relates to the fact that memories are short, and that -there
are some discussions taking place today about the possibilities of another Geneva-type
convention. I well remember, shortly after I became the External Affairs Minister
( now the Foreign Minister) going up to South Vietnam to see our own troops and to see
how Vietnamisation was progressing. And on the way there I met representatives
of various Asian countries. Together we decided that we would have a conference
in Djakarta, dedicated to trying to get peace in Cambodia and to permit this country
to be able to live free, and particularly free from intimidation from the North.
We invited China, we invited the Communist countries, but they
blatantly refused to come. But we did send emissaries around the world trying to
find out whether there was anything that could be done and we even tested the United
Nations without result.
So I want you to understand that we as a Liberal Government have been
seeking for peace. Thinking that the cause of peace was one of the highest ideals
that we asLiberals possess, and a) nsequently I now want to debunk any idea that
somebody has take n the initiative away from us. It is totally false. We want peace,
we know that Vietnamisation is succeeding and we do know it now, we at least want to
preserve the basic cause for which we fought, and that was the right of the South
Vietnamese to be able to determine their own future. 0 0 
Now may I come to the second point that I wanted to mention to you, and
that is about recognition of Continental China, the People's Republic of China in the
United Nations, and recognition itself.
Shortly after I became Minister for External Affairs, I called for papers
to be prepared and presented to the Cabinet, as to what our attitude should be at the
United Nations, because as I mentioned a few moments ago, we had then taken up a
precise and definite attitude,
Similarly, too, did I decide, or did I recommend and the Cabinet decided
that we would make the preliminary move, called a dialogue, with the People's Republic
of China to see what their attitude might be, to recognition. Now when I talk about the
People's Republic for brevity's sake I'll say " China", but I want you to understand
that it means Peking China, or Communist China. We have had meetings with their
plenipotentiaries so far unsuccessful. Not because of our attitude -we did make
an attempt to show them what we were prepared to do-but because of the fact that
they were not prepared to listen unless we agreed to all of the terms that they had
proposed. So now may I come back then to the speech that I want to make and speak
to you about China itself.
There has been, as we all know, certainly most Liberals will know, some
evidence that China was getting ready to lift the boom which has kept her isolated from
the Western world for so long. And, as is prudent, we have had our China policy
under review for a considerable time. I repeat this again, because I don't want to let
somebody jump onto the band wagon and say the opposite that recent developments
in our policy have been precipitated by public interest in China's person-to-person
or as somebody calls it the ping-pong diplomacy.
Neither do I think China's new interest in the outside world reflects a
change of heart. I don't. It would be more accurate to describe her recent initiatives
as a new tactical approach to old goals. Not new, but with skill, and with diplomatic
common sense, they have used the Labor mission for the benefit of the Chinese themselves.
Now the goals, and I want to emphasise this of the Chinese people, are
these. You know that up on the Ussuri and other parts of the North, they have the problems
with the Soviet, and consequently one of their biggest and most immediate problems is
that of border security. They want a reduction in the influence of the United States and
of the Soviet. They want a check on Japan and they want the spread of Maoist revolutionary
theories by securing better relationships with smaller powers. And, of course,
they do want the recovery of Taiwan, that is the Republic of China.
Nevertheless whatever our dislike of her political philosophy, we
regard China as a fact of life in the region. And, indeed, as a fact of life in the wider
world, and we must look forward in the long run to normal relations with them.
But I want to emphasise, we will have a dialogue not on their terms,
but on terms that we regard as satisfactory to us as Australians and to the people
of this country. / 6 
The position now is that fifty-four countries have diplomatic relations
with China and sixty-three with Taiwan. Since last October nine countries have
announced they will establish diplomatic relations, but none of them was in our region
None were immediately to the North of us, none were countries with which we have
regional associations and relationships, and whose security we regard as important
to our own. Not only as a result of my mission to the United Nations, but in what
I have been able to learn since, I have formed the opinion that it is probably that
either this year or next, Peking will become a member of the General Assembly of the
United INations and will I think have a seat on the Security Council. We will not oppose
membership I have said this over and over again. It niusn't be forgotten. Some
people will attempt to jump on the band wagon and try and prove to the c ontrary.
But what we will do is this, we will do all in our power to ensure that
Taiwan, that has 14 million people, that is a member of the United Nations now,
and is recognised by us and is a very good trading partner of ours -Taiwan is a
better trading partner than China itself, that is Continental China -that Taiwan's
posritio2 is recogniscd and its position in the United Nations sustained.
When we are taking this action, of course, we consult with our friends,
part icularly the United States, Japan arid New Zealand. They, toohave already had
some contact with China through diplomatic sources. Or perhaps I should take that
back and I should localise it to ourselves. I don't want to speak for them. I repeat
again that we have had contact with the Chinese Government through other national
sources, We have set out directly to Peking what is our long-term goal and our
desire to take progressive steps towards this. It would be very optimistic to expect
any quick returns. We must move cautiously, with our own national self-interest
uppermost in our minds at all times. And I want to repeat that because I want you to
understand the contrast. VWe will move slowly and cautiously, beca4,% eit is our vital
interest that must be uppermost in our minds. And the contrast is the mission
of the Labor Party recently in Mainland China was moving ilot in our interests, but
dangerously close to the interests of Mainland China-, and dangerously opposed to
the interests of many of our great friends.
N-ow the question of recognition will arise in due course, but as I saidit
may be a long way off. And we don't intend to rush it. Let me give you a few more
facts about the relationships we already have with the People's Republic. This is
important, because some would create the impression that they are completely isolated.
There has been a two-way trade between us both for a good many years,
and recently, and the businessmen here should be told this, we recently liberalised
the list of strategic exports so that the range of trade could be widely extended. And
I ask all businessmen to have a look at this restricted list because they will see, that
that range of opportunities is great, and has been expanded by the Liberal-Country
Party Government in recent months.
There is no discrimination against China in our tariff and import policies.
Although China is not a member of GATT', we have applied GATT rules against
nondiscrimination to China and we will continue to do so. We give her, like other
countries, most favoured nation treatment. / 7 
Furthermore, we have no barriers to visitors from the People's
Republic. They want to come here, and unless there are defence or PtL: dLC%' 1A4 rpnwe
permit them to come, and to come freely. They can come as it were, like any
other visitors, subject only to procedures of a normal kind which I've just mentioned.
But on its part, China exercises the strictest control over visitors. Here there is no
reciprocity and this must be understood by all of us.
Now gentlemen, you will have been reading about this and I've spoken
about it a few moments ago and that is the Labor Party' s mission to China in the last
week. I have already exposed the shams and the absurdities of it all. But I want to go
over some of the points again because they are of considerable importance to you and
they are of overwhelming importance to the security of this country.
They went to China to play politics with w~ heat. I emphasise they went
to play politics. Mr. Anthony said yesterday, that we warnt to leave it to the
established organisations to carry out our trading relations, particularly if they have
been as extraordinarily successful as the Wheat Board. Mr. Anthony said only
py eusrctehradsa4y n gt haagt etnhcei eWs. h eaTt hBe oBaroda rdit sfeellft , htIt'J e had sntrcoonsagt chnotcp es that the iWhthhea t BhouarVd would
sooni have received an invitation to go to Hong Kong to negotiate further contracts.
But because of the attitude, and the activities of the Labor Partythose
hopes were dashed. Instead of going, they have had to be suspended for some time.
I want you to understand that politics and trade relations don't mix. If
you do play politics you can do great harm and damage to Australia's rural industries.
In this case I believe they have done damage to the cause of wheat.
In a series of public statements, Mr. V. 7hitlam committed himself and
his Party to a policy, which I think is an affront to most of Australia's friends and
allies in South-East Asia and the Pacific. And here again I want to interpolate that
Dr. Patterson apparently says that I have been attacking China. Far from the truth.
I've been attacking not China but Mr. Whitlam's intrusion into Foreign Affairs, and his
insulting references to our friends. I can understand Dr. Patterson's confusion of
mind. Whitlam has become the advocate for China. He is not the advocate
for this country. This I have said can be dangerous for us.
The Chinese Premier, Mr. Chou En-Lai cannot be blamed for taking
up the opportunity for some telling propaganda when Mr. Whitlam went to see him.
What is dangerous, and what is damaging, is the extent to which Mr. Whitlam picked
up and made his own the points China has been trying to impose on the world for
years. He said he would recognise China immediately if he were to win the
next elections. He went further. He would sever diplomatic relationships with Taiwan
and further still, he would declare Peking the " sole Government to China". 
In other wordshe would abandon Taiwan, that has been very close to us,
and friendly with us, and as I said a few moments ago, has been a good trading partner,
and one that has assumed its proper role in the diplomatic and international world
and does play its part as a responsible member of that world. These are perhaps
the most startling by a political leader without power or authority in many, many
years. I wonder if this could have happened if it had been the late Mr. Chiefly
or the late Mr. Curtin. Could they ever have conceived of operating in a way that could
be inimical to the interests of this country and dangerous to them.
He made matters worse by gratuitously insulting countries like
Thailand and the Philippines, who are friendly, and a country like the Soviet Union
with whom we are trying and have, in fact, developed a better understanding.
There was no dialogue about his meeting with the Chinese. He took the
bait and he swallowed it whole. He came away without any assurances from Premier
Chou at all. He made all the concessions in a field which was not in his area to operate
anyway. This is an area for Government, and not an area for an itinerant politician
moving into China, and now trying to move into other parts of South-East Asia.
In addition he allowed himself to be used as a spokesman for the North
Vietnamese and Chinese propositions at the Paris peace talks.
Altogether it was an extraordinary performance. For us it is a warning
and a sample of what Mr. Whitlam and the Labor Party would do if they ever come to
power. We as Liberals, every single one of you, from the Premier. to myself,
you joining with us, must make certain this does not happen.
I come back to where I started, that the Liberal Party commands the
loyalty of the great mass of Australians. Everywhere I've been in the last four
months, I've become more and more convinced of the certainty of that statement.
I believe we Liberals have a record behind us to justify that confidence, and that
we have progressive policies to keep that confidence alive. I am sure we will win
the next elections, but with your help, with the help of Angus Bethune, with
the help of the other Liberal Premiers, let's make it a good one. Let's make it a
handsome victory and give us the opportunity to carry on our policies, for at least
another three years. 



VICTOILIAN DIVISION STATE COUNCIL OF THE
LIBERAL PAiTY 01" AUSTRALIA
MELBOUHlNE 28 JUJLY 1971
SPEECH B3Y TILE, PRIPI[ E MINISTER, MR. WILLIAM Mcl4AIION
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It had been my intention to talk to you this morning
about Liberal Pa. rty policies and other domestic matters.
Because of recent events involving our international
relptions, I thought it would be better if I clearly identified
our policies relating to China.
You will recall that about a fortnight ago, I chose
China as my subject when I talked to the Young Liberals in
;. lelbourne Since then we have had the announcement by Presi( lent
Nixon that he will go to Peking sometime before May of next
year for talks with Premier Chou En-Lai.
The decision is of profound importance to the whole
of the free world and naturally it has attracted a tremendous
amount of interest and comment.
I informed the Australian people the day it was
announced that my Government welcomed this decision wholeheartedly
and that President Nixon had our complete support in the initiative
he was taking We sincerely hope that his journey will be a journey
for enduring peace.
There are two comments I want to make at the outset.
The first is that President Nixon's initiative is a beginning.
It is an exploration. It is not yet a settlement of matters at
issue between these two powers, or indeed of matters at issue
between the free world and the communist nations of Asia.
Therefore patience, as well as support, will be
necessary and we must not be rushed or forced into hasty
decisions. We do not want to compromise our bargaining
position qnd there is no overriding national interest that
compels us to do so. We must keep all our options open. 2/. 
It is our interests, not China's, that I am
deeply concerned with.
I also want to emphasise that my Government has, in
fact, been active over a long period. In many cases we have
been in the vanguard.
We have, as I shall show, made a number of practical
moves: To establish our position in relation to
representation of China and Taiwan in the
United Nations.
To find a way to bring about normal bilateral
relations between the People's Republic that
is Mainland China and ourselves.
We have done this without any surrender of our
national interest or the principles which govern our conduct
in international relations.
Our actions are predicated on the basis that we are
not a great power and cannot play a decisive role in resolving
the issues between East and West.
But we are independent, we have a voice which I
know is respected, in our region we have friendships and
alliances which we want to honour. We will not unceremoniously
dump our friends. 3/. 
UNITED NATIONS
We have closely watched the movement in the
United Nations towards admission of the People's
Republic and the trend towards recognition by a number
of other countries in the free world all of them, it
should be noted, outside the Asian region.
These events prompted me when I was Foreign
Minister to have a new reappraisal made of the trend of
our future relations with the People's Republic, with
the Soviet Union and with Japan. The China study began
in October ! 970. In May I announced publicly our
intention to seek a dialogue with China, proceeding
cautiously step by step with the normalisation of
relations as our final objective.
This was two months before President Nixon's
announcement of his planned vrisit to Peking with
precisely the same objectives and in much the same words.
In May of this year I said that we would not
oppose China's representation and admission to the United
Nations, and in a broader context-I said that it was
inevitable and right that China should be a member of the
United Nations General Assembly and should hold the
permanent seat in the Security Council.
I also said and I have repeated it since that
we believed the Republic of China Taiwan should be
given the chance of maintaining its membership if it so
desired. We have had talks with Taiwan on this matter and
I hope we have been able to influence her to consider
accepting proposals for retaining her membership.
It has been suggested that Taiwan may herself
decide not to seek continued membership. That, of course,
would create another situation. This would be a decision
within Taiwan's own jurisdiction and for Taiwan iiself to
make. It is clear from our talks to date with
representatives of the People's Republic of China that the
status of Taiwan is a major factor in their thinking.
So it is on our part. We have repeatedly said
we are anxious to preserve the rights of the fourteen and
a half million people of Taiwan. These include the right
to continued membership of the United Nations.
I believe a majority of Australians share this
anxiety and want us to treat Taiwan honourably. o .4/ 
The United Nations alone can decide this issue.
It is a matter for a collective decision, not for unilateral
action by us. We will not abandon Taiwan, nor prejudge
her position in advance of any decisions in the U. No,
neither will we seek by any procedural device to exclude
Peking. The People's Republic on the Mainland, has been
informed of our views on the question of admission to
the United Nations. I emphasise that my public statements
on representation are still in advance of any declaration
of attitude by America. o 
RECOGNITION
Turning now to the problem of recognition of the
People's Republic.. In the May speech I used the phrase
which had been used by the Department of Foreign Affairs
some time before, that our objective was to normalise
our bilateral relations with the People's Republic.
We have no hostility to the great Chinese people
whose history and culture have contributed much to the
achievements of mankind.
I believe that, in due time, it will be possible
to reach a point when we are able to recognise the People's
Repiublic with honour and without deserting old friends.
But 1 cannot see that happening as the first result of the
first dialogue. Other decisions have to be taken.
Meanwhile we want to keep moving towards normal relations
with China without waiting on completion of the
formalities for full diplomatic recognition.
You will recall that President Nixon said that
the action he was taking would " not be at the expense of
old friends". That, too, is our view. That is where
Australia stands.
I can tell you that we have made some progress
in our dialogue with-China. We know more about the other
side's position and they know more about ours. The
Chinese responses to our approaches have clearly shown
that the Chinese Government is positively interested in
establishing diplomatic relations with the Australian
Government. The dialotgue is continuing.
We are active in trade and we also want to develop
our cultural and scientific relationships with China.
As you know, the Minister for Trade and Industry
recently announced a liberalisation of the strategic
exports list. The goods on the restricted list are those
with defence or security importance.
I have not yet heard anyone say we should remove
these restrictions. So far as Taiwan is concerned, our exports have
increased very substantially in recent years to about
million a year.
We have therefore a substantial interest in both
China and Taiwan for trade.
Our position in regard to travel, cultural
exchanges and sport with China is free. .6/ 
We do not place any unnecessary obstacles in the
way of visits of Australian citizens to China, or of
Chinese citizens to Australia.
In all of this we have followed a consistent
and rational policy that has placed us well ahead of
most countries of the West in our dealings with China.
We have always hoped that by encouraging contacts
between the two countries in a number of lesser fields,
and by private contacts between the people of the two
countries, a greater understanding of each other's
positions would develop and the prospects of a normalisation
of political relations would be enhanced.
In taking the steps that we as a Government have
taken, we have always had in mind the need to consider
the policies and attitudes of the many Governments in our
part of the world with whom we have close and friendly
relations, and for whom China is in many cases an even more
important factor than for Australia.
Many of these, like Australia, do not have
diplomatic relations with China. Many of them have
suffered as a result of Chinese policies directed
specifically against them.
It has been obvious to the Australian Government
that any precipitate move by Australia to improve
relations with China could well have caused difficulties
for some of the countries in the South East Asian region.
We have therefore taken the course of careful
and constructive diplomatic groundwork, aimed at exploring
the areas in which we may have a meeting of minds with
China, I wonder how much Peking knows about the depth
and scope of Australia's relations with the countries of
South East Asia.
These relations are nursued for the purposes of
economic development, of stability and of constructive
regional co-operation among the peoples of South East
Asia. They arenot directed against the interests of any
country. Indeed, let me say clearly that we would not
wish to exclude China from this adventure. But this
Government will not prejudice the close and constructive
relationships we have developed with our neighbours in
this part of the world for the sake alone of better
relations with Peking.
Our relations with all of these countries are
important to us and we want our friends to understand
what we are seeking in our attempt to normalise our
relations with China. For our part, we understand and
will not denigrate the efforts of our friends to adjust
their own policies to the changing circumstances in Asia. 
VI ETNAM
Ladies and Gentlemen, I sincerely hope that when
President Nixon meets Premier Chou En-Lai there will be
another opportunity to bring fresh influences to bear
in the search for an honourable peace in Vietnam.
I like to think that the tragedy of this war
is moving to its close, but I believe that peace with
justice will only be secured if an understanding can be
reached between East and West based on the Bandung
Principle that each nation in the region shall be free to
choose the Government it wants and live the way it wishes.
When we went into South Vietnam in response to a
request from its Government we did so in our own national
interest and to honour treaty obligations. We felt that
there was a real danger at that time of the whole of
South-East Asia falling to communism.
The joint action of the allies in Vietnam in
resisting this threat and enabling the smaller countries
of Asia to determine their own future has led to a
significant improvement in the security and stability of
the region, Vietnamisation is, in fact, being
successful. With courage and determination the South
Vietnamese forces have steadily taken over the brunt
of the combat role, so much so that our operational role
is now winding down and we can now look forward to the
withdrawal of all of our combat forces.
My wish is that this should be a matter for
Parliament to consider and I shall be making a statement
on our position in Vietnam during the forthcoming session.
The withdrawal of allied forces will not, of
course, solve the problems which face the people of Vietnam.
A lasting -peace in Indo-China can only be achieved on the
basis of a political settlement in which all of the parties
participate. The Australian Government has consistently
supported the principles upon which the Geneva Agreements
of 1954 relating to Indo-China and those of 1962 relating
to Laos are based.
If a new arrangement is to be more successful than
those arrived at by the earlier conferences, there will
need to be greater participation in the formulation of
the arrangements by those most directly concerned,
including the Governments of North and South Vietnam. a. ao8 
We took part last year in the Djakarta Conference
on Cambodia in the belief that it is through the co-operation
of the countries in the region that p~ eace and stability can
best be achieved in Asia.
We believe that in any future initiatives for a
peaceful political settlement of the Indo-China question,
great emphasis should be placed on particiipation by
Asian countries. Stability is most likely to flow from greater
Asian participation in solutions to Asian problems.
The issues about which I have spoken China and
Vietnam are two important international issues. The
debate in Australia on China and Vietnam has, to an
undesirable extent, become entangled with party politics.
The search for a lasting solution in the interests
of all the Australian people has sometimes been forgotten
by some people in a scramble for temporary personal
satisfaction. These are extremely complex issues, the importance
of which no responsible government can afford to ignore.
The Government of this country is not some kind of performing
troupe that can turn on a different act in every capital of
this region. We believe that Australia has a real and
positive role to play, and is playing it, and will play it
more and more as we grow and as we identify our interests
around us. But we recognise that we cannot order the world
to our own specifications, Others bigger than we have much
more capacity to do so, Our influence can best be
exercised in concert with our friends, great and small.
We will have very little influence if we behave
inconsistently and with quixotic attention only to what is
happening day by day. What we are trying to do is to move
in an orderly and responsible way towards the resolution of
these problems. This is the reality of the position of a country
like Australia. We support what the United States is
attempting. If it leads to rapprochement with China on
fair and reasonable terms this will be good.
If the Vietnam war and the problems of the Indo-
China states can be approached initially with mutual
restraint and then at the conference table, of course the
Australian Government favours it.
We will do all in our power to help promote
international detente, but let us not deceive ourselves by
exaggerating our own capacity to prodluce it, 



N. S. W. CHAMBEROF MAN1IFACTLJRFRS DINNE R
S YDNEV, N. S. W1 29 JULY 1971
S p ee ch by the Prime Minister. Mr ' VilIIisn-1 McMahon
Mr President, Ladies, and Gentlemen:
I want to talk to you tonight about the partnership I beliee.
exists between Government and industry in Australia today. And I want to
indicate how important that is, not only to our material wellbeing, but to the
preservation of those real values that belong to a free enterprise society.
I believe that such a society is t uilt on the rights of the
individual to a good education in a secure and healthy environment. It is
built on the efforts we make collectively to use the great resources of our
land to manufacture goods and services we need and those we can sell.
It is based on initiative, encouragement and a sense of adventure.
And it will be a successful society if Government helps
to the best of its ability in national economic management, and if industry
responds as innovators and developers in a climate of vigorous and
healthy competition. I believe the problems of the day can be relatively
short-term. If we get effective co-operation between government and
private enterprise and a more mioderate and rational attitude by organised.
labor to demands on resom-ces at large, then I believe we can prosper
greatly. I don't think I need to remind you that we are now an
industrialised society, and in many segments, a highly sophisticated one.
All this has happened in the quarter of a century since the war. I take
this opportunity, therefore, of acknowledging the contribution Australian
manufacturing industry has made to this progress.
You will know, as I do, that manufacturing industry
employs 28 per cent of the Australian work force and contributes 28 per cent
of the Gross National Product. And the total value of production from nearly
39, 000 factories is getting on towards OOintiion. Its exports last year were
worth $ 724 million which is 18 per cent of our total exports and rising.
And it attracted about 30 per cent of the total direct private overseas
investment in Australia. / 2 
So you represerst, Ge-. tlemea, a very significant part of the national effort,
If you have any misgivings about your place in the scheme of things I urge you to forget
them. A Government has many demands made upon it, and if we cannot always meet
them, I ask you to understand that it is a matter of priorities and what is fair to ask
the taxpayer to pay. For, after all, it is his money that keeps us going.
At this point, Gentlemen, let me mention briefly the investment allowance.
Its suspension by the Government earlier this year was one of a series of anti-inflationary
measures which was designed to place a modest restraint on new private investment
in plant and equipment.
This action brought us quite a lot of criticism from many of you. This
was natural, and this we understand, but it was only one of a number of restraints over
the whole area of the economy.
Manufacturers were not singled out to carry a special burden. Manufacturers'
views on the matter were put very forcefully to us at our pre-Budget talks with
industry early this month and we are giving these views careful consideration.
The investment allowance, you will remember, was introduced in 1962 at
a time of declining employment, slow economic activity and uncertainty as to the
outlook for the balance of payments.
It was particularly directed to encouraging expenditures on equipment and
re-equipment of manufacturing industries which were then at a low ebb, and so to
encourage industry to show more vitality and a keener awareness of the opportunities
for growth in the Australian economy.
The concession did, I believe, contribute to the end result we were
seeking. But more recently, as you know serious inflationary pressures emerged in
the economy, and some restraints became necessary.
As I have indicated, the suspension of the investment allowance was just
one of several measures taken by the Government. All I want to say * at this stage
is that the Government's action was a suspension of the allowance, and I can assure you
the matter. will be held under review. Beyond -hat it would be wrong for-me-to-go-at
this time. Now let me say something about two aspects of economic matters which
affect you. One is trade, and the other is tariffs.
In recent years the pattern of our trade has been changing and its direction
has been more to the markets of Asia and the Pacific than to the traditional markets
of the Old World. I have said manufacturers are now providing 18 per cent of our total exports.
In 1969/ 70 sixty per cent of this total went to Asia and the Pacific area and was worth
$ 409 million. Seven out of our ten largest markets are in this area. They are, in
order, New Zealand which has been our largest market for many years Papua-
New Guinea, Japan, Singapore, Philippines, Malaysia and Hong Kong. o e / 3 
This, of course, is greatly to the credit of Australian manufacturers. But
as part of the partnership which I mentioned at the beginning of this speech, the
Australian Government has
Negotiated trade treaties in the region;
Has spent many millions of dollars on promotion of
Australian products in those markets;
Provided insurance guarantees and export incentives; and
0 Is now maintaining seventeen Trade Commissioner posts
there out of about fifty all over the world.
And I am glad to see that Australian industry is now moving quite steadily
into the area of joint ventures in the region where once it was just a case of buying and
selling. Australian manufacturing companies are now involved in joint ventrues in places.
like Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.
All this activity will assist us if and when Britain goes into the Common
Market as we expect her to. Manufacturers will, as you know, be affected by this,
although the principal impact will be on rural industries.
Britain's entry could have adverse effects on your ability to compete with
British manufacturers within Britain. It could also put you at a disadvantage in
competing with the present E. E. C. market where B ritish exporters would enjoy an
improved position. So, Gentlemen, there is a pretty healthy challenge ahead of us in our
partnership. There is the challenge br . ought about by change; by the shifting
patterns of world trade; and by our own developing interest in the Asian and Pacific
region. There is the challenge at home to diversify still more our manufacturing
industries and to support our great new mining industries with processing and
muanufacturing activities.
There are of course major problems of cost involved in these developments,
but it is encouraging that nine of our mineral companies are already committed to
begin or enlarge processing facilities associated with their operations in the seventies.
There is also the challenge to find new markets and develop existing ones.
To do this we must be able to compete effectively and this means a greater self-discipline
6n costs and new levels of efficiency.
I turn now to tariffs which are so closely bound up with the principle of
competition to which I have referred. I have concentrated in my remarks on the
tariff but there are many other ways in which the Government can assist industry
to achieve our mutual objectives of growth and productivity.
I am by no means leaving these out of account. On the contrary, in all
of these elements, we wish to continue to work in partnership with private enterprise. / 4 
There are two considerations before us in any discussion of this subject.
One is our responsibility as a Government to manufacturing industries which are of
tremendous importance to Australia. The other is the benefit which comes to the
Australian people from healthy and sustained competition.
Competition keeps prices and quality where they ought to be. This stimulates
the innovator to try new products and the manager to higher levels of efficiency. How
can we ensure that the manufacturing sector continues to contribute to the growth of the
Australian economy? The simple answer is by ensuring that it uses the resources it has as fully
-and as efficiently as possible. This is, of course, the prescr-iption that would be given
$ Dr any sector of the economy.
It is accepted by all that a rising standard of living is a fundamental objective
of economic policy, and that increasing productivity is a pre-requisite for this. But
there is less willingness to accept the implications for the way we allocate our scarce
national resources. It is in this context that I wish to raise briefly the question of tariff protection.
You will all know of the statement that was made recently on tariff policy by my
colleague, Mr. Anthony.
And you will be aware that the Government recently sent to the Tariff
Board the first ten references marking the beginning of a systematic review of the
tariff. There are two aspects of tariff policy which seem to concern some
manufacturers the more critical attitude which the Tariff Board had said it will adopt
towards highly PrutCLed activities. -and the way this attitude will be implemented, in
the review of the tariff.
I have already commented, by implication, on the first matter. If we want
a rising standard of living for a growing population, we must continuously increase
the efficiency with which we use our national resources.
If we want to increase the efficiency with which we use our resources, we
cannot be indifferent to the way these resources are allocated. We cannot accept
uncritically their use in activities which require high levels of protection because,
prima facie, such a ctivities are less suited to the Australian environment.
It has been estimated that the total value of private investment in the
manufacturing sector during the next 20 years will be at least three times that which
has occurred during the last 20 years. It seems probable that there will also be
a substantial increase in the number of persons employed in manufacturing.
We simply cannot afford to allow a significant proportion of these resources.
to drift into activities for which our environment is less suited. It is the concern of
the Government to ensure that this increasing investment of both human and capital
resources will be applied where it promotes rather than retards the growth of
Australia's future prosperity. 
We must see to it that this future investment produces the greatest benefit
to the community. To do otherwise would be to allow Australia to become a high-cost
low-productivity economy, less and less able to compete in world markets.
If our secondary industries are to export increasingly to the world's market.-
in competition with other industrial nations, we must ensure that our protection systemn
does nct discourage the development of Australian industry according to the principle
of comparative advantage.
There are several comments I would like to make about the review of the
tariff, and the apprehension which some manufacturers still seem to feel about it. It
has been suggested that entire industries are threatened with extinction.
No Government would in fact accept a series of recommendations from the
Tariff Board which had the intent or effect of dismantling large areas of secondary
industry; and I don't for a moment believe the Tariff Board would ever make such
recommendations. Those who predict the demise of whole industries fail to appreciate the
distinction between an ' activity' and an ' industry', and fail to recognise, when studying
data on average rates of protection for various industries, that an average is an
average. The Tariff Board has said it will adopt a more critical approach towards
highly protective activities namely those with effective protection over 50 per cent.
Conclusions were erroneously drawn by critics that the future of all
activities within highly protected industries was in jeopardy, when data were recently
published by the Tariff Board on the struct ure of protection in Australia whnich showed
the average rate of effective protection for industries. These erroneous conclusions
were drawn despite information the Board published about the wide variation of rates
within each of these industries.
Those who regard the tariff review as essentially negative fail to appreciate,
I believe, the complex network of inter -relationships between different manufacturing
activities in the economy.
It is only when one begins to explore the nature of these relationships that
the positive effects which the tariff review will have become apparent. For example,
a reduction in the duty on a particular product will increase the effective protection
afforded those using the product concerned. Duty reductions are not therefore
necessarily negative.
Conversely, duty increases are not necessarily positive for those using
protected products. In a nutshell, an increase in a duty does not necessarily result
in an increase in protection. An important fact highlighted by the information the
Tariff Board recently published on the structure of protection in Australia is that
many manufacturing activities do not need all the protection which the tariff at present
affords them. oes. ./ 6 
In other words, the costs of some activities using protected products are
inflated in order to provide protection to other activities which do not need it.
As your own organisation, Mr. President, has argued that high costs are
the main cause of the present inflation, it would doubtless stjppr t-. c s'e-y removal
of this excess protection. Consuming industries, for intanc2, i. I_: 2 c-. ly
from reduction of protection on their inputs in cases where exiatL=; is ar( higher
than necessary to sustain profitable local production of those inputs.
In such cases, the removal of the unnecessary protection will reduce
the costs of the consuming industries. This, in turn, will make trhe prices of their
outputs more competitive. Removal of those tariffs which do not prcAt. any local
production another purpose of the review will reduce the cos: zS of d inputs
for manufacturing. In this connection, I remind you that between 60 and 70 per cent of all
Australian imports in the main, those which are not in competition with local
production are used in direct factory production by Australian mr'-rcturers.
Removal of unnecessary protection and preferential margins on imports which
are not in competition with local production will directly benefit manufacturers using
such imports in their production. fi cases where existing preferertial margins are
substantial, their removal may also be expected to give Austra-?--:,-nufact-. r.-_ rs
access to new and cheaper sources of imported materials and eq i-ment.
In all these cases, removal of unnecessary protection in the cour3 e of
the tariff review will make the Australian manufacturing sector more competitive without
detriment to any existing Australian industry.
And the market for Australian manufactures will, as a result, tend to expand
faster. This, in turn, will increase the employment opportunities for labour and
capital in Australian manufacturing.
The review will also bring some important indirect benefits for
manufacturing industry. One such benefit, overlooked by some who are apprehensive
about the review, is the additional information which it should provide about manufacturing
activities in Australia.
For example, it should provide for manufacturers more specific information
than is at present available
about the size of the domestic market for particular products;
about production costs at different levels of output; and
about the general structure of local industry.
This is obviously basic information for any potential investor in a manufacturing
activity. 
The review should also provide individual manufactukers with a unique lIU*
between their own activities and those of the industry to which they belong to the
extent that statistics published by the Tariff Board can be compared with the more
aggregated statistics published by the Bureau of Census and Statistics.
Indeed, because of the immense volume of data already available from the
Bureau, and the new information which will become available as a result of its
in~ egrated economic censuses, links between statistics published by the Board and
those published by the Bureau will add a new dimension to public understanding of the
costs and benefits-of protection.
This will be to the advantage of manufacturers, the Government and the
community. In summary, I am confident we can expect quite positive -and beneficial
effects for manufacturing industry and for the whole community to flow from the
systematic review of the-tariff.
I believe our policy is wholly constructive. It is not punitive. It is
designed to help not hinder. It is part, I believe, of the new maturity which has come
to Australian industry and will be for the good of all. I
I do congratulate you all on the wonderful job manufacturing industry is doing
to speed the growth of the nation and on the efforts it is making to increase productivity.
This is a time when new products, new ideas and the application of new technologies are
of tremendous importance and have a fertilising influence on the whole of the economy.
Your horizons are getting wider every year and I wish you well in your
great endeavours. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 75/ 1971
MINISTERIAL CHANGES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
His Excellency, the Govern6r-eftnral ha
accepted the resignation of Mr L. H. E. Bury aa Minieter for fOregn
Affairs. I have rec-mended to Hi Excellency the
following Ministerial changes
Senator the Hon.. Sir Kenneth Anderson.. the-Loader-of the
Government in the Senate, to be Minister for Health;
The Hon. N. Bowen, QC, MP, to be Minister for Foreign
Affairs;
Senator the Hon. I. J. Greenwood to be Attorney-General; and
Mr R. V. Garland, MP, to be Minister for Supply.
His Excellency the Governor-General proposes to
hold a swearing-in in Sydney on Monday 2 August.
CANBERRA, 1 August 1971 



F. OR PRESS PM. No. 7  L1971
MR BURY'S RESIGNATION
Tribu te P~ r ime Minister, Mr William McMahon
I wact to pay a personal tribute to the dedicated service
that Mr Bury has given to Australia as a member of the Commonwealth
Minis try. After an earlier period as Minister for Air, Mr Bury
was Minister for Housing in 1964-1965, then a new portfolio. He
was Minister for Labour and National Service from 1966 until 1969.
He served as Commonwealth Treasurer in 1970 and early 1971, and
since March 1971 he has been Minister fcr Foreign Affairs.
This is an impressive record, and one in which he
can take great pride. He has earned the gratitude of all Australians.
My own association with Mr Bury has been a long and
pleasant one.
CANBERRA, I August 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. NO. 7L97l
CHINESE REPRESENTATION IN THE UNITED NATIONS
Statemen t by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
I welcome the statement by Mr. Roers, the US Secretary
of State, that the United States will support action1 or seating the PLRC
in the United Nations and will oppose any action to expel the ROC or
otherwise deprive it of representation. Likewise, I vwelcome the United
States acceptance that the question of China's seat in the Security Council
is one to be resolved by the members of the United Nations.
The announcement by Mr Rogers clearly reflects the
close accord of the United States and Australian Governments on the China
representation issue. Our position, as formulated over several months,
has been that we would not oppose the representation of the PRC in the United
Nations. Indeed, I have said that it was both inevitable and right that
China should be a member of the UN General Assembly and should hold the
permanent seat in the Security Council. At the same time, I have continued
to emphasise that the Republic of China Taiwan should be given the
chance to maintain its membership of the United Nations if it so wished.
Only the United Nations can decide the question of Chinese representation.
As one member of the United Nations, we will play our part in efforts to
reach a decision that will be honourable and just.
The Australian Government has been in consultation with
the United States and other friendly governments for several months on
the question of Chinese representation in the United Nations. We were
consulted in advance on the substance of the Secretary of State's
announcement. Of course, in a developing situation, many points of
detail on the implementation of policy still need to be determined. We
will remain in close consultation with the United States and other
friendly governments in coming months about these details.
I hope that the forthcoming session of the General Assembly,
and the scheduled visit of President Nixon to Peking, will help to usher in
a new era of better relations between the People's Republic of China and
the countries of the Asia/ Pacific region.
CANBERRRA, 3 August 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 78/ 1971
Statement_ bythe Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
This afternoon I asked Mr. Gorton, the Minister for
Defence, to see me about his decision to write a series of
articles for the " Sunday Australian", the first of which has
already been published.
I informed him that, in my opinion, his action
breached basic principles of Cabinet solidarity and unity
and reflected on the integrity of some Ministers.
I therefore asked Mr. Gorton to let me have his
resignation. This he agreed to do.
I have advised the Governor-General and will
shortly recommend the name of a new Minister.
CANBERRA 12 AUGUST 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 79/ 1971
NEW DEFENCE MINISTER
Statement bythe Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
I have recommended to His Excellency, the Governor-
General that the Honourable David Fairbairn be sworn
in as the Minister for Defence.
His Excellency, the Governor-General, proposes
to hold the Swearing-in at 2. 30pm today, 13 August.
Mr. Fairbairn will, for the time being, continue
to hold also the portfolio of Education and Science.
CANBERRA 13 AUGUST 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 80/ 1971
EXCHANGE OF LETTERS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Vqilliam. Mvahon,
this afternoon released the texts of the letters
between himself and Mr. Gorton.
The texts are attached.
C ANBE2ARA
13 August 1971 
The Prime 1' Iinister's letter to YMr. Gorton 12 August 1971
My dear John, I refer to our discussion this afternoon when
I said that I had given the most careful consideration
to your decision to write a series of articles for the
" Sunday Australian", the first of which has already
been published. In my opinion, your action breaches basic
principles of Cabinet solidarity and unity. Your
first article deals with a number of controversial
issues involving other hMinisters and affecting their.
integrity. These Ministers are not free to comment if these
principles are to be respected. If any other practice
were to be permitted, a precedent would be created which
would, I believe, make the Cabinet system of Government
unworkable. I know how deeply you feel about the contents of
the recent book. But Other Ministers have had to endure
this type of criticism, which is part and parcel of
political life. The overriding consideration, in my
view, must be Cabinet solidarity and unity.
I will make a short statement this evening
stating that I have discussed -Uis matter with you and
that you have, in accordance with my request, agreed to
tender your resignation to me.
His Excellency the Governor-General has been
informed. Yours sincerely,
William Mcl~ ahon 
Mr. Gorton's letter to the Prime Minister
My dear Prime Minister,
I acknowledge your letter of 12 August
concerning our discussion this afternoon.
In my recollection the only article you
referred to was the one already published, which
you said in your view breached Cabinet solidarity
and unity. You said that as a result of this
article and your feeling concerning it you felt
you must ask for my resignation.
In accordance with your request, I now
tender you that resignation. Yours sincerely,
J. G. GORTON
12 August 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 81/ 1971
APPOINTMENT OF CROWN OF THORNS COMMITTEE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Agreement has been reached with the Premier of Queensland on
the membership of the Advisory Committee which will in due course
recommend the allocation of funds from the joint research funds being 4
established by the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments.
The Chairman of the Advisory Committee is Professor R. J. Walsh,
0. B. who was also Chairman of the joint committee of enquiry.
Other members are Professor J. M. Thomson, Dr. J. M. Harvey and
Dr. W. G. H. Maxwell.
Those appointed have all been members of the Committee of
Enquiry into the Problem of the Crown-of-Thorns Starfish and for
this reason are most reliably informed in the matter.
The sum of $ 90, 000 is being made available for the present. The
Advisory Committee will make its recommendations in the first instance
to the Commonwealth Minister for Education and Science for consideration
in due course by both Governments.
CANBERRA 16 August 1971 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
ON
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 17 August 1971]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minis-
-ter) ( 4.32)-On another occasion I
described the Leader of the Opposition
( Mr Whitlam) as an extraordinarily feline
person. I have no wish to change my views
after today. I have every intention of trying
to deal with the facts, and I want to
mention -the constructive actions that have
been taken by this Governmeni, whether it
has been led by the right honourable member
for Higgins ( Mr Gorton) or by myself.
I want to mention what we are doing to
ensure the greatness of this country. I have
no intention to degenerate into personalities
in the way that the Leader of the
Opposition, this feline person, has done.
Let me mention one or two facts. Not
one of the statements that the honourable
gentleman made about me is true in substance.
Let me deal first of all with the
question of my association with Sir Frank
Packer over 40 years. It is true that on 8th
November 1932 or somewhere about that
time I did sign the memorandum and
articles of association of his company. I
was then an articled clerk in Allen, Allen
and Hemsley. I had never met Frank
Packer; I had never met his associates. I
did not know who he was. The men to
whom I was clerking, Sir Norman Cowper
and Mr Arthur Hemsley, asked me to sign
the document. Of course I signed it. Any
person with a knowledge of law and a
knowledge of the way companies are
formed would have done exactly as I did.
Secondly, the Leader of the Opposition
referred to the statement relating to the so
called payment for the articles that had
been written by the right honourable mem-
1432 1/ 71 ber for Higgins. I did not ask the right
honourable member whether he was being
paid. For a fact, I did not think he was.
But I see no reason in the world why I
should ask him, particularly after I had
read the article. It was no business of mine.
If people want to ask him, he can be
asked and I am sure he will give the kind
of answer that he feels appropriate to be
given. The honourable gentleman also referred
to the fact that in some article in the
' Daily Telegraph' -there was a forecast of
some further action to be taken. I will give
the author of -that article complete liberty
to state positively, without any recrimination
from me, whether he had discussed
this matter with me or had let me know
that the article was to be written. No
member of the ' Daily Telegraph' contacted
me prior to the publication of the article,
and in fact I had not talked to Mr Alan
Reid for at least 3 weeks prior to that, and
I have not spoken to him since his return
from Fiji. This is the kind of rumour and
nastiness that are inherent in the mind of
the honourable gentleman. I intend for the
rest to ignore them completely and to get
on with the job of governing this country
and doing the best we can to contribute to
its greatness.
The Leader of the Opposition referred
to the fact that during the last session he
also moved a censure -motion on me. He
has lost no time for a second one although
we wanted to give him more time for his
censure motion. I repeat that he is not
only showing his inherent nastiness but is
also attempting to obstruct the business of 
this House and is trying to prevent us
from getting on with the constructive work
of government. This is the device of a man
and a party with nothing to off er and a
great deal to be ashamed of. When the
Minister for Foreign Affairs ( Mr N. H.
Bowen) brings forward his paper on
foreign affairs, I for one will participate in
the debate, and I believe that I will be able
to show not only that the Leader of the
Opposition is dangerous to the security of
this country but that wherever he went on
his recent overseas trip he created an
impression which was bad for Australia
and which brought him into ridicule. I
believe that in every country he visited he
left a most unfavourable, even bad,
impression. Mr Shery-I raise a point of order.
The Prime Minister has just referred to the
Leader of the Opposition being a danger to
this country. This is impugning the character
and the responsibility of the Leader of
the Opposition and I ask the Prime Minister
to withdraw -the remark.
Mr SPEAKER-Orderi I do not think
that the Prime Minister at any stage
impugned the personal character of the
Leader of the Opposition. I think the honourable
member is perhaps confused as to
the substance of the Prime Minister's
remarks about security.
Mr Sherry-Mr Speaker, with all due
respect -to your ruling, if the Prime Minister.
has referred to the Leader of the
Opposition as being a security risk, this is
certainly in my view a reflection on the
character of the Leader of the Opposition
and I ask the Prime Minister to withdraw
the remark.
Mr SPERAKER-Order! Of course I
have not a verbatim note of what the
Prime Minister said, * but from listening to
him I do not think that he said that the
Leader of the Opposition was a security
risk. SMr McMAHON-This is the device of
a man and a -party with nothing to offer
and a great deal to be ashamed of. It is
the attitude of a party that has been conditioned
by 22 years on the Opposition
benches to think only destructively.
Obviously it has no mind for constructive
contributions to the work of Parliament
and it has no stomach, as I said before,
for facts. It prefers to perform by innuendo, suspicion and false statement. Let this
be known: We in the Liberal-Country
Party Government want to get on with -the
real business of government. We believe
that Australia is a country with a tremendous
future. We know that the people are
sound at heart and we know that they are
sensible. It is our task to represent them
here in this Parliament, and we must not
be diverted from that task * by tawdry personal
issues raised by the Opposition. We
must -take initiatives in nation building on
their behalf. We are doing that and we will
continue to do it.
The Leader of the Opposition is upset
because I have made some ministerial
changes. What has this to do with
him? This is the business of the Government,
and we do not want him interfering
with what are exclusively our affairs. He
has plenty -to do trying to get his own
Party into shape and, if I can go a stagc
further, in coming to terms with the
President of the Australian Council of
Trade Unions, who keeps rocking -the boat
with his excursions into what should be
the Labor Party's exclusive preserves. It
has been said-and I repeat this againthat
I am influenced by the Press. I have
been in Parliament a long time. I have held
a great number of port fol ios-more, I
think, than any other person in the House.
I make up my own mind what I personally
should do in the interests of the nation,
not in the interests of anyone else. Of
course, I listen to advice from my colleagues
in the Ministry, in the Cabinet and
in my Party. I have consultations with
industry. I meet the Press and I meet the
people. But of ' this honourable members
may be sure: I have never taken and will
never take any action designed to please the
Press people. I suppose that I have had
more quarrels with them than has any other
person in this House. Of course, on many
occasions -they have -been in praise of me.
If we look over the long term, I think the
criticism has been pretty strong too. But
who in this House has not gone through
exactly the same experiences?
The second point that is referred to by
the Leader of the Opposition is tbat of
leadership. I and . my former colleague know
-we are probably the only 2 in this
House who do kncew-that it carries very
great responsibilities. But I want to ask
this question: What leadership does the 
honourable member for Werriwa give to his
Party today? This is the man who incited
young men inducted for national service to
refuse to serve in Vietnam when it was
their duty to do so. This is the man who
approved the attempt by some unions to
interfere with the legitimate trade of this
country. This is the man who gave tacit
support to the left wing unions and the
professional dissenters during the recent
rugby tour. This is the man who went to
China to play party politics with wheat
and finished up by being a total advocate
for the -policy of -a foreign power-the
greatest Communist power in Asia.
The Budget that the Treasurer ( Mr
Snedden) will bring down tonight involves
a motion of real substance. The motion
before the House this afternoon -has none.
The Budget presents fiscal policy and an
explanation of monetary policy for Australia
for the whole of 197 1-72. It is therefore
a paramount importance and should
be treated accordingly. It is right, I know,
for the Leader of the Opposition to talk
about unity and good government. We talk
about it. But we talk about it because we
know what it means and we know the contribution
we will be able to make. They
are, I believe, the qualities that a well
ordered country needs and that, I believe,
Australia is getting in full measure from
the Liberal-Country Party Government.
Let me remind honourable members of
the performance of my Government in
recent months. it * has been here just on 5
months and in that time it has brought
down a solid list of domestic legislation. It
has broken completely new ground in
foreign affairs. It has tackled a range of
problems, not of its own making, including
inflation and the fall in the price of wool,
which are pressing heavily on the country
today. I believe that they will be dealt with
effectively, providing we can have continuitv
and steadiness in government. I believe,
too, that it is of importance to make the
federal system of government work effectively.
That great spirit of free enterprise
which has served Australia so well through
all its history should not be stifled by controls
and directions from Canberra.
I have said that we believe in co-operation
as the basis for unity. In 5 months we
have established, I believe, a new relationship
with the States. What we did, in addition,
was to give them a general growth tax. We gave them payroll tax which was
designed to stop them from coming. to
Canberra cap in hand and begging us to
give them increasing access to funds. I
emphasise that what we have done all this
while is to continue the development of
this country and we have also-this will be
reflected in the Budget tonight-developed
policies which are directed at reducing
inflationary pressures because inflation is
one of our greatest problems. Success here
is the basis on which we can successfully
plan for the future.
We must contain and, I believe, we must
reverse the serious escalation of costs and
prices. We have begun investigations as to
how arbitration -procedures might be
improved. We have done this to give
greater emphasis in wage decisions to the
economic consequences of the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission's
awards. We have also investigated
what broader measures we might
take to bring about the needed restraints in
wage increases and in wage costs. We have
come to grips with the crisis in some of
our rural industries, particularly in the case
of wool. Already, we have adopted reconstruction
and special aid policies in order
to assist -them. We have reduced the
migrant intake to contain costs and to
allow a greater concentration on personal
quality. We have passed legislation controlling
resale price maintenance and we are
reviewing the Trade Practices Aot so that
we can strengthen it and encourage much
more vigorous competition.
On the advice of the Tariff Board the
Government also has accepted the need for
a systematic review of tariffs and this is
proceeding. My Government has also
reviewed important aspects of social welfare.
We have done so because we consider
it a prime duty to do more for the needy
and the neglected. We want to clean out
the pockets of poverty wherever they
appear. The effective development of an
adequate social welfare system, to which I
have pledged my Government, depends
heavily on a good working arrangement
between the Commonwealth and the
States. That is another reason why our new
understanding with the States is so important.
In March we gave pensioners a supplementary
increase. We did so because we
thought social justice demanded a rise to 
offset the sharp increase in living costs
which was causing unexpected hardship.
We also secured a satisfactory arrangement
with the Australian Medical Association
about fees to make the revised medical
benefits scheme operate effectively, and we
overhauled hospital insurance benefits to
give a more extensive cover to fund members.
So many of these activities bear on
the quality of life which must ' be of
increasing concern to everyone in Australia.
We are, after all, searching for a
quality of life which will be better than the
one that we have today. This is the end
objective of all our efforts, because the
quality of life is just about everything that
belongs to and relates to man. It is his
place in the environment-the good he
does, how he lives with his neighbours and
the measures of his contentment-but at
the same time we must preserve our freedoms
and our civil liberties. ( Extension of
time granted) We must tackle the congestion
and pollution of our cities. Now,
having said that, I turn briefly to our
record in foreign affairs. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs will deal with the subject in
detail later-I hope tomorrow but at the
latest on Thursday.
Mr Daly-Mr Speaker, I take a point of
order. My point of order is that this is all
very interesting, but what does it have to
do with the motion?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no substance
in the point of order.
Mr McMAHON-What does the socalled
censure motion have to do with the
House? As I said, the Foreign Minister will
deal with the subject later. In the past
months we have made considerable progress
with the prospect of getting our
troops home from Vietnam as the operation
there winds down. You will recall, Sir,
that I announced further withdrawals at
the end of March. I will state the Government's
policy in the House this week. We
have completed new appraisals of our -relations
with Japan, Russia and China. These
appraisals took place over a year or more
but they have brought us to new decisions
in respect of all 3 countries in the last few
months. I will not repeat them now. They
speak well for our future in the international
community.
Our aid programmes particularly in the
Asian -and the Pacific region continue at a high level. We have also made progress
with the 5-power defence arrangements for
Malaysia-Singapore and we have become a
member of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development. Wha~ t contribution
has the Opposition made to
national progress? Absolutely none.
Indeed, by i-ts actions and its abstentions it
has aggravated the problems of the day.
The Labor Party has encouraged a contempt
for law and order and the rights of
individual citizens. A clear example can be
seen on the industrial scene and the
increase in political strikes. We have had a
rash of industrial strikes and stoppages
which last year cost the work force nearly
$ 31m in wages. The loss to the nation in
output and the consequent effect on prices
is enormous. We must not forget that the
number of man days lost * by individual
disputes has gone up 21 times in the last 3
years. Now, I want the House to answer
this question: What has the Lepder of the
Opposition done about this? The answer
is positive-nothing at all. In all of this
he has been silent, and by his silence
he has given consent. He has stood
by help~ essly while his authority has been
eroded and his bailiwick invaded by Mr
Bob Hawke, the President of the Australian
Council of Trade Unions, another
leader who is causing responsible people in
the trade union movement a great deal of
activity. Another question I want to pose is
this: Who is really speaking for Labor? It
is not a question of who runs the country;
it is a question of who runs the Labor
Party. Mr Jacobi -Ask Frank Packer.
Mr McMAHON-He would give the
same answer on this occasion because he
cannot decide, as no-one else can decide,
who is running the trade union movement.
I want to say more about the Leader of
the* Opposition, but I think it best to leave
to the judgment of the House what it
thinks about his censure motion, and him.
I believe that answer will be given before 6
o'clock tonight.
Let me return to the overseas visit by
the Leader of the Opposition. He went on
a disastrous-I use the word deliberately-
visit to Peking after he had given
his tacit support to protests against the
South African football tour. In China he
conceded every single point the Chinese 
made to him, and he did so in public. This
was a disservice to Australia without any
precedent. His performance is written into
the record for all to read and for history
to see. More will -be said about China in
the foreign affairs debate this session, but
let me say just this: I believe his visit
compromised discussions which the Australian
Wheat Board was just about to
begin with the Chinese when he announced
his intention to go to China. I believe he
compromised the -first moves we were making
through diplomatic channels to open
up a dialogue with China. As a result of
some cocktail gossip with a foreign representative
in China, he caused more havoc
than any man could have caused either in
Australia or in any other part of the
world. I believe it is the first time in Australia's
history that a Leader of the Opposition
has been the total advocate for
another country's cause. I believe it is also
the first time that any Australian political
leader has presumed to tell other countries
horw they should run their business, and he
did so publicly. He discredited the President
of the United States of America by
telling him he would be kicked out. He told
Japan that it should cancel its treaties. Later
when I have an opportunity to speak in the
foreign affairs debate I will disclose more
of his tactics and more of the mischief he
has caused.
I have visited every State in Australia-
some several times-in the last few
months. I have seen great progress in
national development wherever I have
been. As I1 went around I ' became aware
that many people are deeply troubled by
some ol the trends developing in Australia
today. They are concerned with the
increase in industrial disputes and lawlessness.
They * are concerned about the issue
of -law and order. They want to retain
their right to dissent, but they do not want
their civil liberties interfered with ' by mass
protests or professionally promoted demonstrations.
They do not want their right of
choice within the law interfered with. They
expect their parliamentarians to take note
of these issues and to give them a lead.
This, 11 -believe, my Government is doing
and is doing with strength.
May I now return to the principles relating
to constitutional law and practice? So
much doubt has been cast these days on
the Cabinet system that I felt it would ' he appropriate for * me to make some statement
about it. Of course, it is the Opposition's
policy to cheapen and denigrate
Cabinet. But I have another attitude
altogether, and a far better one. I affirm
my faith in the principle of Cabinet government.
It is central to my own Administration.
It is the practice which ' best suits
the executive in our democratic parliamentary
system. It must work effectively,
whether as a Cabinet, as a ministry or
through the system of committees which
has recently been reconstructed, if parliamentary
democracy is to ' be sustained. My
concern as Prime Minister relates to policy.
Cabinet is the proper instrument for
the development of that policy. A change
in party leadership and Ministers does not
invalidate the Government's authority. It
has not done so in the past and it does not
do so now. It is the coalition Government
of the Liberal Party and the Country Party
which the people put back into office less
than 2 years ago. ( Extension of time
granted) It is the coalition Government
that I lead, and its authority continues in
force. It has operated and will continue to
operate with due respect to law and with
due respect to process in the area of the
Cabinet system, in the relationship with the
States -and with the electorate.
I can understand the disappointment of
the Opposition that a change in leadership,
and the other changes that have been
made, have nort brought about some reduction
in our capacity to govern, our intention
to govern or our right to govern. The
motion that is before the House is, I
believe, a product of that disappointment.
A similar motion was moved in vain in
March when I took over as Prime Minister.
I repeat that today's motion will be in
vain. I am perfectly confident that the
people of Australia understand what I am
saying. They understand, firstly, that they
gave us authority to govern and that we
still have that authority. They understand.
secondly, that we are thoroughly capable
to exercise that authority to their satisfaction.
They understand, thirdly, ' that it
would be folly to transfer this authority to
another party unqualified and totally
unable to discharge it effectively. I suspect
they understand that the whole of today's
exercise by the Opposition is nothing else
but humbug. 
I must remind the House that we are
known abroad in the great majority of
countries. Despite what the Leader of the
Opposition said, we have given this
country great national responsibility and
stable and progressive administration over
a period now running into 22 years, close
to a quarter of a century. This is known
and respected overseas, as it is here. This
administration is not upset by changes in
leadership, by ministerial re-arrangements or by any statements the Leader of the
Opposition might make. I want to state to
you positively, Sir, that you will see evidence
of unity in this Government. You
will find that the Liberal Party which I
lead, with the Country Party standing
behind us, will give to this country ' the
kind of government that it needs and
which will take it to a very much higher
destiny than we know at the moment or
that -the Labor Party could ever think was
realistically possible.
W. 0. MUUAY, Government Printer. Canberra 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
ON
FUTURE OF AUSTRALIAN FORCES IN VIETNAM,
AND NATIONAL SERVICE
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 18 August 1971]
Mr McMA4HON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)-
by leave-Sir, I announce tonight
that the combat role which Australia took
up over 6 years ago in Vietnam is soon to
be completed. In 1965, when Australia first
sent troops to that country, the continued
survival of the Republic was in dire jeopardy.
The scale and weight of enemy
attacks were increasing, and North Vietnam's
intervention was becoming ever
more brazen. It seemed only a matter of
time before Hanoi and the Vietcong, which
supported Hanoi's cause, would take over
the country by main force in defiance of
the 1954 Geneva Agreements.
Beyond the immediate threats within
and against Vietnam there was a militant
China-a China which was giving direct
moral and material aid to North Vietnamn
and which had in the recent past occupied
Tibet and fought with India, a China
whose ambitions and policies in the area
were causing great concern. Nor was that
all. The independence of Laos and Cambodia
were in precarious balance. Insurgent
activity in border areas of Thailand had
already begun. Sukarnoist Indonesia was
committing violence against its near neighbours,
with the then powerful Indonesian
Communist Party exercising major
influence over Indonesian policies.
14322/ 71 This, then, was the situation in 1965.
This was the background against which the
Australian Government decided to commit
Australian forces to the aid of South Vietnam.
That decision was made in the
national interest pursuant to our obigations
under the Manila Treaty and at the
invitation of the Republic of Vietnam. Its
purpose was to help, jointly with the
United States and others, to sustain and
develop the confidence of the Government
and the people of the Republic; to help
defend it; to develop its capacities to deal
with both overt aggression and externally
promoted insurgency; and to enable it to
make its own decisions about its future in
a context of greater security. That purpose
has now been substantially achieved.
Today the picture is different-in East
Asia, in South East Asia, and not'least in
Indo-China itself. The aggression by North
Vietnam has been slowed and its plans for
over-running the South frustrated. Security
throughout the country has improved
remarkably. Successive pacification programmes
have extended the physical control
of the Vietnamese Government over
the countryside. Political, economic and
social advances have been made notwithstanding
that the war has absorbed so
much of the people's time and energies. 
Above all, the armed forces of the Republic,
with considerable help from the allies,
have grown in size and developed their
skills, cohesion and effectiveness. This has
enabled them progressively to take over
responsibilities from allied forces and at
the same time to conduct operations
against North Vietnamese forces in Cambodia
and to disrupt their supply ines
in southern Laos.
To this changed and improved situation
Australia has made a significant contribution.
Australian forces of all arms have
played an honourable and effective part in
their areas of operation. They have been
worthy of this country. They have been
honoured by our Alles. The main Australian
effort has been in the general area
surrounding Saigon and in particular in
Phuoc Tuy Province. There, the security
situation has markedly improved. The
enemy has largely lost the initiative. The
Vietnamese territorial forces have been
steadily developing their capacity. And in
the last year have gradually expanded their
own areas of operations. The enemy is still
there of course, and some setbacks may
yet occur. But it is our view, shared by the
Government of the Republic, that the
existing relative strengths are such that the
territorial forces should be able to handle
the likely contingencies.
In these changing and improving circumstances,
the Australian Government
has been giving close consideration to the
future of the Australian forces in Vietnam.
It has for some time been our policy to
withdraw our forces progressively as and
when in our judgment, and after consuftation
with the Republic of Vietnam and the
United States, the situation has allowed it.
In coming to this judgment we have on
each occasion considered several factors,
including whether the forces and administration
of the Republic have been ready
and able to assume increased responsibility
for local security.
We now judge that the circumstances
are such that further effect can be given to
our withdrawal. policy. I have recently
been in correspondence on this subject
with the President of the Republic of Vietnam,
and also with President Nixon and
Sir Keith Holyoake. I am now able to
announce that the Government has decided
to withdraw all remaining Australian combat
forces from Vietnam. The forces will begin withdrawing in the next few months,
giving the Vietnamese time to adjust their
force dispositions. HMAS ' Brisbane', due
out of service in Vietnamese waters early
in September, will not be replaced. Most
of the combat elements will be home in
Australia by Christmas 1971. Shipment to
Australia of stores and equipment will be
completed in the early months of 1972.
The Government has already pledged
that, as the withdrawal of our forces proceeds,
we will provide other appropriate.
forms of military assistance as well as economic
aid. We have accordingly approved
an aid package for the Republic of Vietnam
totalling $ 25m, to be spent over the
next 3 years. The package will include civil
projects of an economic development character
as well as defence aid in the form of
military training and equipment. Seven
million dollars have been set aside for this
assistance in the current financial year.
This figure will be progressively increased
during the two succeeding years.
We are also discussing with the Vietnamese
Government plans to retain in the
Republic some military training and advisory
elements, for example instructors at
the jungle warfare training centre in Nui
Dat, if they are wanted and if satisfactory
arrangements can be made. We hope that
-these elements will continue to work in
close association with the United States
effort in this field.
Finally, I express the Government's conviction
that -the decision I have announced
tonight is a mark of the success which has
attended our policies and actions in Vietnam
over the years. This does not mean
that security in the area is yet fully
achieved. The Government of South Vietnam
will continue to face serious problems,
aggravated by the continuing and
flagrant North Vietnamese aggression in
Cambodia and interference in Laos. South
Vietnam is confident that it can overcome
these problems if it continues to receive
appropriate assistance. The Australian
Government shares that confidence. It is
the Government's earnest hope that the
war can be brought to an early end by
serious negotiations, -that peace and stability
will soon prevail throughout the area,
and that the countries of Indo-China-not
excluding North Vietnam-will be able to
devote their energies with the help of
others to worthwhile productive efforts. 
I now turn to national service. The present
form of national service was introduced
towards the end of 1964. Against
the background of the situation at that
time, which I have described, the Government
decided that the strength of the
Army needed to be increased from its then
low level of some 23,000. It was apparent,
notwithstanding pay rises some months
earlier, that this could not be achieved in
time by voluntary means alone. Accordingly,
in November 1964, the then Prime
Minister announced the introduction of the
present national service scheme. Further
developments in the situation led to the
commitment in 1965 of major Australian
Army units to Vietnam. In 1966 national
servicemen were sent there. We now have
a different situation.
There is improved political stability in
South East Asia. We have decided to withdraw
our forces from Vietnam. These factors
have implications for the composition
of our defence forces. The major portion
of our defence manpower is obtained by
volunteer recruitment. The Navy and the
Air Force are both entirely volunteer
forces. On the other hand for the full time
Army, where the numbers are larger, more
than one-third of the strength has had to
be obtained in recent times by other than
voluntary means to ensure an Army of the
size we need. The extent of our defence
manpower is measured not simply by the
size of our Regular forces, but by the
totality of the Regular, Citizen and
Reserve forces. Fully trained former
national servicemen in the Reserve are of
particular significance. Reviewing the situation
the Government has concluded that
there can be some reduction in the number
of men serving full time in the Army. The
Government accordingly proposes to
reduce the full time strength of the Army
by some 4,000 in the immediate future. It
has decided to do this by reducing the
period of full time national service from 2
years to 18 months.
The present total liability of 5 years' service
for national servicemen will remain
unchanged. But henceforth more of this
service will be rendered in the Reserve-
31 years instead of 3 years as at present.
National servicemen will be required to
serve only 18 months full time. There will
be complementary reductions in the period of part time service in the Citizen Forces
which is at present available as an alternative
to full time national service. These
men will now normally serve a period of
years in the Citizen Forces. The number of
men to be called up each year under the
national service scheme, about 8,000, will
be unchanged. At present, with 2 years'
full time service, this means a total of
some 16,000 full time national servicemen
in the Army at any one time. With only 18
months' full time service, the number of
full time national servicemen serving in the
Army at any one time will fall to a-bout
12,000. Correspondingly the total strength
of the full time Army will fall by
4,000-from about 44,000 to 40,000. This
reduction in strength will1 not affect the
present organisation of the Army into 9
battalions. Some will be on a reduced
-basis. The Government has given careful consideration
to the effect of these changes on
personnel already serving. We wish to
ensure that the transition will -be orderly
and that as far as possible inequities are
avoided. It has been decided that serving
national servicemen who have completed
18 months service will be discharged
broadly in accordance with their length of
service. This will be done over a period of
some 3 months commencing late in
October or early in November. Legislation
giving effect to the Government's decisions
will be introduced as quickly as possible. I
am sure the Parliament will wish to give
priority to it. In deciding on this reduction
in national service, careful account has
been taken of the strategic situation confronting
us. While as I have said there
have been improvements in many aspects
of the situation in South East Asia, there
are many continuing elements of insecurity
and some new ones. At the same time, we
see changes in the defence posture of our
close allies, particularly the United States.
These do not affect the fundamental character
of our alliances. We must maintain -a
defence capability that is evident * both to
friendly countries and to potential enemies,
and which we could develop in adequate
time should more immediate threats arise.
National servicemen will still constitute a
substantial proportion of our Army-some
12,000 in a total full time Army strength
of about 40,000. 
The Government will review force levels
as necessary as part of the 5-year defence
rolling programme. It is important against
the strategic outlook for the 1970s and the
1980s to have the right balance of equipment
and men in the defence forces as a
whole. Close attention will continue to be
given to all practicable means of increasing
voluntary recruitment. Before the introduction
of national service in 1964 there were
improvements in pay but their effect on
recruitment was only marginal. Since then
there have been substantial improvements
not only in pay but in other conditions of
service, for example, the provision of many more married quarters and much
improved barrack accommodation. The
Government's establishment of the Kerr
Committee, and the decisions it has
already taken on the findings of that Committee,
are further important steps. The
Government will continue to ensure that
conditions of service in our armed forces
are as attractive as they can reasonably be
with the aim of ensuring that the proportion
of volunteers will be as large as practicable.
I present the following paper:
Future of Australian Forces in Vietnam, and
National Service-Ministerial Statement, 18th
August 1971.
W. G. MumAY, Government Printer, Canberra 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 82/ 1971
V IE T NAM CORRESPONDENCE
In accordance with his undertaking to the House
of Reprsentatives last night 18 August), the Prime Minister,
Mr Wiliam McMahon, today tabled photocopies of the following
correspondence: Marked is a copy of a letter dated
29 April 1965, sent by the Australian Ambassador
to the Republic of Vietnam to His Excellency,
Dr Phan Huy Quat, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Vietnam; and
Marked is a copy of a letter dated 29 April 1965
sent by His Excellency, Dr Phan Huy Quat, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Vietnam to the Australian
Ambassador of the Republic of Vietnam.
CANBERRA, 19 August 1971 
4-
BACKGROUND: In a statement released to the Press on 22 June, 1971,
the Prime Minister said: " It should be remembered that in July 1964
the Prime Minister of South Vietnam, then Major-General
Nguyen Khanh, in a published letter addressed to the Heads
of State of 34 countries, including Australia, had appealed
for ' all the support you deem possible and opportune in
order to help us successfully fight the communist aggression.'
And as I have pointed out on another occasion,
the Prime Minister of South Vietnam, Mr Tran Van Huong,
in December 1964 in discussion with the Australian Minister
for Air, then visiting Vietnam, and the Australian Ambassador,
asked for an increased Australian military contribution.
Mr Huong said the situation was now such that
large scale assistance was urgently needed from all free
nations ' in every form but particularly military'.
On 29 April there was an exchange of letters
between the Australian Ambassador and the Prime Minister
of South Vietnam. In these letters, the Australian Government
offered to send a battalion if one were requested, and the
South Vietnamese Government accepted this offer and made
its request in terms conforming with the requirements of the
South-East Asia Treaty. 
A
29th April, 1965
tour Uzoelleney I have the honour, with refarence to our
conversation yesterday, to confirm the Auatraltun
Government's ofer to oond to Viat Hem an infantry
battalion of 800 men, with some 100 porsonnel in
logistic eupporS, to serve with United States foroes
in assisting in the defence of the Republic of
Viet Name I have informed the Australian Government,
following our oonversation, that Yo'r Soellanoy has
accepted this offer end haa requested ths deap~ toh
of this force to Viet Hen on the basis which we
dicussed* Please accept, Exoellenoy. the assurances
of my highest consideration* ( II. Do Aderon)
Ambassador
is Szoe11eoy Dr Phan lumy Q=% g
Prime Minister of the Repoblio at
Viet nam,
BA! 001f 
TH-TU' NG PHU. 29th April, 1965
No 511-TTP/ VP/ M Dear Mr. Ambassador, I have the honor to refer to your letter
of today's date confirming the Australian Government's
offer to send to Viet Nam an infantry battalion of
800 men, with some 100 personnel in logistic support
to serve with United States forces in assisting in
the defence of the Republic of Vietnam.
I wish to confirm my government's acceptance
of this offer and to request the dispatch of this
force to Viet Nam on the basis which we discussed.
Sincerely,
V. A
A RWAN-HUY-QUAT
The Honorable
H. D. Anderson
Ambassador of the government-of Australia
Saigon, Vietnam. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 83/ 1971
MINISTERIAL CHANGES AND APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANT
11TNTSYMWS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
I have recommended to His Excellency the Governor-General
that the Honourable Malcolm Fraser be sworn in as Minister for Education
and Science. Mr. Fraser will take over this portfolio from Mr. Fairbairn
who currently holds the two portfolios of Minister for Defence and
Minister for Education and Science.
Mr. Fraser will be in the Cabinet.
Earlier this year I announced my intention to appoint Assistant
Ministers to support certain senior Ministers in the discharge of their
responsibilities. I have recommended to His Excellency the Governor-
General that the following Senator and Members of the House of Representatives
be sworn as Executive Councillors
Mr. A. A. Street, M. P.
Mr. J. D. M. Dobie, M. P.,
Mr. 1. L. Robinson, M. P.,
Senator J. E. Marriott,
Mr. R. S. King, M. P.,
Mr. J. E. McLeay, M. P.
It is His Excellency's intention to hold the swearing-in in
Canberra on Friday 20 August.
C ANBIER'I A
19 August 1971 



SPEECh BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, IN THE HOUSE O1 REPRESENTATIVES
FOREIGN POLICY
23 AUGUST 1971
The speech on foreign policy by my colleague stands out in
complete contrast to the superficial approach of the Opposition.
To my mind, the Minister for Foreign Affairs has set out,
in a responsible way, the Government's record and its attitude on the vital
issues before us in the international scene. I commend him for what he has
said in his first report to the House in his new portfolio.
There are one or two objectives of policy I want to stress.
The first is to emphasise very clearly and very simply that our foreign
policy is based on the fact that our own national interest must be of paramount
importance at all times.
We are not going to be run around the place by anybody. We are
an independent country. We will never be a satellite of any power, close though
our relationships with others might be. But we must face realities.
We are not a great power and we cannot play a decisive role in
resolving the big issues between East and West. Nevertheless, we have a
role which we play, both in the region of South-East Asia and the Pacific, and
in the wider international community as well. It is up to us to play that role
responsibly. Keeping in mind at all times that we have a long and honourable
record for honest dealing in international affairs and that we want to live in
peaceful and profitable co-existence with all. We want to achieve this
objective no matter how different the political philosophies of other countries
might be from ours.
I believe we are achieving that objective. And I believe those who
ahrtse us, our foreign affairs officers have a mature and sophisticated
approach to their duties which serves Australia well.
These observations need to be made because we are all conscious
that this is a period of considerable change sometimes very rapid change
and we must be alert to the consequences and flexible in our responses. e e / 2 
-2
But we must not be pushed or panicked into new postures or
adventures with unpredictable consequences smart though they may have
appeared to be at the time. To the contrary, we must move forward
deliberately after careful consideration of every step we take. And for
good reason. Foreign policy cannot be made by a series of unthought out
adventures. It must evolve from the passage of events and our own
appreciation of the trends of the future and our relationships with others.
We live in a world of interdependence. This goes for
countries great and small. Our identification with the international
world is * Our membership of the United Nations,*
* Our membership of the Commonwealth of Nations
* Our treaties with friendly powers and
* Our association in a variety of international and
regional arrangements for security, trade and
economic aid.
In this complex of relationships we have made some important
advances in recent months as the Foreign Minister has pointed out. They have
been dealt with fully and effectively. I will not go over the ground again.
But there is a second matter I want to raise in the context
of a foreign p olicy debate. This is the wa we conduct our foreign
policy. No medium power like Australia can negotiate effectively
in sensitive areas of international relations in the full glare of the
spotlights. The pursuit of our foreign relations depends on frank and
confidential exchanges with many countries. We have to respect their
confidences as we expect them to respect ours. We do not peddle the
gossip of the diplomatic cocktail rounds in the capitals of the world.
The credibility of a government in its international dealings
depends heavily on the sanctity of its undertakings and the security of the
confidences given to it by others. No considerations of party politics must
be allowed to compromise this credibility. The conventions for
international conduct must be high and responsible.
I deplore the failure of the Opposition to respect these
conventions. I deplore the recent antics of the Leader of the Opposition
when he led a delegation to some of the countries of Asia, notably to the
People's Republic of China. / 3 
-3-
I remind Honourable Members that the Leader of the opposition went to China
to play politics with wheat. He fou-d himself declaring, on behalf of his Party, a
foreign policy for Australia that was not withiin-his power to implement. It was not the
policy of the elected Government of Australia. It is a policy in conflict with our
national interest. And very much so very much in line with the policy of the greatest
communist power in Asia.
I do not complain about the action of the Chinese Leaders. They, too, have
a national interest to promote and have obviously done so.
wit meBut what I do call into question and I believe a majority of Australians agree
wit me-is that, at a time when the Governmeat was in contact with the Chinese seeking
to open up a dialogue, a full surrender to Peking's point of view was made publicly by
the Leader of the Opposition.
The Leader of the Opposition did not come back with any assurance of future
wheat sales. He didn't come back with anything except defensive responses and
evasive answers to those who criticised
His conduct
The concessions he volunteered in Peking and
The gratuitous advice he offered to other countries.
He did, of course, come out of China saying that the Chinese Government was
quite willing to participate in any renewed Geneva Conference.
Chou En-Lai has just made a categorical denial, saying there is no question of
such a conference. The official Chinese press has also described talk about a new
Geneva conference as " a sheer fraud which is ridiculous and absurd."
This surely tests the credibility of the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr. Speaker, we are seeking as a Government to establish better relations with
the People's Republic of China. In concert with our friends we hope she will join in
the efforts of the countries of our region and the broader international community to
promote peace and prosperity for all peoples in accordance with the Bandung principle
to which Chou En-Lai himself has publicly subscribed.
We want to see this happen. And we will make our contribution where we can.
We will do so without sacrificing one single part of our national interest. And we will
try to achieve this objective while retaining an honourable position with our friends
and allies. I remind the House again that there is no sudden short cut to normal relations
with China as history so clearly shows, particularly Soviet and Chinese history.
Patience and hard-headed negotiation are needed.
The process is not one that will require, on our part, spectacular public
gestures or instant decisions. / 4 
And this problem must be considered in the total context it is important, I
think, to see our own position clearly against the background of the forthcoming
meeting of the United Nations and the planned visit to Peking by President Nixon before
May of next year.
The Government's policy on representation in the United Nations of the People's
Republic of China and of Taiwan has already been stated in this IHouse during the
course of thi 3 debate.
I have said it was inevitable and right that China should be a member of the
United Nations and should hold the permanent seat in the Security Council. I have also
said that we believed the Republic of China Taiwan should be given the chance of
maintaining its membership if it so desired.
In the final result these are matters for collective decision by the United
Nations. There has been a lot of talk about there being only one China and that Taiwan
is a Province of China. But when the Leader of the Opposition states this proposition
he evades the fact that there are two Governments each controlling a certain area with
a certain population and each claiming to be the Government of the whole of China.
And he would put a seal of legality on the forceful takeover of 14 million people
by a Government they do not want. He obviously does not understand that acceptance
of the idea that Taiwan is a province of China implies that force can be used to restor e
control by China without invoking United Nations assistance.
The de facto situation is that neither the P. R. C. nor the R. 0. C. exercises
administrative control over all the territories they claim. While this situation exists
where two Governments are in political and jurisdictional conflict third countries are
free to recognise whichever Government they choose.
Australia has for many years recognised the Taiwan Government the Republic
of China and in 1966 completed the formalities by establishing an embassy there.
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has alleged publicly that the decision
to send an Australian Ambassador to Taipeh was arranged by the late Mr. Holt as
Prime Minister without the knowledge of his Foreign Minister of the day then Mr.-
now Sir Paul Hasluck.
This is utterly untrue. This is the second test of the Leader of the Opposition's
credibility. The decision was made by the Cabinet of the day. It is on record and beyond
dispute. This then is our position.
I believe it is in our national interest first to have a collective decision by the
United Nations on the admission of the People's Republic of China and the status of the
Republic of China of Taiwan.
When representation in the United Nations is clarified we shall be better placed
to examine the problems of recognition and diplomatic relations with Peking. 
In his various public statements the Leader of the Opposition has endeavoured
to suggest that the whole of South-East Asia is about to go or should go cap in
hiand to Peking. The truth is that South-East Asian countries are moving with caution
as we are., They realise the desirability of adjusting to changing circumstances in Asia
and the likely entry this year or next of Peking into the United Nations.
The Leader of the Opposition has said the Canadian formula is the one his
Party would adopt for immediate recognition of China. This doesn't make sense because
the espousal of any formula now would prejudge events yet to take place in the
United Nations. And in any case only a naive person would set out what he would finally
accept as his first position in any negotiation.
The Canadian formula " notes" China's claim to Taiwan. In his statement on
the subject the Canadian Minister of State for External Affairs ( Mr. Mitchell Sharp)
said Canada had made it clear to the Chinese from the start of their negotiations " that
the Canadian Government does not consider it appropriate either to endorse or to
challenge the Chinese Government' s position on the status of Taiwan.
But Mr. Whitlam, while adopting the Canadian formula as his own, also concedes
Taiwan to China. And, as I have said, by so doing does not exclude the use of force in
the resolution of this issue by the Chinese.
For reasons I have mentioned there is no need to rush into recognition.
Mr. Whitlam has said " we must accept the view of President Nixon that
diplomatic relations must be normalised as speedily as possible. I have no knowledge
that the President or his Administration have said that at all. This is the third test
of credibility. They, like us, have declared their attitude on China's admission to the United
Nations. And they, like us, are seeking a dialogue in their bilateral relationship.
The Leader of the Opposition, on his recent ill-starred journey, not only
dismissed the future fate of the people of Taiwan in a most casual manner. He also
took upon himself the role of publicly declaring the policy Japan should adopt about her
treaty with Taiwan.
I quote his own words at the National Press Club here in Canberra.
" We should be the first to point out to Japan that she is not in
honour or reason irrevocably tied to a treaty forced on her
when she was weak and dependent... we should say to her that
she is now entitled to pursue her own interests which require
a restoration of relations with China.
That is the Leader of the Opposition brashly telling one of the great powers
of Asia and one that is likely to be, in the foreseeable future, a dominant power
what it should do. Japan, I emphasise, is a very great trading partner of ours and
one with whom we are associated in many regional activities. 
This kind of advice disregards~ Australia's -interest by assuming at once that it
is to our advantage for China and Japan to m-ve into a close relationship. It also
racks of interference in the internal affairs of Japan. Who are we to say " Japan is
now entitled to pursue her own interests?"
In fact it looks precisely the kind of negotiating position China herself could
take up towards Japan. In short, the Leader of the Opposition urges Japan to tear up
her treaty with Taiwan and do business with China.
That any Member of this Parliament should seriously advocate such action is
utterly deplorable in the context of our national interest. It displays either ignorance
of international relations or a cynical opportunism towards international agreements.
It implies that international agreements such as A. N. Z. U. S. which is the
corner-stone of our security are expendable scraps of paper.
This is the first time in Australia's history that a Leader of the Opposition
has been the total advocate of another country's cause. It is a dangerous policy to
this country. Let me quote some editorial comment from a leading newspaper in Asia.
The Singapore edition of " The Straits Times" on 14 July said this and I quote
" The Australian Government is ready to discuss diplomatic relations with
Peking and though recognition may be a long way off ( Mr. McMahon's
phrase) the intention is sincere and the endeavour is not assisted by
the Labor Party mission'is extraordinary behaviour . it is one thing
for Mr. Whitlam to campaign in Australia for radical policy changes,
but quite another to play Party politics openly in Peking. This is
irresponsibility of a high order.
Mr. Speaker, a great deal has happened since then.
The fact that President Nixon and Premier Chou En-Lai have agreed to meet
in Peking some time before May of next year has added a new dirnens ion to the
international debate on China.
The United Nations will meet next month, and in our contacts with China there
has been some clarification of each other's viewpoints. I have no dramatic forecasts
to make on what the future holds. It is difficult to see how Australia can have more than
a marginal influence on American-Chinese relations.
Because America is a super-power and China a great power I think it may be
inevitable that they will treat on a bilateral basis on the big issues. [ I saying this I
do not intend to suggest that we expect to have no exchanges of views with America
on all issues of common interest.
It is part of the practice of our diplomacy to keep in close, continuing touch
with America and our other friends, particularly in the Asian and Pacific region. This
they encourage and this we will continue to do. 
-7-
And I emphasise what I said when I began. We will base our action on two
principles Australia's national interest comes first at all times.
And our diplomatic conduct accords with the highest
conventions of honourable dealing and respect for
the rights of others.
A clear understanding of the Leader of the Opposition's actions during . his
Peking visit makes it extremely difficult to reconcile them with these principles.
L 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 84/ 1971.
FAILURE TO SUSTAIN A QUORUM
State ment by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
It is the responsibility of the Government
Parties to have sufficient Members in the House to maintain quorums
when the division bells are rung, in order that the business of the
Hose should proceed.
I am informed that this afternoon on the ringing of the bells,
the House was two short of a quorum.
The fact that there were enough Government Members in
the Pajliamentary precincts to sustain a quorum was not a satisfactory
reason for their failure to promptly answer the bells.
I regret that the quorum was not maintained and I treat the
matter extremely seriously both from the point of view of the business
of the House and of sustaining the prestige and authority of the
Parliament. I take the matter so seriously that I have instructed that
this be the first item on the Business Paper of the Joint Parties at
the next meeting.
CANBERRA, 26 August, 1971. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
ON
INTERNATIONAL CURRENCY
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 26 A ugust 1971]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe Prime Minister)
The right honourable member for
Melbourne ( Mr Caiwell) has asked that I
make a statement on the measures for the
protection of the United States dollar
announced by President Nixon on 15th
August. As honourable members will be
aware, the situation in the international
currency markets is changing from day to
day -and any assessment of the situation
has to be treated cautiously at this point of
time. ' However, in the view of the importance
of the developments I feel it desirable
to give the House a preliminary
assessment. As honourable members will
know, the present disturbed situation in the
international currency markets was sparked
off by the -announcement of the President
of the United States last week that convertibility
of United States dollars into gold
and other reserve assets was to be suspended,
and a 10 per cent surcharge on all
dutiable imports into the United States,
other than those subject to quotas, was to
be imposed. Both these decisions were
announced by the President to be temporary.
But it was made clear that the removal
of the 10 per cent surcharge, and the
resumption of convertibility of United
States dollar balances, would be dependent
on certain objectives being -achieved by the
United States as a result of negotiation in
the fields of international trade and -finance
and the sharing of defence burdens.
19f2271 As to trade, the President claimed that
American products were at a disadvantage
because of unfair exchange rates. He said
that the import tax would be ended when
the unfair treatment ended. In the field of
finance, the President asserted the need
for a widespread major realignment of
exchange parities, and also for an
improved system of international monetary
arrangements generally. The President also
said that the time had come for other economically
strong nations to bear their fair
share of defending freedom around the
world. This latest disturbance on the international
currency markets is only the most
recent of a long succession of similar disturbances,
centring on one major currency
after another, and sometimes on groups of
currencies. In 1967 we had the disturbances
leading up to the devaluation of
sterling. In 1969, the pressure was transferred
from London to Paris and we had
the devaluation of the French franc * and
the revaluation of the Deutschemark. More
recently, the trouble has centred on the
United States and has been attributable in
large part to the growing balance of payments
deficit of that country. This has led
to a fall in United States official reserves
and a sharp increase in its official shortterm
liabilities. At the same time, there has
been a substantial transfer of United States
dollars on private account into the international
monetary markets of the world. 
All this has served to weaken confidence in
the United States dollar on the foreign
exchanges. A number of factors has contributed to
the United States' external deficit. Prominent
among these is the rapid price and
cost inflation in the United States over the
last 5 years. The United States' position
has been exacerbated by the growing competitiveness
of some of its trading partners
and by restraints on the access of United
States' exports to markets abroad. Superimposed
on this has been the heavy
defence burdens of the United States.
Defence expenditure abroad by the United
States has recently been running at the
level of about SUS5 billion annually. One
way and another, the balance of payments
deficit has built up until, in the first half of
this year, the deficit has been running at
an annual rate of SUS23 billion.
It is not surprising, in these circumstances,
that the United States dollar is now
commonly regarded as being ' over valued'.
In other words, the existing exchange
parity for the United States dollar overrates
its international purchasing power. This, of
course, is a matter of critical worldwide
importance because of the pivotal position
in the international monetary system of the
United States dollar.
The United States dollar is the largest of
the reserve currencies in the world today
and many countries have fixed rates of
exchange on the dollar. A great proportion
of international trade and financial transactions
has been settled through the dollar in
the past. And the dollar has been adopted,
along with gold as one of the two basic
units of value in the Bretton Woods
monetary system. Other currencies have
had their par values expressed in terms of
the United States dollar and gold.
There is no doubt that the Bretton
Woods system has made a major contribution
to full employment, economic growth,
and the orderly development of world
trade and financial arrangements in the
post-war period. It has achieved this as -a
result of the adoption of a number of
working principles, not least of which has
been the system of agreed parities of rates
of exchange between participating
countries, adjustable only with the consent
of the International Monetary Fund in the
case of fundamental balance of payments disequilibrium. This system of pegged parities
has been of particular value to smaller
countries as a protection against the prewar
practice of currency manipulation and
competitive depreciations. It has also been
of value to rapidly developing countries
like Australia who do not have access to
the economic dialogues centred on the
United States and Europe.
Nevertheless, no system is proof against
the ravages of time and the Bretton Woods
system is no exception. The need for further
development of the Bretton Woods
arrangements has long been recognised,
and the most recent innovation has been
the establishment of special drawing right
which, in themselves, offer some alternative
to the United States dollar and gold as an
international reserve asset.
Another innovation, and this is very germane
to the present situation, is that the
Executive Board of the Fund ' has been discussing
the case for a greater flexibility in
-the mechanism of exchange rate adjustments.
There is a strong body of opinion
which suggests that the present arrangements
whereby exchange rates should not
vary more than I per cent from parity
should be changed by extending somewhat
the operating limits within which currencies
could be exchanged without being held
to infringe their par values -at the International
Monetary Fund.
The action taken by the United States
last week has short-circuited this debate
and take the question of exchange rate
adjustments into the field of immediate
practical necessity in the foreign exchange
markets. The 10 per cent surcharge on
dutiable imports would, were it to be continued,
strike heavily at the exports of
countries like Japan which have had a
large and growing market in the United
States for goods of the kinds subject to the
surcharge. Through the effect of this on
industries in such centres it would in turn
tend to reduce their demand for materials
supplied by other countries in the normal
course of events. The surcharge is currently
under consideration in the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The United States has, however, said
that it sees this trade* action as a means of
securing revaluation of the currencies of
countries which it considers to have an
unwarranted advantage over it in point of 
trade competition because of their existing
parities. If and to the extent that other
countries were to revalue their currencies,
the United States dollar would be devalued
in relation to them. The United States
Government has chosen this approach to
its problem in preference to seeking a formal
devaluation of its currency against all
other currencies.
Amongst other things that course would
involve the United States in altering the
value of the dollar in terms of gold. The
President has said that his Government
does not intend to alter the present dollar
price of gold. We have, as yet, no real
idea as to what the final response of other
major countries to the United States initiative
is going to be.
Under the rules of the International
Monetary Fund, the exchange parity of
any country which is a member of the
fund can be altered only if the country
itself seeks a change. It seems reasonable
to suppose that few, if any, major
countries are likely to seek such a change
unless and until other countries take steps
to do so. As yet there is no firm indication
of concerted action amongst major
countries to that end.
On Thursday of last week the Finance
Ministers of the European Economic Community,
meeting in Brussels, failed to reach
agreement on any form of common action
in the matter. The foreign exchange markets
in Europe were closed last week but
have re-opened this week. There have been
no formal revaluations on the dollar but
the majority of European countries have
allowed their buying rates for dollars to
exceed the Monetary Fund limits of 1 per
cent beyond parity with the dollar. In
point of fact, however, the markets so far
this week have been fairly steady on the
dollar and the dollar has fallen in value in
most markets by something in the region
of only 2 per cent to 3 per cent below the
rates ruling before the markets closed.
I want to stress that this is likely to be
an interim situation since it has done
nothing to achieve the more significant realignment
of exchange rates which the
United States, and the Managing Director
of the International Monetary Fund, consider
to be necessary. This fact must be
borne in mind in all our thinking and calculations. If, of course, a number of
major currencies were to seek and obtain
adjustments of their exchange parities
under the International Monetary Agreement
a question could arise as to whether
Australia should seek some such adjustment.
If such a situation were to arise, we
would need to make the most careful
assessment of it from the standpoint of our
own interests both international and
domestic. But no such situation has arisen
yet. We are keeping closely in touch with
developments and studying all possibilities.
At the same time we are preserving for
ourselves the greatest possible scope for
independence of action. If it should come
to a decision whether or not to seek some
alteration of our exchange parity there will
be only one proper basis for decision-the
interests of the Australian economy and
the Australian nation as a whole. Meanwhile,
in the state of uncertainty which
must prevail until the large issues I have
mentioned are crystallised and intentions
on the part of major countries become
clearer, foreign exchange markets are
likely to be very unsettled and changeable.
We may also see large movements of funds
between financial centres. It will be a matter
of adjusting our own exchange dealing
arrangements to meet changing situations
as they arise.
In this state of uncertainty in the foreign
exchange markets it is not possible to settle
on a firm exchange rate for the Australian
dollar. However, in order to enable overseas
transactions to be resumed, it has been
decided to continue to fix an exchange rate
with the pound sterling on a daily basis.
For purposes of the last 3 days trading the
existing parity with sterling-that is,
$ A2.1429 for  11 sterling-has been maintained.
It is true that, as sterling has been
traded at a rate about 2 per cent above
parity with the United States dollar, this
means that at the moment there is, in
effect, a similar small appreciation of -the
Australian dollar in relation to the United
States dollar. However, the situation is
being reviewed on a day-to-day basis and
any short term change in the rate should
not, of course, necessarily be taken as an
indication as to the long term rate that will
eventually be settled for the Australian
dollar. 
For the time being, and until further
notice, banks have been advised that they
may undertake foreign exchange transactions
in respect of normal trade transactions,
other current account payments contractually
due, and the reasonable requirements
of travellers. Rates of exchange for
these transactions are quoted by the banks
under arrangements with the Reserve Bank
and are based on developments in the London
and other main foreign exchange markets
overseas. forward transactions and, of course, this
limits the scope of banks to offer such
cover to their customers. I think this is
reasonable in view of the present unsettled
circumstances on the foreign exchanges.
We will be ready to adjust our position as
required in accordance with the emerging
situation. I present the following paper:
International Currency-Ministerial Statement,
26 August 1971.
The Reserve Bank is not yet offering Motion ( by Mr Swartz) proposed:
facilities to the banks to cover them for That the House take note of the paper.
W. G. MURAY, Government Printer. Canberra 


4 September 1971
Ladies and Gentlemen, My wife and I are delighted to be here. Thank you for your most generous welcome. I can assure you it is stimulating to see so many of you from my own and other Liberal Electorates here today.
Let us make today a significant date in the history of the Liberal Party and in the history of the Government in Canberra. Let us as Liberals make a new and concerted drive to fight for our own Liberal principles and our cause, in the interest of all Australians.
It is up to all of us to bring this about. We cannot expect to get it by asking or by hoping or by wishful thinking. We can get it by performance. Performance in our Branches, in our State Parties, in our Federal organisation and in the Parliamentary Party.
If we have differences as we inevitably will let us resolve them within the Party. We should be exuding confidence in the Branches all the members playing their part. If we have doubts, let us cast them out. Don't let them eat away at us like a cancer.
Liberalism stands for the individual. For his liberties and his ideals.
All I ask for is unity in the pursuit of those ideals and objectives to which we as Liberals are committed by our platform and our policies. I ask for unity in our attack on inflation. I ask for moderation on the part of those in whose hands lies the determination of prices.
I ask for moderation on the part of industrial forces so that genuine progress is not retarded by political conflict,, and above all let us see policies rather than personalities get better recognition in the media.
We have had a period of difficulties. That is true. I want to stress that the differences were never fundamental, nor did they relate to differences in policy of any substance. I know that the Liberal Parliamentary Party is united, and united behind the leadership, and there are good reasons for us to be confident. But there is a need to demonstrate that confidence. There are good grounds for us to be optimistic. There are none for us to be complacent.
I also want to appeal to the people of Australia for unity in a nation-wide effort to beat the problems of the day. They are not problems of survival, for we have security. They are not problems of bondage, for we are free. Some of them are largely beyond our control, such as excessive wage increases and the problem of the wool industry: some of them are not.
Let us pull together all of us to overcome them where it is in our power so to do. There is no better place for us to start than here in my own Electorate of Lowe. The people of Lowe have given me their loyalty and their support for twenty-two years. I value that beyond words.
My duties are clear. They are to represent the people of Lowe in the Federal Parliament. to lead the Parliamentary Liberal Party and to lead the nation as Prime Minister.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I believe that my Government has done a great deal in these past six months which has not yet had a proper public valuation put on it because of the distractions of other events and because the good things of life frequently pass unnoticed.
During the past six months I have visited every state in the Commonwealth and some of the states several times. I have been concerned with achieving two objectives. One was to make it clear that my Goverwnent believes in the Federal System.
We in the Commonwealth Government will co-operate with the states to the limit to make it work in the best interests of the Australian people. The other was to make direct contact with the State Liberal Parties and Branches. I did this to ensure that those of us in the Federal Parliamentary Party were making common cause with our fellow Liberals in presenting the platform and policies of our Party in the National Parliament.
I have been encouraged during my travels. I believe our relationships with the states at the political level are much better, and I am more confident now that we are getting a better identity of outlook between the Liberal Branches and their Parliamentary representatives. We have, in short, a solid base on which to build.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I won't go over history but I do want to make some brief comments on some matters of special interest.
The first relates to the decision of the High Court in the cement pipes case. The decision should be welcomed for the reason that it clarifies the meaning of the words " tradlhg and financial corporationg' in the Commonwealth Constitution. The 1908 definition of the words in the Huddart Parrcer judgement have long seemed to me to violate the plain meaning of the words. The High Gburt has also pointed out the necessity for precision in the drafting of legislation.
The Trade Practices Law is designed to strengthen competition in Australian ' trade and . commerce to the extent required by the public interest. The law is now being reviewed and a new and strengthened Bill will be introduced into Parliament as soon as practicable. On a practical basis, the decision does not, in any sense, reduce the need for the closest co-operation between the Commonwealth and the States.
Second is the state of the economy. You have just had the new Budget. I didn't expect it to be a popular Budget, but it is a responsible one. Few people have challenged us about its inherent soundness or that it was developed with a high sense of responsibility.
Would any sensible Australian expect us to act otherwise? We had already come to grips with inflation and the rural crisis. We are working hard to get a more stable industrial situation.
The Budget took these and other factors into account. Some of the problems are short term, others longer-term, but we take them together so that we have a strategy and a purpose for the future. What I want to say to you is: Have confidence in your countryand in the strength of the economy.
The economy basically is sound. Our natural resources are substantial, our trade is healthy, our foreign exchange position is strong. There is no danger whatsoever of mass unemployment. Those who are starting this kind of whispering campaign are talking rubbish. They want to create alarm and despondency when there is no reason - absolutely no reason - for that.
The Liberal-Country Party Government has had the confidence and support of a niajority of Australians for twenty-two years. It has never shirked its responsibilities. It has a wealth of experience to bring to bear on the problems of the day. I have no doubt that we will emerge from the present economic difficulties with our long-range prospects sound indeed.
The other matter I want to mention is social welfare. We have to look after those most in need as our first commitments in this field. We have done this with our pension rises. Those increases during my administration have been much greater than the rise in the cost of living. That, in fact, is the record in recent years. Their standard of living will be improved, but I don't want to regard our care for the needy as something based on a simple statistic or a percentage. I want to make it something which has regard for human values, for the right of every Austialian to security in his life and living.
Our work in the social welfare field is by no means done. We have the whole rang,-e of Government activity in this field under review and we will press on until we have cleaned out poverty from our communities.
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, I ask you to ignore the Jeremiahs. They come out from their holes in the ground whenever they think there is someone who will listen to them.
The problems before us are being dealt with. The future is full of promise, the Government is in good heart and we have abundant faith in the good sense, the abilities and the energies of the Australian people.



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
ON
APPROPRIATION BILL ( No. 1) 1971-72
Second Reading
( Budget Debate)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 7 September 1971]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
( 8.26)-This is the twenty-second Budget
since the Liberal-Country Party Government
took office in 1949. Since then we in
Australia have enjoyed a period of sustained
economic growth combined with full
employment which has not been rivalled in
any previous period of our history.
Let me illustrate by reference to the
progress we have made in the last decade.
Ten years ago our gross national product,
at constant prices was around $ 17,000m.
Last year it was $ 28, OO0m-an increase of
about 60 per cent or an annual rate of
increase of over 5 per cent. Ten years ago
our workforce was less than 44 million. It
is now over 51 million-a growth of about
per cent. Our international reserves
have more than doubled and now stand at
over $ 2.3 billion. These facts, I suggest,
speak for themselves.
We are, I agree, now facing problems
because cost and price inflation has recently
gathered pace. In the interests of the whole
community, we have to tackle -these problems
and tackle them now. But they need
to be handled in a way which will assist,
rather than impede, our long-term growth
goals. And a co-operative effort is needed
by every group of Australians. We have
one very important economic problem that
the Treasurer ( Mr Snedden) highlighted in
his Budget Speech. Our over-riding
economic purpose in this year's Budget was
14327/ 71 to combat inflationary pressures. We are
well aware that the inflationary process is
most complex and that there are important
elements which the Government's fiscal
and monetary measures do not influence
directly. Wage rates, for example, are largely a
matter for the Arbitration Commission and
for employer and employee relationships,
although the Government can play a role
by trying to ensure that the general
economic climate is not conducive to the
making of wage awards that exceed increases
in productivity. The problem we
faced in framing the Budget was therefore
to try to reduce inflationary pressures in
those areas where the Government can
have a direct influence. As I said iin the
House on 18th February, we have to
distinguish between cost inflation and
demand inflation. I wish that this distinction
could be made abundantly clear,
because of all the speeches I have heard
in this House and of many of the comments
I have heard too, few have been
able to draw this distinction effectively.
Mr Foster-Yoyu are never in the
chamber to -hear speeches.
Mr McMAHEON-But I listen in on the
radio. In any event, I disappear the moment
I see you.
I pointed out then that we were not faced
with overall demand inflation of the classical
type, except in three areas, namely, private 
building and construction, private investment
in plant and equipment, and Government
expenditure. Here there was excessive
pressure on resources. In addition, more
recently the strong rise in the potential for
demand inflation through increased personal
consumption expenditure gave us cause for
concern. in circumstances where prices
had already been increasing much too
rapidly, we felt that it would -have been
irresponsible to risk the possibility of superimposing
excess demand on wage inflation.
To guard against the development of undue
demand pressures, we therefore judged that
it was necessary to restrain the growth in
Commonwealth expenditures by severely
pruning departmental proposals and we decided
also that we had to raise additional
revenues. These are in the nature of fine
tuning adjustments which must be seen in
proper perspective.
After allowing for the transfer of payroll
tax to the States the Commonwealth's
domestic outlays are estimated to increase
by $ 900m in 1971-72--only $ 90m less
than in 1970-71. Similarly, receipts are
estimated -to increase by only about S lO0m
more than last year. In technical terms-
I have to emphasise the word ' technical'
because it has a technical meaning-these
measures imply an increase in the overall
domestic surplus of $ 170m. Combined with
a restrictive monetary policy I have little
doubt that they have -helped considerably
in reducing the risk that excess demand
inflation would develop. But these measures
will not in themselves prevent the continuance
of the -strong overall economic
growth that we have been experiencing in
recent years. It is nonsense -to suggest that
they will result in mass unemployment. In
the normal course of events registrants for
employment will rise to a seasonal peak
in January of next year. With the addition
of school leavers, it would not be at all
surprising if unemployment exceeded
100,000 at that time. That would only be
slightly in excess of the numbers that were
registered in January this year. I want to
assure the House that we remain firmly
committed -to the maintenance of full
employment and -that the Government will
be keeping a very close watch on trends
in the private sector to see whether they
develop along the lines forecast.
Our concern must be to try to provide aa
-economic climate in which economic growth can proceed without excessive cost
and price increases. Left unchecked, the
rate of price increases would soon erodc
the gains we propose for pensioner and
other social welfare recipients. it could also
jeopardise the strong economic growth we
have enjoyed in recent years. It could
threaten our export industries. It could limit
-our -ability to improve the quality of life
in Australia. In the final analysis, of course,
the prospects for controlling inflation will
be affected, as I have already said, by
community attitudes-not by any single
group in the community, but by the coinmunity
as a whole. Recent experience
overseas suggests -that once a cost-, price
spiral is permitted to get a foothold in an
economy, the measures then required to
combat it successfully are very difficult
to devise and decidedly less palatable than
those contained in this Budget. Our aim
is to prevent such a development in this
country. Till now I have referred mainly to
measures aimed at demand control. But
it is wrong to suggest that -the Government
has ignored the problems of cost pressures.
The Treasurer referred -to a variety of
measures which are being taken outside the
immediate Budget context -and which arc
aimed at reducing these pressures. It should
however be recognised that the full year
effects of wage and other cost increases
which took place during 1970-71 will continue
to be reflected in the economy for
some time. The levels of -average weekly
earnings and the consumer price index,
for example, are already considerably
above their average levels in 1970-71. This
undoubtedly will be reflected in statistics
during the remainder of 1971-72, no matter
how effective the Budget and the Government's
other measures may be in containing
future cost increases.
Now let us speculate about what the
Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam)
and his colleagues might do to solve the
problem. The Leader of the Opposition
says he notes many things which are not
causes of inflation. He says that wage increases
are not the cause of inflation. I will
refer to these in a moment. He also says:
Great sectors of our secondary industry have
not contributed to inflation.
The rural sector is not contributing to
inflation; and clearly he believes that
Government spending is not the cause, since 
he wants the Government to spend much
more on a whole range of projects. Moreover,
as company incomes increased very
little in the last financial year, presumably
he does not find the cause of inflation in
that area. What then is the cause in his
view? It is important that not only we
but all members of the Australian public
should know. Having excluded so much,
he leaves us in the dark as to what his
analysis is and what the real causes might
be. The Leader of the Opposition does, it
is true, give us a most significant hint as
to his views when he accuses the Government
of refusing to acknowledge-and here
I quote his own words-' the inevitable connection
between rising prices and demands
for increased wages.'
I repeat his words ' The inevitable connection
between rising prices and demands
for increased wages'. Does this mean that
after all, he accepts wage increases as a
cause of inflation? The words may be
ambiguous. He is strangely silent. I accept
his silence as meaning that he does accept
wage increases as the cause. The fact is,
of course, that wage and salary earners
have increased their share of gross national
product. In 1970-71, wages, salaries and
supplements accounted for nearly 55 per
cent of gross national product; much above
the proportion in 1969-70, when it was
52.4 per cent, and in other recent years.
The Leader of the Opposition refers also
to ' half an income-price policy' under which
be suggests the Arbitration Commission has
the job of keeping wages and prices down.
He should know, as a once potential lawyer.
that the Arbitration Commission has power
to set only minimum wage rates which in
peither theory nor practicei amounts to
setting actua3 wage rates. This is reflected
in the fact that average weekly earnings
have consistently increased much faster
than award rates; for example, in the year
to the June quarter 1971 by over 13 per
cen~ t as against 9 per cent in the corresponding
period last year. The truth is that the
Leader of the Opposition is unable to provide
any analysis of the causes of inflation.
Not unexpectedly he is therefore completely
silent on the crucial question of what should
be done to control it. We do know that
he criticises the Government for not spending
enough. In almost the same breath he
complains that the burden of taxation ' s too high. He cannot have it both ways. So
we are left to the conclusion that Mr
Whitlam's cure for inflation is to increase
Government spending and to reduce taxation.
This is just the kind of cure we must
avoid if we are to make any kind of attempt
to cure inflation. As I have said, it is the
Government's firm belief that the only
responsible course of action was to bring
down a Budget designed to prevent the
development of excessive demand inflation,
superimposing itself on the existing cost
inflation. I make it clear that our policy
continues to be a flexible one, responsive
to change and able to make adjustments
needed to sustain full employmeot and
economic growth. It is, of course, entirely
possible to adopt a less restrictive monetary
and fiscal policy if circumstances make that
necessary. Mr Deputy Speaker, I want now to
emphasise another important aspect of our
policy. We have been able to take positive
action to meet the various high priority
needs of the community, despite the need
to restrain Government expenditure to combat
inflationary pressures. The Budget in
fact provides for substantial increases in
social welfare, defence, education and the
arts, assistance to rural industries, and other
areas of essential activity. The responsible
Ministers will explain in detail those parts
of the Budget which involve their own
portfolios. But let me just mention social
welfare as one example. Reference has been
made to a fundamental reappraisal of social
services which I said the Government would
undertake. The Government looked at
various possible measures in the social welfare
field. We decided, as I shall outline
in a moment, to take action in the areas
of greatest need. If the Opposition wants to
say that this policy was wrong and that it
does not believe that those in the greatest
need should receive the greatest assistance,
it is up to -the Opposition to tell the Government
and up to it to make it positive to
the Australian people. It is all very well
for the Leader of the Opposition to say
glibly that the cost of paying pensions to
all Australians would be no more than
S300m. The fact is that, on the basis of
present eligibility for age pensions, the cost
would be about $ 440m. Now where would
that money come from? Where did he get
his figures from? What taxes would the
Leader of the Opposition increase? Until 
these questions are answered one must
regard any propositions put by the Leader
of the Opposition with extreme doubt.
Unlike the Leader of the Opposition, my
Government has acted responsibly by
matching its welfare programme to what we
have judged can reasonably be raised from
taxation and other revenue sources. Frankly,
Sir, I di d not think that we could increase
revenue at all other than in the way in
which we have done so. I did not want
to touch to any extent, and neither did my
colleague the Treasurer, indirect taxes which
could clearly write themselves into the consumer
price index. I repeat: We have helped
where we thought the need or poverty was
greatest. The increase of S$ 1.25 in the standard rate
of pension and of S1 for each married
pensioner provides a substantial improvement
in the purchasing power of recipients.
Taken with increases which were made
last year and in April this year, there has
been an increase of about 11 per cent in
both pension rates since September 1970.
The consumer price index rose by about 5
per cent in the year to June 1971. Therefore,
there is a pretty healthy margin of
approximately 6 per cent that can improve
the real standards of the pensioners themselves.
So clearly, I think, we can take it
that those most in need have received the
benefits and they have received considerable
gains. A further most significant measure was
the increases granted in the additional
pensions payable where a pensioner has
dependent children. In addition, we have
increased child endowment by 50c a week
for each child under the age of 16 in
excess of 2 in a family. These increases in
pensions, child endowment and other social
welfare and repatriatiori benefits should
ensure a welcome improvement in the
standard of living of those dependent on
them, even after allowing for the faster rate
of price rises. Mr Deputy Speaker, I have
pledged my Government to do all within
its power to eliminate pockets of poverty.
This is and will remain our humanitarian
aim. Our concern for the needy is
unqualified. We will continue to keep
measures to increase our help constantly
under review.
The Leader of the Opposition has moved
to condemn the Budget on the ground that it contains no proposals to balance the
finances and functions of the Commonwealth,
States and local government.
Obviously, the Leader of the Opposition,
could not have written the speech. Obviously
he could not have been guided by
any person with a knowledge of the contents
of the Budegt itself. The fact is that this
Budget recognises the undertaking I gave
when I came to office that I would give
priority to making sure that the Federal
system worked effectively. My two conferences
with the Premiers in Canberra have
resulted in a significant improvement in the
States' financial capacity. First, my col,~
leagues and I reached agreement with the
States on a growth tax which is theirs to
levy and which will give them an important
addition to their revenue raising resources.
Second, on top of the normal grants that
they will receive under the -improved
financial arrangements settled last year, we
have provided special assistance of
to help the States cope with their 1971-72
Budgets. Third, while recognising the need
to restrain the growth in capital spending
by governments, we agree to support a
substantial increase in the funds available
to the States for expenditure on capital
works. Fourth, in transferring payroll tax
to the States, we agreed to meet the cost
of exempting local authorities from the
tax where it applies to their non-business
activities-a move which has been widely
welcomed by local government authorities
throughout Australia. I now ask the question:
How many members of the Opposition
know of the amount of funds that
have been made available to local government
authorities? if they do know, why
have they not referred to it in any one of
their speeches? Certainly, the Leader of the
Opposition did * not appear to have any
knowledge of this innovation or the extent
of it. The Government has taken these
steps to improve the financial capacity of
the States and their authorities. We did so
because we recognise the important responsibilities
which they have in providing basic
services to the citizens of this country. The
Labor Party, as we all know-this side and
the other side-gives lip service to the role
of the States. But we all know that what
it would like to do is to take over the
services provided by the States and run
them from Canberra and to abolish the
States if it had the constitutional capacity 
to do so. We believe, however, in a cooperative
federalism, in which full recognition
is given to the role of the States in
providing the educational, housing, health
and other facilities that are so important
in improving the quality of life. ( Extension
of time panted.)
The plain fact is that nearly $ 3, OO0m, or
over one-third of this year's Budget, has
been set aside to assist the States in providing
these facilities. Portion of this assistance
takes the form of grants for specific
purposes, but some $ 2,300m is available to
the States for expenditure as they see fit.
To suggest that this Budget excludes all
mention of cities completely overlooks the
fact that the major portion of this assistance
would be expended by State governments
in their cities. The Commonwealth
recognises that State governments are being
faced with demands for improvements in
every field of their activity. With our help,
an increasing proportion of national
resources is being devoted to the provision
of Government services in the State and
local sectors. It is inportant, too, to bear
in mind, however, that the resources of the
community drawn upon by all the government
instrumentalities that service the
community are necessarily limited. Just as
we have had to limit spending in fields of
Commonwealth responsibility, so too are
there limits to the assistance we can pro,-
vide to the States to improve their services.
But there is no doubt, Mr Deputy Speaker,
that the increased financial capacity of the
States will do much to help improve the
quality of Australian life. So, too, will the
action which the Commonwealth is taking
directly in many fields. 1 ' have already
mentioned our social welfare programme.
We are also making substantial contri-butions
to Aboriginal welfare, -to education and the ' arts, and we have established a
department whose functions include examination
of environmental problems. All this
is part of our effort to give national leadership
and secure national unity.
Mr Deputy Speaker, this Budget is a
positive one. It is a Budget which will help
us achieve our great national aims of economic'
strength and prosperity, social welfare,
and security. It will oontribute to a
general improvement in the quality of life.
There are some people who seem blind
to our economic progress, and the real
nature of our problems. They relish playing
the role of prophets of gloom. Some
talk of a stagnant economy. Some see
unemployment rising in an uncontrolled
way. The Leader of the Opposition professes
to see the Budget as a divisive political
exercise. People who talk in this way
seem to be mesmerised by the immediate
problems of the day. It is true that some
of these problems-such as the current
problem of inflation-have to be taken
very seriously and solutions have to ' be
found for them. But such problems should
be kept in proper perspective. It is nonsense
to suggest that mass unemployment
is just around the corner. Our record in
maintaining full employment is second to
no other country in the world. We have a
strong economy; an economy with enormous
and exciting potentialities for future
growth; providing only we act responsibly.
People who suppress or distort these facts
do no service to Australia. The sooner we
learn to ignore them the better it will be
for the development and prosperity of this
country and the better we will be able to
do for every single class of Australian
citizen.
W. G. MumvA, Government Printer, Canberra
14327/ 71-2 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 85/ 1971
STATE VISIT BY GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF NEW ZIEALAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
With the approval of The Queen and with the
concurrence of the New Zealand and Australian Governments,
the Governor-General of New Zealand ( Sir Arthur Porritt) and
Lady Porritt have been pleased to accept the invitation
from the Governor-General of Australia ( Sir Paul Hasluck) to
make a State Visit to Australia towards the end of this year.
The visit is lo take place from liednesday 27 October
to Sunday 7 November 1971 and in addition to visiting
Canberra, Sir Arthur and Lady Porritt are scheduled to have
time in Hobart, Melbourne and Sydney in that order.
Consultations are now taking place to prepare a
prograimme of engagements for the visit and an announcement
of these details will be made when an approved prograimme
has been decided.
CANBERRA 8 September 1971
BACKGROUND NOTE:
Sir Paul Hasluck's official visit to New Zealand in
February of this year was the first time, following an earlierapproval
from Buckingham Palace, that a Governor-General of
Australia had travelled abroad in his official capacity as
Head of his own country. T1he proposed State Visit by the
Governor-General of New Zealand later this year reciprocates
Sir Paul's visit. 



FOR PRESS. PT! No. 36/ 1971
CANCELLATrION OF SOUTh AFRICAN CRICKET TOUR
Statement by the Prime  Iinister, 7r. illiam , ciahon
Tne Government has consistently expressed
the view that visits of international sporting team-;;
should be arranged between the sporting bodies concerned
and that politics snould not be introduced into sport.
Grave practical difficulties are, however,
associated with the cricket tour. The Australian Cricket
Board is best able to assess these difficulties. It
has obviously taken account of the possibility that a
minority would be prepared to go to extremes to disrupt
the tour. I appreciate that the great majority of
Australians wanted the tour to proceed, but I recognise
the Board's problem in arranging a successful tour in
the face of the difficulties.
CAN! BERRA
8 September 1971 


PMNO. 87/1971
Two senior appointments in the Commonwealth PublicService were made today.
The appointments are those of Sir Frederick Wheeler asthe Secretary to the Department of the Treasury, to succeed Sir RichardRandall who will retire, and Mr A. S. Cooleyas Chairman of the PublicService Board in succession to Sir Frederick. Mr Cooley is at presentSecretary to the Department of Supply.
Both appointments are effective from 1 November 1971.Mr Cooley's appointment is for a term of five years in accordancewith the Public Service Act.
Both Sir Richard Randall and Sir Frederick Wheeler havebeen outstanding public servants of national and international standing.
Mr Cooley is also an outstanding public servant withlengthy experience in management in areas with a large and diversework force. An appointment to replace Mr Cooley will be made later.
CANBERRA,10 September 1971
(Attached PDF contains biographical information)


10 September1971
I should like to inform the House of the followingMinisterial arrangements.
Mr. Holten, in addition to his duties as Minister forRepatriation, will assist the Minister for Trade and Industry.
I have also made the following appointments ofAssistant Ministers:
The Prime Minister will be assisted by Mr. Dobie
The Minister for Primary Industry will beassisted by Mr. King
The Minister for Health and Leader of theGovernment in the Senate will be assistedby Senator Marriott;
The Postmaster-General will be assisted byMr. Robinson;
The Minister for Labour and National Servicewill be assisted by Mr. Street; and
The Minister for Civil Aviation will beassisted by Mr. McLeay.
Senator Marriott will take up his duties after hehas been sworn as a member of the Executive Council. Thiswill also apply to Mr. King on his return from overseas.



STATEMFNT B~ Y THE PRPIe MINISTER
THE P. T. HON. T;' ILLIYAl c-MAHON
IN THIE HOUSE OF REPR~ ESENTATIVES
INQUIRY INTO PARLIAM" ENTARY SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES
16 SEPTEMBER 1971
I inform the House that the Government has decided that there should be
an inquiry into Parliamentary salaries and allowances.
Parliamentary salaries and allowances were last adjusted in December 1968.
It will be generally accept'ed that there should be periodic reviews of
Parliamentary salaries and allowrances just as there are in other sectors of
the community. It has been represented to me from both sides of the House,
including strong recommendations from the Leader of the Opposition and the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition, at the request of their own Party, that
there should he a review at this time.
In the recent history of this matter, there have been three inquiries
held in 1952, in 1955 and in 1959.. Since then, in 1964 and in 1968, the
salary adjustments were made by decision of the Parliament itself.
The Government has decided that in this instance it should revert to the
inquiry method. We ' nropose that one of the terms of reference will be an
examination and report upon methods by w., hich Parliamentary salaries
and allowances may be determined in future.
The Government has decided to ask Mr. Justice Kerr to undertake this task.
He has accepted.
Mr. Justice Kerr was appointed a Judge of the Commonwealth Industrial
Court in 1966. As a Senior Counsel at the Bar, he had previously had an
extensive uractice in industrial matters. Mr. Justice Kerr is at present
Chairman of a five-man committee that the Government has appointed to inquire
into Pay and other conditions of service of members of the Armed Forces. He
has informed me that the Committee has a Planned programme for carrying out
the remainder of its inquiry and for the submission of its further report.
I have the Jud~ ge's firm assurance that the examination of Parliamentary
salaries he has now been asked to undertake will in no way delay the
completion of the work of the Armed Forces Pay Committee. That work will
proceed and will be carried to finality as originally planned.
The terms of reference of the inquiry will be-
To examine and report upon the salaries and allowances of
Senators and Members of the House of Representatives, and
those paid to Ministers and Senators and Mlembers who are
office-bearers of the Parliament;
If it be reported that it is necessary or desirable to alter
such salaries and allowances or any of them, then to recommend
the nature and extent of the alterations that should be made; and
To examine and report upon methods by which such salaries and
allowances may be determined in future. 



FOR PRESS
COMMONWEALTH/ STATE MINISTERS' MEETING ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Commonwealth and State Ministers, with responsibility
for environmental matters, met for the first time today in
Canberra. Those present were
Commonwealth N. S. W.
VIC. QLD. S. A.
W. A.
TAS. The Honourable Peter Howson, M. P.,
Minister for the Environment,
Aborigines and the Arts
The Honourable J. G. Beale, M. L. A,,
Minister for Environment Control
The Honourable V. 0. Dickie, M. L. C.,
Minister of State Development
The Honourable J. Bjelke-Petersen, M. L. A.,
Premier and Minister for State
Development
The Honourable G. R. Broomhill, M. H. A.,
Minister for Conservation
The Honourable J. T. Tonkin, M. L. A.,
Premier and Minister for Environmental
Protection
The Honourable K. 0. Lyons, M. H. A.,
Deputy Premier and Chief Secretary.
At today's meeting, Ministers exchanged information
on existing legislation and gave their views on the problems
of the environment in their areas and the steps that they
are formulating to protect it. It was recognised that the
State Governments have already been active in a wide range of
fields, including national parks, wildlife, water, soil and
forest conservation; and control of water and sewerage
systems and air, water, oil and noise pollution. / 2 
However, it was agreed that there was a continuing
need to combat pollution and to improve the quality of the
environment. Ministers discussed the means of continuing
Federal and State consultation and the degree to which
uniformity of approach was desirable.
The Ministers decided to meet again as soon as
possible and, they hope, before the end of the year.
Tentatively, they have arranged to meet on 26 November in
Perth at the invitation of the Premier of Western Australia.
In preparation for that meeting, Commonwealth and State
officers will draw up an agenda for their consideration and,
in the meantime, details of legislation and administrative
practice will be exchanged.
17 September 1971 



FOR PRESS PM NO. 88/ 1971
VISIT BY GOVERNOR-GENERAL TO IRAN
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Their Excellencies The Governor-General and
Lady Hasluck have accented an invitation from The Shah of
Iran to attend the 25th centenary celebrations of the
establishment of the Iranian Monarchy.
The celebrations, which are to be held in Persepolis
from 13 to 17 October, are being attended by Heads of State
from all parts of the world.
Those who have accepted invitations include the
Kings of Belgium, Denmnark, N'epal and Norway? the Presidents
of France, the Federal Republic of Germany, India, Italy,
Pakistan, the Phillippines, South Africa, the UDSR and
Yugoslavia and the Governor-eneral of Canada. Among those
representing Heads of State who have accepted invitations
is the Duke of 1dinburgh.
CANBERRA, 19 September, 1971. 



FOR PRESSPM. No. 8 91.1971
RETIREMENT OF SIR ALLEN BROWN
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
Sir Allen Brown, CBE, a farmer Ambassador tojapan
and, earlier, Permanent Head of tLie Prime Minister's Department
and Secretary to Cabinet, will retire from the Commonwealth Service
with effect from 30 September 1971.
Sir Allen has had a distinguished career with the
Commonwealth Service, holding a number of senior appointments and
showing himself to be an outstanding public servant both in Australia
and overseas. Sir Allen's appointments as Australian representative
on the Board of the British Phosphate Commissioners and Australian
Commissioner on the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission are
not affected by his retirement from the Commonwealth Service. Hie
will also be completing his current work as Chairman of the Committee
of Inquiry into Higher Education in the Territory of Papua and New
Guinea and as a Member of the Ddence Legal Services Committee.
CANBERRA, 26 September 1971 
BIOGRAPHICAL BACKGROUND ALLEN STANLEY BROWN
: 3 July 1911
Academic Qualifications
Decorations, Honours, Awards
History: Prior to 1942
1942-1944
1944-1948
1949 1949-1958
1959-1965
1965-1970
1970-1971 MA, LL. M, ACIA
CBE ( 1953), Kt. ( 1956)
: In legal practice
Executive Officer, later Assistant
Director, Rationing Commission
Chief Executive Officer, Department
of Post-War Reconstruction
Director -General, Department of
Post-War Reconstruction
Secretary, Prime Minister's
Department ( at that time including
role as Secretary to the Cabinet)
Deputy High Commissioner, London
Australian Ambassador to Japan
Chairman, Committee of Inquiry
into Higher Education in the
Territory of Papua and New Guinea
Member of the Defence Legal
Services Committee
Australian Representative on the
Board of the British Phosphate
Commissioners
Australian Commissioner on the
Christmas Island Phosphate
Commission
Date of Birth 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 90/ 1971
RE-APPOINTIMENT OF SIR ALEXANDER DOWNER
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Sir Alexander Downer, has been re-appointed
as High Commissioner for Australia in the United Kingdom
for a further term until 24 October 1972.
Sir Alexander has been serving Australia's interests
in the United Kingdom with great distinction for almost
seven years, and I am very grateful that he has agreed
to carry on for another year.
CANBE RRA
3 OCTOBER 1971 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE~ RT. HON. WILLIAM MCMAHON
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
COM4MONWEALTH ASSISTANCE FOR NURSING HOME PATIENTS OCTOBER 1971
For some time past now, the Government has been examining the
role of nursing homes in caring for the sick aged, their financial position
and the extent of Commonwealth financial assistance for all nursing
home patients. over the past five years, the number of nursing home beds has
increased from about 33,000 to about 47,000. There is no doubt that this
has resulted in a very significant improvement in the care of the sick
aged in Australia. The financial assistance provided by the Commonwealth for
nursing home patients, which amounted to nearly $ 50 million in 1970/ 71,
has been an important factor contributing to the growth of these homep and
to the overall raising of standards of care.
The assistance to be provided to those people requiring nursing
home care is an extiaordinarily complex question involving consideration
of the differing needs and circumstances of patients in various types of
homes. These homes are run by State Governments as well as by religiogs
and charitable organisations and by private proprietors.
As I. have inoicated, the present arrangements relating to the
care of, and assistance to, those requiring nursing home treatment have been
under review for-some time. We are continuing this review with the aim of
introducing new long terirt arrangements As soon as it is practicable to do
so. This, of course, will include consultation with State Governments
as necessary. We recognise that the recent steep increases in running costs,
notably in nurses' salaries, has placed many homes in an extremely difficult
financial position. Those homes relying largely on Commonwealth assistance
to patients through benefits or pensions have been hit particularly hard.
We have therefore decided, as 4~ n interim measure, to increase
nursing home benefits to take effect as soooi as the necessary legislation
is passed by Parliament and assented to.
Benefits for patients receiving ordinary nursing home care will
be increased from $ 2 per day to $ 3.50 per day or $ 24.50 per week. Benefits
for patients receiving intensive care will be increased from $ 5 per day to
$ 6.50 per day or $ 45.50 per week. The cost of these increases will be
approximately $ 24 million in a full year. The cst in 1971/ 72, which will
depend on the date of assent to the amending legislation to give effect to
the new legislation, will be of the order of $ 12 million to $ 14 million.
, This action is being taken in accordance with the Government's
overall policy of assisting the sick and the aged wherever areas of need
exist. Nursing home benefits are only one of the many provisions made
by the Commonwealth to help aged persons, and the increase in benefits
is to be seen in the context of the substantial assistance we are
providing in other ways. I refer to such measures as the age pension and
related payments, assistance with aged persons housing and assistance
provided through our home care programme.
within the limits necessarily imposed by available resources, it
is the policy of the Government to improve progressively the welfare of
elderly' citizens. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERYAUSTRlALIAN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATIONAN'NIVERSARY DIN4NER VICTORIAN BRANCIMIELBOURNE,VIC. 7 OCTOBER, 1971.SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTERMr. President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,When I look around this crowded room tonightI feel in great heart knowing that there are in everycommunity, good and able people, ready and willing tomake a deliberate effort to keep our vital friendshipsin good repair and to convince others to do the same.I am glad to be here tonight, Msr. Baxter, asthe guest of your association and its members for thisthirtieth anniversary celebration dinner of the VictorianBranch of the Australian-American Association.M4y wife and I have both travelled widelytogether in America and we are the first to acknowledgethe warmth and friendliness of its people and the greatnessof its achievements in the cavalcade of history. We haveshared many happy arnd exciting associations with our Americanfriends on the other side of the Pacific.Sir, we are delighted to see so many old friendshere tonight and if I may be forgiven for singling out twovery distinguished people I want to say it is wonderful tohave Lord and Lady Casey with us at this table. None knowsbetter than they how the links between Australia and Americahave been forged over the years and I doubt if anyone has doneas much as they have to make those links secure. I know whata strength Lord Casey has been to the Australian-American.Association since its earliest days. I do congratulate theAssociation on living this long life and one which I trusthas been a merry as well as a rewarding one. I am told, too,Sir, that the women's group and the Junior American Associationreally keep the men on their toes. Congratulations to you too.Now Sir, I hope you will forgive me for beingserious tonight but an anniversary occasion like this temptsme to look briefly over the past, and then, more particularlyto look forward into the future in our relationships withAmerica. .2/
2I think the pre' -eminent characteristic of theUnited Statlkes in the international comrmunity has been itsdeep sense of responsibility to work towards a more stableand equitable world order. It has given concrete evidenceof its readiness to make human and material sacrifices forthis purpose. It has given its blood and its treasure informidable quantities. That hasn't always been appreciatedand often not understood. If we can do something to explainand correct this we serve our own interests and take up aproper position as fair-minded people.It is easy to scoff at our democratic institutions.The way they .) ork and the things they do, be they of theAmerican, the British or the Australian order; And I quoteFranklin Roosevelt on this point. What he had to say was thisandI quote'-" I get everlastingly angry at those who assertvociferously that the four freedoms and theAtlantic Charter are nonsense because they areunattainable." if those people had lived a century arid a halfago they would have sneered and said that theDeclaration of independence was utter piffle." If they had lived nearly a thousand years agothey would have laughed uproariously at the idealsof Magna Carta.Ancz if they had lived several thousand yearsago they would have derided Moses when he camedown from t-he mountain with the Ten Commandments".ladies and Gentlemen, your Association was born inthe dark days of World War II and at that time, and in the yearssince then, the United States has been a significant, and ind~ eeda decisive, factor in our security. We must be grateful ' for thepartnership with the United States which prevented a possibleinvasion of Australia and led to the re-conquest of the Pacificby the allies. Australia was, of course, an essential base for operations.Then we must acknowledge the effective leadership given by theUnited States checking communist aggression in Korea and inVietnam. We signed the Anzus Treaty wnith them and to this daythat Treaty ranks as our most important Treaty.I have travelled the Pacific many times. I have seenthe distance shrink as the jets have devoured the space and Ihave seen South-East Asia change from a region of turbulenceto one with a more settled and confident prospect.I have sat in the Australian Cabinet for many yearsand joined in the vital decisions we have taken to identifyourselves more deliberately and more closely with the region towhich geographically we belong. .3/
-3one of the essential elements in our policy towardsSouth East Asia has been the Australian-Amierican alliance.It is of crucial importance to our foreign folic7. This willcontinue to be a basic element of our policy, but the changednature of the political situation in South East Asia mustcarry with it changes in the nature of our relationship withthe United States in that region.The United States and Australia have sir~ illar objoctives.We should both like * to see a region which is stable politically,developing rapidly economically and within which the peoplesare free to choose their own forms of governments. NeverthelessAustralia must recognise that its own particular interests in thispart of the world may call for different judgements on its partfrom those of the United States.Let us look at some of the chanaes that have occurredwithin our own part of the world. The first which hasreceived widespread publicity has been the change in UnitedStates policy itself, broadly encompassed under what is knownas the Nixon Doctrine.Clearly the United States is no longer prepared toattempt alone and on a global ecale the containment ofaggression and the construction of a reasonably stable frame=work of international co-operation. While maintaining itsgeneral support and protection, it has called upon the countriesof the region to do more to help themselves. rle accept this,and the challenge and responsibility of greater self-reliance.The second major change within the South-East Asia regionhas been the re-emergence of tha influence of powers other thanthe United States. This re-emergence has begun to complicatethe ' international political situation.Japan with its enormous economic strength is in a positionto make a major contribution to the development of the region.It has regained its international confidence, and its relationswith South-East Asian countries will be increasingly importantin the political equations of the area.The People's Republic of China appears to be giving-lessemphasis to the rigidities of ideology in the conduct of itsforeign policy and to be showing a new interest in the establishmentof more traditional diplomatic and commercial relationships.Russia, too, has begun to try to increase its influencein the area, and to seek closer ties with South East AsianGovernments. All these moves are only to be expected;, greatpowers have always interested themselves in affairs outsidetheir own borders, and will continue to do so. ./ 4
The third major change that I shall note in theregion has been the establishment of increasingly confidentand capable national governments, dedicated to the objectivesof economic progress, social welfare and regional co-operation.This is a development which has been made possible in largemeasure by successful allied resistance to the aggressionagainst South Vietnam.Most of the peoples of the countries of the regionhave now established their national identity and have installedgovernments capable of planning their futures, and resisting,with a minimum of outside assistance, efforts by minority groupsto overthrow the national political order.Of one thing I am sure, in the period that lies ahead,the need for consultation between us will not be less, butgreater. Increasingly with our political and defence relations,other aspects of our relationship with the United States can beexpected to assume greater importance for example trade,investment, civil aviation.In the process, differences between us are bound toarise but there is no reason why we cannot continue to discussthem fully and frankly, as we have in the past, and in a spiritof give and take. This is what a partnership is for.We look forward to a future where the United StatescQntinues to take a wise and constructive role in theachievement of a peaceful world order and we expect to makeour own individual and independent contribution to therealisation of the same objective.We have shared the dangers of the past in friendship.Let us share, in the same way, the promise of the future.I thank you. 1ZI



ATLAS COPCO OPENING OF NEW PLANT
BLACKTOWN N. S. W.
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Ladies and Gentlemen: 11Otbr97
Thank you Sir-Ian for referring to my friendship with
Dr. Wallenberg. I know him primarily as a very distinguished member
of the banking community, and a financier of international repute.
And I also know him but in a lesser way as an industrialist. So
I looked forward, when I was invited here, to being able to renew
my acquaintance with him. And I hope at the same time, to be able
to try and get his impressions of what is happening in the international
O maobnoevet arayll , m arwkheetns , w e whcaenn wheo pec anf orh opteh e foArm erai craena lisgunrcmheanrtg eo f onp ariimtpioerst, s and
to be removed. I
But that meeting will be delayed. I hope it's in the not
too distant future that I'll be able to meet him again.
And Sir Ian, if I can . thank you particularly when you
referred to compression, compressed air and similar matters, that
you did it in an industrial context, and not in the context in front
of my colleagues of compressed air in the Federal Parliament. I
can assure you, we're grateful that this subject wasn't raised
with all the implications it has for my colleagues on the other side
of the House and for myself.
But having said all that, may I join with you Sir Ian, in
hoping that in the not too distant future we will be able to get a
resolution of world parities in the international money markets.
Because I believe that while it doesn't interfere with us to any
great extent at the moment, nonetheless, it does interfere with the
free flow of world trade, and consequently if it proceeds over a
very long period of time, it must effect us. It effects us indirectly
because it will effect the trade of the developing countries and
for that matter, all the developed countries as well.
And I can add to that that I do hope this surcharge that has
been imposed is also removed in double-quick time, because of the
impact that it can have, and the reaction that is likely to be-caused
in other countries if it is not taken off very quickly. The Americans,
we know, have a major problem a very big one because their
balance of payments deficit is a huge one. But other countries are,
I am sure, looking at it in a realistic way. We want all countries to be
able to play their part in trying to come to a speedy resolution for
all of us. But now, Sir, may I turn to the substance of what I wanted
to say to you here today. And the first point that I want to mention
is that we do welcome our friends from Sweden and , their new enterprise.
This enterprise Atlas Copco brings with it a very famous Sviedish
name. It is associated with the name of Wallenberg and that name is
very well known in this country of ours. / 2 
Now I'm sure of this. That because of the management
techniques that are so well-known to your Corporation, because
of the new type of product it is now introducing, that it will
be a great asset to this country. And one I can assure you
that as an Acting Treasurer and as a Prime Minister, we welcome.
Now the second reason why I want to welcome you here
is a pleasant one. You mentioned the word growth. We like to
use three different phrases together, or three different words
together growth, progress and prosperity. 7,
And I believe that not only do we ensure growth in
the material sense as a result of the establishment of these new
sections of your factory, but it will also add to our progress
in this community, and I think to the prosperity of many, many
sections of our people as well. Because a new plant does mean
progress, and a new plant does give a demonstration from overseas,
and capital is a very sensitive thing and usually works in
those places where it can get the best and the most stable return.
But it also demonstrates the confidence of your own people, and
the management of your own people in Sweden in the future
prosperity of this country.
There is another reason too and I'll have to come
back to what both you and Sir Ian said a few moments ago -and
this does give me the opportunity for a little propaganda -that
whilst at the moment we have a very satisfactory trade balance
and we've got a very happy balance of payments surplus at the
moment too, nonetheless, we do want to be able to ensure, that
over a long period, we can not only have trade surplusses, but
the problem of balance of payments difficulties will be banished
for all time. Now I think you know Sir, that so far as our direct trade
with Sweden is concerned, we export to you only a little less than
one sixth of what you export to us. And so consequently we've
always looked forward with a great deal of pleasure to the day
when industries could be established here that could in some way,
rectify to a moderate extent the difference in the balance of
payments between the two countries.
Naturally I a4leased to be able to say in your
presence, and in the presence of Sir Ian as well, that last year
our trade increased by something of the order of thirty per cent.
So we can look forward in the days to come in an improvement in
the balance. But what is much more important to us is that you are
engaging in new activities and that those activities will in
the future permit us together to improve the export trade.
And again if I can refer to Sir Ian in a very favourable
way. On the last two-occasions when I've had the pleasure of
meeting him in Canberra, he's advised me of' the kind ofa. ctivities
that he is engaged in. And he gave me an insight at least into
one industry, that was exclusively oriented towards the export
markets. I believe Sir, that your Corporation is oriented to
export markets as well. 
Now when I heard of these ideas and these new enterprises, I
couldn't help but think of the words " taking coals to Newcastle". It's
not so many generations ago when nobody thought it was within the bounds
of contemplation that anyone could shift coals to Newcastle. But we in
this country seem to be developing the facilties to move all sorts of
commodities to all sorts of hitherto unexpected places. We export quite
a lot of spaghetti to Italy. We send a lot of our flowers to Holland.
And I am pleased to be able to state, that as a result of some discussions
I have had in Melbournewithin the course of the last few weeks that
we are now sending knives and forks to Sheffield.
So you can see, Sir, that we are getting heavily engaged in
international trade and we are doing so in a very sensible way..
But today I don't want to refer principally to these matters of
trade. To an audience as distinguished as this, and one heavily involved
S in the problem of industrial management and productivity, I want to
Vmention three matters that I regard to be of crucial importance to us
ones that have to be solved.
The first one involves this Corporation in the same way as
it involves every other corporation manufacturing goods in AustralhV
And the problem that we face today is this. That now for a little
more than a year, probably approaching a period of about two years,
we have had wild-cat strikes, unpredictable wild-cat strikes of a size,
of a dimension that I believe are cutting back our prospects for
production in the future. And they are most certainly reducing our
productivity and therefore the very basis on which we are able to get
a reduction of costs and one of the instruments through which we can
effect inflation. Now many of them, and I want to emphasise these
words, are strikes that are purely based upon domestic political
Srequirements that have no association whatsoever with the idea that they
can win greater pay packets and more purchasing power for the people
who might be employed in the industry involved.
They're certainly helping prices to go up. Looked at in the
other way, they're not helping us to keep prices down. And I repeat it
again, because it is of basic importance to us : It is one of the
greatest impediments that we have to keeping inflationary forces under
restraint. And equally too, because of the difficulties it creates, the
uncertainties it creates in the minds of so many people, I think it
is preventing domestic demand from increasing at a moderate pace and
in a way in which I can assure you we would like it to increase at the
moment. But coming back to this problem of political and other industrial
wild-cat strikes the point that I want to make here today is that last
year the working man lost $ 31 million because of industrial disputes.
That is three times more than they lost in 1967. It's an appalling record
and it's an appalling record against the backgroun ' d that average earnings,
and if you like average wages, are increasing at an unprecedented pace.
Now my worry, and it's one of the biggest worries, is that it's
left-wing and communist controlled unions, that are, I believe, probably
responsible for more of the strikes than from any other section of
the community-. / 4 
But I also want to emphasise that I do not believe that the
great majority of working men want these strikes to continue. They
want to get on with the job. They want prices to be fairly stable.
They want to be able to look after their families. And consequently
it must be our responsibility as the Government to try and ensure that
it is the wish of the working man that prevails and not the wish of
their left-wing supporters.
And the second point I want to mention concerns what is funadmental
to industrial success. And that is our system of arbitration. Now this
is a system that most of you know has stood us in very good stead ever
since the arbitration system was established. As a member of a Cabinet,
who for eight years was responsible for the Department of Labour and
National Service, I can assure you that I developed a respect for the
system of arbitration. I know the advantages that it can bring. And
it must be our responsibility as a Government to try and strengthen that
system, and not permit others to destroy it, or weaken it. We must
ensure that objective if it is practical.
The arbitration system has served Australians remarkably well.
._ Ihats banished sweated labour into the recesses of history. It brought
W a degree of equality in payment-for work performed that could not be
brought by any other system. There is one regret that I have at the
moment, and it is a very deep regret. It is the way in which under the
present system of settlement of industrial disputes the rewards
are not going within a fair degree of equality to all workers, but are
going into the hands of those where the industrial might and strength
is the greatest and where they can use the greatest muscle in order
to wring rewards out of employers.
But I don't for one moment think that this is the end of the
problem. I can assure you that we are doing all in our power now, to be
able to contemplate first of all, and finally to be able to bring
reforms to Parliament in order to strengthen arbitration and to look at
the whole system of industrial strength to see what advantage we can
obtain from it.
* And whenlI look at this I want to assure you that the system of
sanctions must remain as an essential element in the arbitral machinery.
And they must apply, not only to the employee or to the trade unionist,
but as you know as well as I do, they have to apply to the employer as
well. Now I can't stress too strongly how fundamental the preservation
of the arbitration system is to industrial peace and stability. I want
to assiire you that we will do all in our power to sustain arbitration.
We will not permit it to be destroyed.
So I must urge you not to sell it short. Don't drop it because
you've nothing better to put in its place. Don't nege it, or don't
please I ask you, let it fail by lack of use.
The final point I want to put to you, and this is one, 1-believe,
Sir, will appeal to you. That is the problem of productivity. All of
us, I think, understand this problem of productivity and inflation. But
the moment there is any increase in average incomes or earnings that is
greater than the increase in producitivity, then naturally enough you
do get an inflationary pressure. Something of the order of 6 or 7 per cen.
today that is the difference between the growth in productivity
and'-'-he growth in average earnings. 
Now what we want to attempt to do, although it is a very difficult
objective, is to try and reduce the gap to the maximum extent that we
can do. Not that we believe it is a tolerable alternative, because we
don't think we can. But what we want to do is to reduce the gap so
that we get a degree of inflation that is acceptable and one that
can be readily absorbed in the international community.
The next point that I want to make to you about productivity is
this It doesn't necessarily mean more work. It doesn't-necessarily
mean more work. It doesn't necessarily mean that you work harder. It
has, Mr. Johnsson, as you so clearly implied, meant that you have to
work with a greater degree of efficiency. And it is for this, and for
other reasons why we welcome your Corporation coming here. Because we
do feel from what we have heard and what I have seen, that you would
introduce efficiency into the management of this plant.
Now Mr. Chairman, I haven't had a good look around this
factory. I regret to say I have to go to Canberra quite soon. But from
what I have read, particularly from the little pamphlet that was sent
to me a few days ago, I can assure you that I recognise the degree of
efficiency that you show.
I know of the management and labour skills that you have in
this factory in Blacktown.
I believe the manufacturing industries of Australia are making
a magnificent contribution to our growing industrial greatness. They
are providing resourceful and skilful service, and they are doing much
to strengthen our self-reliance as a nation. This new plant today adds
to their number and their diversity. 



FOR PRESS PM No. 93/ 1971
PENSION INCREASES
SUPERANNUATION AND DEFE1VCE FORCES
RETIREMENT BENEFITS FUND
The Prime Minister and Acting Treasurer,
Mr. William McMahon, announced today that, arising from
the Superannuation ( Pension Increases) Act 1971 and the
Defence Forces Retirement Benefits ( Pension Increases)
Act 1971, which were recently passed by the Parliament, the
pensions of retired Coimmonwealth employees and retired
members of the Defence Forces will be increased from pension
payday 14 October 1971. The increases are related to the
level of salaries that applied at 30 June 1971 and appropr~ ate
increases will also be paid to widows and certain orphans.
Ur. McMahon said that the Superannuation and
Defence Forces Retirement Benefits Boards have arranged for
the payment of the increases to those who are eligible with
their normal pension payments on 14 October 1971. While
about 33,000 pensioners will receive their increases on that
date, there are about 250 pensioners who, because of the
complexities attaching to their individual cases and the
magnitudo of the overall task, may have to wait a short time,
until the subsequent pension payday, for the payment of the
increase. CANBERRA 11 October 1971 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Ministers
ON
Report of the Commonwealth Administrative
Review Committee
Ministerial Statement
i[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 14 October 1971]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
( 1 1.30)--For the information of honourable
members I present the report of
the Commonwealth Administrative Review
Committee. The Committee was composed
of a group of eminent Australian lawyers.
It was charged with recommending to the
Government the procedures by which
administrative decisions could be reviewed
either in law or on their merits. The members
of the Committee were: Mr Justice
Kerr, a member of the Commonwealth
Industrial Court, as Chairman; Mr Justice
Mason, who was farst appointed to the
Committee in his capacity at the time as
the Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth
and who continued lo be a member of
the Committee following his appointment
in 1969 as a Judge of Appeal of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales; Mr
R. J. Ellicott, who joined the Committee
on his appointment as Solicitor-
General of the Commonwealth on 15th May
1969; and Professor J. Whitmore, presently
Dean of the Faculty of Law in -the Australian
National University and an acknowledged
authority on administrative law.
The report is a valuable contribution to
Australian study of the subject of
administrative review. It reflects the considerable
expertise and industry which the members of the Committee brought to their
task. A glance at the chapter headings of the
report will serve to indicate the breadth
of the Committee's consideration of the
matters referred to it. The report canvasses
the problems associated with the review
of administrative decisions. Against the
background of experience in some overseas
countries, it discusses the efficacy of
traditional means of redress of grievances,
including by representations by members
of the Parliament. It notes the steps taken
by -the Parliament itself in particular
statutes -to provide for review of the decisions
of administrative tribunals. It examines
the adequacy of the traditional review
procedures through the courts by the prerogative
writs of mandamus, prohibition
and certiorari. The Committee has concluded
that a Commonwealth administrative
court should be established to provide a
means for judicial review of the decisions
of Commonwealth Ministers, officials and
administrative bodies. The jurisdiction of
the court would be limited to judicial
review on legal grounds. Alongside the
court would be established an administrative
review tribunal. The tribunal wou~ d,
in appropriate cases, review on the merits
the exercise of administrative discretions
under Commonwealth statutes and reguladons. 
In addition, the report outlines a proposal
for an administrative review council. The
council would be charged with supervising
the procedures of administrative tribuals,
and with making recommendations as to the
administrative discretions to be reviewed on
their merits by the tribunal. The tribunal
would be assisted by a general counsel for
grievances and a small research staff. The
general counsel for grievances would be a
member of the council and have a right of
audience before both the Commonwealth
administrative court and the administrative
review tribunal. It can be seen that the
Committee has produced a report wh.*' zh
sets out in an informed and elegant fashion
a comprehensive structure for administrative
review. Even from this summary honourable
members will appreciate that the report will
require considerable study. We have decided
to make it available at this stage in order
to promote informed and considered discussion
in the Parliament and in public,
academic and professional circles.
The Government has not had an
opportunity to consider the report in detail.
But we have decided that immediate action
on 2 fronts is appropriate. A group of 3
people will be appointed to examine existing
administrative discretions under Commonwealth
statutes and regulations and to advise
the Government as to those in respect of
which it considers a review on the merits
should be provided. This study of needs will
proceed immediately, and ahead of any
decisions about further aspects of the
report. We intend that the group to study
and make recommendations on the review
of administrative discretions under statute
and regulations will be constituted at a high
level. It will include perhaps one member
of the Committee whose report is now
being tabled, a very senior and experienced
public servant or ex-public servant and
perhaps one other with wide experience in
the legal, political or administrative fields.
In the light of the recommendations from
the group and of responses from those
interested in the report now tabled, the
Government will be able to determine in
detail what additional arrangements for
administrative review may be necessary.
In addition, the Government has decided
to ask the Attorney-General ( Senator
Greenwood) to institute a review of the
prerogative writ procedures available in the courts. We accept the comment of the
Committee that the legal grounds on which
remedies can at present be obtained are
limited and often complicated. The
Attorney-General's review of remedies available
in the courts will take place concurrently
with the study I have mentioned
of the existing range of administrative
discretions under statute or regulation. This
review should also lead to recommendations
which the Government will consider. The
Government believes that these two
immediate decisions relating to the report
of the Commonwealth Administrativie
review committee will be taken as a
tangible demonstration of the significance it
attaches to the protection of the rights of
individuals at a time when governments
exercise extensive powers on their behalf.
I think it appropriate to add at this stage
2 comments. The first is that this report
should be of particular concern to members
of the Parliament. They themselves have a
significant role in the review and criticism
of the administrative processes. It is important
that their own role be regarded as
central and that any steps taken in response
to the report should have this in mind. My
second comment relates to the possibility
of these reforms causing delays in the
administrative process. The Government,
and the Commonwealth Service, are often
criticised for delays that occur in administration.
In large part, these are due to the
need for co-ordination and for clearance to
ensure that all aspects of any particular
matter are fully considered. It must be
recognised that any substantial extension of
institutions and procedures for the formal
review of administrative action will in the
nature of things add materially both to the
time taken in the administrative process
and to the costs it entails. I need not
remind honourable members that speed and
efficiency in the conduct of Government
business are important both for the
Government itself and for those who rely
on decisions of the Government. I believe
honourable members will welcome the
report and the action the Government
proposes to take. I commend the report to
the House for consideration. I present the
following paper:
Report of the Commonwealth Administrative
Review Commi ttee-Ministerial Statement,-14ti
October 1971.
21441/ 712 t44G17. IMWu. n Ruy, Government Printer, Canberra 



FOR PRESS: PI. No. 94/ 1971
VISIT TO UNITED STATES AND BRITAIN
Statement by the Prime Minister, ' Tr. William . IcMahon
The following statement is being issued
simultaneously in Washington and Canberra.-
' In pursuance of the continuous consultations
that occur between the two Governments, the Prime
Minister of Australia will visit Washington at the
invitation of President ilon and have discussions
with him on 2 November on matters of mutual concern."
The Prime Minister of Britain, 3Ir. Edward
Heath, invited me upon my appointment as Prime Minister, to
visit Britain for discussions.
I informed Heath that although I could not
accept the invitation immediately, I would do so as soon as it
became practicable. We have now agreed that I should visit the
United Kingdom as part of my forthcoming journey.
In the circumstances that exist, it is
appropriate that I should visit both London and Washington.
CANBERRA. 17 October, 1971. 



FOR PRESS. PM. No. 95/ 1971
VISIT OF NEW ZEALAND GOVERNOR-GENERAL
The Governor-General of New Zealand, Sir Arthur
Porritt, and Lady Porritt will r-ake a State Visit to
Australia from October 27 to November 7.
It will be the first official visit to Australia
by the vice-regal couple and is being made at the invitation
of the Governor-General of Australia, Sir Paul Haslucko
Sir Paul and Lady Hasluck visited New Zealand in
February and the exchange of visits, the first of its kind,
is seen as a useful part of a policy of maintaining close
relationships between New Zealand and Australia.
During the visit Sir Arthur and Lady Porritt will
visit Sydney, Canberra, Melbourne, Hobart, Bathurst and the
Blue Mountains. In Canberra their programme includes a Government
reception at Parliament House, an inspection of ' Merryville'
and ' Hillview' properties and a visit to the Australian War
Memorial. They will attend the Melbourne Cup meeting on
November 2 and during their time in New South Wales will tour
the Blue Mountains and Jenolan Caves.
Sir Arthur, a Rhodes scholar and international
sportsman, is the first native-born representative of the
Crown in New Zealand.
An outstanding athlete, he was the first member
or the New Zealand team to win an Olympic Medal in a track
and field event, gaining a bronze medal in the 100 metres at
the 1924 Olympic Games in Paris.
He has been Serjeant-General to the Queen since
1952 and earlier was a surgeon to King George Vl from 1946 to
1952. Sir Arthur and Lady Porritt will undertake the
following itinerary while in Australia:-
Wednesday, October 27 a. m. Wellington/ Sydney/ Canberra
Saturday, October 30 a. m Canberra/ Hobart
Monday, November 1 a. m. Hobart/ Melbourne
Thursday, November 4 a. m. Melbourne/ Blue Mountains
Friday, November 5 a. m. Blue Mountains/ Sydney
Sunday, November 7 a. m. Leave Sydney
CANBERRA October, 1971.
BACKGROUND: The Commonwealth Pres Liaison Officer for the
visit is Mr. G. Dixon of the Canberra Office of the Australian
News and Information Bureau. He may be contacted at telephone612123 



FORl PRESS PM No. 96/ 1971.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX SEPTEMBER QUARTER 1971
Statement by the Prime " Linister, Mr. W. illiam MlcMahon
It is perfectly obvious that this further rise in the
Consumer Price Index is predominantly due to cost increases which
have been brought about, directly and indirectly, by very large wage
increases. For example, the big lift in the Index for Sydney largely
reflects increases m ade Lby the Government of New South Wales in fares,
hospital charges and the like. But these were rendered inescapable'by
steep preceding increases in wages and salaries to State employees.
The same sort of influence shows up in the rise of
1.6 per cent for the quarter in the housing component of the Index
for Australia as a whole. This reflects rising costs of building
labour and of building materials.
It is therefore plainly absurd for t--he Leader of the
Opposition to attribute the rise in consumer prices to the policies
of the Government. We have been doing everything in our power to
restrain the underlying forces which have caused these price movements.
In particular we have sought to induce both employers and employees
to observe greater moderation in wage settlements. I am certain that
the great majority of intelligent ' people in the community perceive
the connection between wage increases and price increases and appreciate
the futility of the reckless industrial policies advocated by Mr.
Whitlam and his industrial backers.
If they were genuinely concerned to bring about cost and
price stability in our economy they would be exerting themselves to
achieve the same sort of moderation as the Government has advocated.
This applies especially to the President of the Mr. Hawke.
It is along these lines that Mr. WAhitlam and he could malUng a re-4l
contribution to stability and thero fore to the wellbeing of the
Australian public. In the Budget we directed attention to the fact that
costs and prices were rising under the influence of excessive wage
increases and we shaped our Budget strategy to bring about greater
restraint on these and other cost factors. The rise in the Consumer
Price Index in the last quarter has proved that the diagnosis on which
our Budget was founded was entirely correct.
CANBERRA, October, 1971. 



TfkC~
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THlE PRIME MINISTER,
MR WILLIAM McMAIION, AT PARLIAMENT HJOUSE,
CANBERRA, ACT. 21 OCTOBER 1971
Q. Have you seen anyone down here today from the
Treasury, Prime Minister?
PM: Yes.
Q. What line of discussions have you had, may I ask?
PM4: I wanted to find out what their version of the consumer
index was.
Q. What is it?
PM: They explained tL-he figures Lo me, particular the sharp
increase that occurred in New South Wales as the result of
the increase in fares and the increases that had occurred
over the whole of Australia because of the impact of
increases in health charges. The greater part of these
were due to wage increases. They also went through the
various other elements of the September Index ith me.
But I.. have.. given you my impression of what their thinking was.
It then became clear that if you had removed the special
influence of New South Wales special influences relating
to New South Wales that the rate of increase would not
appear to be anywhere near as sharp -or as sharp if you
could put it a little more accurate -as the raw figures
-would indicate.
Q. Did they make any predictions about what the December
quarter would bring in view of increases in State Bu&amp; c ets
Pm: I raise. this question myself and I obtained verification
of my own views that the December quarter while being
speculative at this moment could at least be expected to be
quite substantial because of the impact of the Commonwealth
Budget figures were not felt in the September quarter, as the 
collection of the data occurred in the middle of August and
the Budget didn't come down until a little later, and that
the effc-ct of Budget changes in the Victorian Budget would
not be written in until the December index figures became
available.
Q. Does this mean that a substantial increase in the
December quarter won't prompt the Government to tak,-e any
action on the economy?
PM: I will not make any statement there, but again it
must be obvious that in the December quarter, most of the
impact also will be substantially due, or as put last night,
directly or indirectly due to the impact of wage increases,
and not as the result of an increase in demand. Nowi what would
happen then in the March quatter March and June quarterswill
largely depend on the National Wage Case, if the decision
is out by that time. vOUia re
Q. Sir, Mr Lynch has made it clear Nk%, xis/ oing to do
something about the Arbitration Act tightening it up.
Do you think what you do there will have an effect on
the cost of living? Will you be able to pull it into line
through action on wages?
. P. M: You are taking it over a very broad cnnvas.
As yet, we haven't made our decision, so the question is
hypothetical, and one to which you couldn't give an answer
that is sufficiently exact. But it is as I said, in my
view and in the view of the officials and those participated
in the drafting of the Budget, the forecasts that we made then
are turning out to be correct with this one exception that
demand is not quite as strong as w~ e would like it to be.
B ut the economy is a healthy one, our overceas balances are
strong, our overseas trade is going along~ well, and personal
savings are particularly high. What is-needed is a little
more confidence. If this confidence was there, then I am
sure the economy could be brought quid-y to a pretty healthy
state. 
Q. Any idea how you are going to instil that confidence,
Prime Minister?
PM: Talkabout it. There is a wonder: ful phrase that was
once used by Roosevelt: " The only thing we have to fear is
fear itself". And I think that applies pretty well to
Australia's position today.
Q. You are not planning any other definite measures to
increase consumer spending, for example?
PM: Naturally, and I have said this before, we are
watching the economy vary carefully. We have plenty of scope
for revision and we could act quickly should we feel the time
was right to do so. I can give this assurance that I, in
particular, the Treasury officials and the Reserve Bank are
watching the figures very closely, and I have had at least
two very thoroughgoing discussions with them during the course
of the last four weeks.
Q. Do the present employment figures, in the light of this
Index rise, present you with any trouble, or do you pL-opose
to take any amelioratory steps at this stage?
PM: Not immediately. But I have said to you that I have
had thoroughgoing discussi ons with all the officials recently
and in particular, we will have a national income and
expenditure forecast presented to the Government quite soon.
Those are the figures that will be important to us in consideringj
what we should do.
Q. You have asked for this specifically, Prime Minister,
have you?
PM: I did some weeks ago.
Q. How far ahead does this project? Is it a projection
on the rest of the financial year? I-
PM I don't know how long a projection it will be, but it
is a projection.
Q. When do you think you % vill get it? After this trip or
before?
PM: Q. PM: Q. PM: Not before, no, I don't think so. I think I would be
extremely lucky, although I have been asking them to hurry up
with it. But these have got to be done with a great deal of
thoroughness and care, and I think you might get a surprise
a pleasant surprise when we see the next employment figures.
Have they indicated to you that there are already
indications that things might not be following the same pattern
we saw in September?
Don't let me get too speculative, but I do my homework.
an I know all the people in the employment offices, and I
never hesitate to contact them personally.
' What would give you a pleasant surprise a small drop
or a small rise, or what?
The figures that I would be looking at would be see to
whether the October figures accorded with the pattern of the
October figures for previous years..
The pattern being an improvement in tlesituation in
October usually? It is usually avery small increase in registrants
look I couldn't explain them accurately to you because I haven't
got them in front of me, but they are usually somewhat neutral
figures. And I will be interested to see what does happen.
We won't have the figures after all until the second wveek in
November.
Q. PM: 
Q. Is that time, therefore the second week in Novemberwhen
you have to sit down and decide whether the Go-rnment
PM:
Q. That will be an important week for us, yes.
Does that mean the Government will get the income and
expenditure That I couldn't tell you. As I have said,
extremely difficult analysis to make, and one that
done with a great degree of thoroughness and care.
been asking them to hurry up with the analysis for
prepared to. make them ( 3to too rushed a job. I want
analysis I can get. it is an
has to be
W hilst I have
me, I am not
the best
Q. You will still be away then, won't you?
PM: Look I have said to you.. no, that isn't correct.
Let me correct you, because I said I didn't know when it was
coming forward.
Q. No, I just meant that second week
Interjection : The employment figures will be out in that second week.
PM: Oh, the employment figures. Yes, they would come out
in the second week. It would only be within a day or two of
my cominq back.
Q. PM:
Q. PM: Prime Minister, just what degree of concern do you
feel about the state of the economy?
I have said to you already that the economy is in a
healthy state.
You are not concerned?
Of course I am concerned. Any politician whoever loses
a capacity toib concerned would be a strange one. Of course
PM: 
I look at the figures with care but I know that the greatest
problem of all that we have to solve is of inflation.
And we are doing the best we can to.-try and solve. Many
people are now conccding for the first time that what we
have said is correct. For example, if you look at today's
papers, there is a-very good... . and if you would like to
look, for example, at an article by Professor K. J. Hancock
in the " Financial Review" of 19 October, he says in this
context: " Given that the Government takes the view that
some deflationary counter to inflation is desirable
it is hard to see the logic of those who assert tha-' the
Government's Budgetary policy is misconceived."
I think you ought all know these. And the statement of the
National Bank today believes that " the economic slow-down
of the past year has been caused by the conservatism of
individuals in the personal sector as a whole." These
are very important statements because now it is becoming
understood by so many. The cause is there. The cause
is a very real one and we have tried to the best of our
ability to ensure that we bring inflation, particularly
wage inflation, under control under relative controland
I believe we are on the way to succeeding.
Q. You said one of the things you are going to do about
the economy is to talk. Have you considered going on
national television or radio and trying to undo the message
that was given to people in January and February?
PM: No, I don't think I have. But I don't want to push
this too far. I have I suggested to the ABC
I might go on, but they had a programme filled up and then
I was going away. I couldn't finalise the arrangements
with them. But I have made arrangements... I1 thought I
would be having a press conference on Wednesday before I
went, and I would do exactly the same then as I am doing
now, saying a little more confidence is what we need to
get demand back because the potential for demand is
pretty high and personal savings and disposable income
will permit some increase in demand. But again, if you 
start to look at the figure. Look at Waltons' figures
today for retail sales. They were surprisingly high. So
production figures are pretty good. You know, the figures
are not As clear-cut yet, for anyone to be able Ito be precise,
I don't care who hie is.
Q. Prime Minister, you mentioned Professor Hancock's speech
the other night to the Economics Society. Although it is
quite correct what you did quote, the main burden of hispaper
was there was a strong chance the Arbitration Commission would
no longer have the small degree of control it at present has
over the wages policy, because the MTIA would perhaps go outside
the Arbitration system. Are you concerned with this possibility
which seiems to flow from the decision in the Carpenters' case,
that we may have the MTIA having sweetheart agreements outside
the Arbitration Commission in addition to the National Wage
Case and setting a case in which the Government cannot even
make representations as it can do now with the Arbitration
Commission.
PM: Yes I am disturbed by it and I will be seeing Mr Cilarkson
tomorrow. He hasn't indicated to me he wants to see me about it
but I presume it would be in connection with the Nati-nal
Employers policy decisions as to what they intended to do
with Arbitraition. I think i't would be a retrograde step if
they were to have negotiations with the Metal Trades Industries
outside the Commission and later on went to the Commission
itself and tried to get a national wage increase. It could
be extremely dangerous and would introduce a policy that
wouldn't be in the best interests of this country and certainly
wouldn't be in the best interests of the working man.
Q. * Have you considered the idea of using corporation powers
to enlarge the powers of the Arbitration Commission in your
Hkkadxiniiwx present review of the Arbitration Commission?
PM: I don't think you can. In fact the Arbitration power
is a separate placitum of the Constitution, and gives the
power to legislate for the peace, order and good gover.:-Aent
of the country, and we can only legislate with regard to
Arbitration. We cannot affect the Arbitration decision 1~' 
itself. We must leave them free to make up their minds what
they think is right.
Q. i thought the corpofation power, and of course it is
the subject of wide discussion outside the corporation
power might give the Government greater control over an
institution such as the Arbitration Commission operating
as an incomes board, being able to set maximum rates as well
as minimum.
PM: I don't think so. It has never been suggested to me
and on the plain meaning of the words, I doubt whether that
interpretation is.-right. 4" U g~
good
Q. To change the subject You have had a/ view of the
fasters. What do you think of Paul Ponoermo's actions-.
he was taken to hospital today?
PM: I have been very worried about him-i. Very worried.
I did, as I mentioned in the House, ask the Speaker if
he would make arrangements to ensure that whatever facilities
were available to them were made available, partic. ilarly if
they wanted to have a wash, if they wanted somewhere they
could change, that they would be able to do so. I also made
enquiries yesterday to see that he was watched carefully
to ensure that he didn't come to any harm. And I checked
again this morning to ensure that lie was watched. I was
later on informed that some of ) Js friends had arranged for
the ambulance to take him to hospital. But I have been
worried about him, very worried.
Q. You had him watched in the medical sense?
PM: In the medical sense, yes. I thought if~ he we're not
eating that he could damage to himself, and I didn't want that
to happen. 
Q. What about this question of increasing aid to
million, have you thoughtc-out that?
PM: Yes, it is only recently that we made the decision
about the increase of $ 11 million, and both the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and I have answered questions about it in
the House. I have also discussed it again with Mr Bowen
this morning.
Q. Can we expect further announcements?
PM: I can't make any other statement about it.
Q. Did you discuss the possibility of increase?
PM: I won't go any further.
Q. Was this in the light of the increase in the British...
PM: No, it was in the light of the United Nations'
initiative
Q. The Brits say they acted because the United Nations
asked them for more money. Have we had a specific request
from the United Nations?
PM: I don't know because I wanted to talk to Mr Bowen
about it today. He is ill in bed and I was not able to find
out what the exact position was.
Q. Sir, will you be talkingzbout the refugees on this
trip? Is it one of the things....,
PM. No. V
Q. Can you tell us, generally, the reasons for the
trip?
PM: PTMh: e reasons were, I thought, made pretty plain in 
PM: Sir? So far I intend to visit only the United States and
Britain. I mnust... I1 think then I will come straight 1 iome.
That will get me home then on the Wednesday before the House
meets, and I think that is about as late a s I want to return
to Australia. What date is that?
Somewhere about the 16th or 17th. I could look it
up for you, but I think you can get it just as easily as I can.
Prime Minister, did you get any indication when
you received an invitation from President Nixon that this
was in response to your letter to him which you mentioned in
the House. You agreed in the House that you had writLen to
the President following....
No, I didn't. I didn't get any impression that it
was as a result of that. I did not. I got an impression
the statemcnt that I issued. I received a personal invitatioi
from President Nixon to come to Washington on 2 November.
Sometime before, I had received an invitation from Mr Heath,
and I informed him that OThen a suitable opportunity arose
I would come. As I was going to Washington I immediately
informed him, and he asked me if I would come to London
and we have arranged meetings there.
Is the suggestion well founded that President Nixon
has some announcements to make that will affect us and wants
to tell you about them? Have you got any reason to believe
that that is so?
I think it would be imprudent for me to be making
any kind of a statement that could create false impressions
and I have no intention of doing so. But there has been
a speculation on a wide range of subjects and I am sure most
of them will be covered in the discus~ ios.
Can you say what other countries you will be visiting
PM: PM:
Q. PM: 
that this was a very suitable time for me to come because.
it would be immediately before the decision-making processes
on a wide range of matters would be initiated, and that it
was a very favourable timc to be there. I would have liked
to have gone a little later, particularly during one of the
weeks that the House was up but it was felt on analysing the
information we had that the 2nd was the best date I could be
there.
Q. Sir, can you tell us when in fact pu got the
invitation?
PM: Last Thursday.
Q. You. really didn't waste any time accepting it.
PM: No. Well I gave you the explanation a few seconds
ago that I would have liked to have gone a little later and
I pointed this out, but it was also pointed out to me that
in our interests, our Austral. ian interests, it would be wise
to be there at the earliest possible date.
Q. Can you indicate some of these wide range ot matters
PM: No, I don't want-to. But the Press speculated, and
frankly, the Press speculation on this occasion has been
wide ranging and has touched most subjects that I think are
of importance.
Q. Sir, will you have any point of view to put to
the President on China which seems to be the big issue&gt;
I think your visit will be before he goes to Cihina.
PM: Yes, but I am not going to be now forecasti, g
or stating explicitly what I will be saying. The details
of what I intend to say is something that has qot to be
reserved for discussion with him, and then subsequently
T am pretty certain a joint press statement will be made.
* The Press that come, I can assure you, will be kept well
informed. 
12.
Q. I assume before you leave Australia will make
a decision regarding its currency level?
PM: No
Q. I assume you will be discussing it in those talks
both in Washington and London.
PM: The answer to your first question is: I don't
think we will be making a decision as to the long-term
parity of the Australian currency with other currencies.
The second one, of course, I will be discussing both the
import surcharge of the United States and the question of
currency realignments together with the other problems
associated with it such as greater freedom of trade
multilateral trade and I take it that, incidentally, although
it won't affect us, thexpxk uiaxx will be the question ofa'
greater sharing of the defence burden.
Q. Have you spoken to the President on so-called
" hot line"? Have you spoken to him personally yet about the
trip or is it a written arrangement?
PM" Well, he wrote to me personally. Then there were
discussions on at leatt two occasions bxnt eHe Australian
Ambassador to Washington and the White House staff.
Q. If you are going to get back mid= November and
Cbbinet will be considering changes to the Arbitration
I presume.
Act, presumably, which Mr Lynch is/ go ng o present to
Cabinet, you are going to be rather pressed to get this
into Parliament before the House rises for Christmas.
PM: Yes, but we has not been, as it were, waiting for
all the papers to be pre-sented one Cabinet meeting.
We have had several Cabinet meetings about the Arbitration
system, and I think most of us are in a position, whrre if
we have to make decisions on a single paper we will be able to
do it fairly quickly. 
13.
Q. The intention is to have a policy statement mor'e
or less first, rather than detdUled legislation before
the HoUse rose?
PM: I doubt whether we could have detailed legislation.
It would be a policy, statement.
Q. Sir, have you got any comment on the Fr Anthony's
suggestion there could be a Federal election early next
year?
* PM: No.
Q. It-is not true or you have no comment?
SPM: I have no comment.
Q. I think you said early this year there would be
no more legislation introduced into the House three weeks
before the house rises on December 10. Will that in fact
occur?
PM: Yes that decision will stand with these exceptions.
That in the case of tariff reports and in the case of
essential Treasury Bills, they would be introduced. But these
are usually passed without very much discussion. They are
bills of a formal kind that can't be avoided.
Q. If I could ask one more question. You told
Parliament the other day you would look at the figures
presented by Mr Howson on the Television and Film School.
Have you done so yet?
PM: Yes. I have had a thorough look at them
Q. Can you tell us the result of it? / 14 -M a 
14.
PM: No, I can't. I think it would my response if I
said anything to say it in the House.
Q. You said you saw a Treasury official today. Can
you tell us who you saw? Did you see Sir Richard?
PM: I saw Mr Garrett, first of allpwho, as you know,,
is an old friend of mine, and we started to discuss the
C index figures. He thought it was better if I saw Mr
Rye, and I t'Aen had a talk to him. He is one of the whiz kids.
Q. Prime Minister, thank you very much. We hope we
will be able to see you again soon. F-



FOR PRESS PM. No. 97/ 1971
THE PRIE MINISTER'S VISIT TO AMERICA AD PRITAIN
The Prime Minister ( Mr M'cMahon) will leave Australia
on Wednesday 27 October on his way to Wahsington and London for
talks with President Nixon of the United States and Mr Heath,
Prime Minister of Britain.
Mr McMahon will be accompanied by Mrs Mclahon and his
personal staff. The working team accompanying the Prime
Minister will include the Secretary of the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet ( Sir John Bunting) and the Secretary
of the Department of Foreign Affairs ( Sir Keith Waller) who is
now overseas and will join him in USA. There will be other
advisers from these and other relevant Departments.
The Prime Minister and Vrs [ cMahon will arrive in New
York on Thursday 28 October and proceed to Washington on Saturday
October where Mr and Mrs McMahon will be the guests of
President ] Tixon at Blair House.
Mr McMahon will have talks with President Nixon on
Tuesday 2 November and with other senior officials of the
Administration while he is in 7ashington.
The Prime Minister and his party will leave Washington
at the end of the week for New York and London.
He will have talks with the British Prime Minister
on Tuesday 9 November and will be entertained by Mr Heath at
dinner during his stay.
Discussions with other . inisters of the British
Gavernment are also being arranged.
Return travel arranqements are still to be completed.
CANBERRA, 21 October 1971 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH
The Rt Hona. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
National Film and Television Training School
,[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 26 October 1971]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
On 14th October, in reply to a question
from the Leader of the Opposition, 1
undertook to look at figures concerning the
proposals of the Interim Council for a
National Film and Television Training
School that my colleague, the Minister for
the Environment, Aborigines and the Arts
( Mr Howson) had presented to the House
and at criticisms that had been made about
them. I have had the matter looked into
and I have studied the various statements
' hat have been made in the House. I am
satisfied that the Minister did not give to the
House-to quote the Leader of the Opposition-'-
figures which were not accurate or
estimates which were misleading'. rme
discussion that has taken place in the House
' ias centred around the cost of acquiring
land and whether an area of 60 acres, or an
area of 8 acres, should be acquired.
In November 1969, the Government set
up an Interim Council for a National Film
and Television Training School. The Interim
Council submitted its first report in
November 1970. 1 table a -copy of the
report. In paragraph 11.4 the Council
expressed the view that: ' It is not a viable
proposition to set up a National Film and
Television School on its own, with a student
body of only limited numbers'. In paragraph
11.8 the Council said that: ' The
school should be established as an independent
College of Advanced Education
immediately adjacent to an existing educational
institution'. In paragraph 12.3 the
Council suggested that an area of some 60
acres might well be required. The full import will be apparent to members on
reading the text of these paragraphs of the
report. The Interim Council submitted a second
report in March this year. I table a copy of
that report. In it the Council put forward a
programme of action on the basis that the
National Film and Television School would
open up for some pupils early in 1973. In
paragraph 4 of the report the Council
suggested a timetable and said that-and I
quote from sub-paragraph 5-the programme
as set out in the timetable is
applicable whether the Government accepts
the recommendation to purchase the larger
area required for a Centre or a lesser area
sufficient for the Film and Television School
alone'. Mr Acting Speaker, it is clear that
the Council was to be taken in its second
report as adhering to its recommendation
in the first report that an area of something
like 60 acres should be acquired, although
it was recognising that the Government, on
its initiative, might only authorise the
acquisition of a lesser area.
In June this year the Minister raised with
the Council the question whether the School
might not progress along rather more
cautious lines than the Council had proposed.
On 30th June the Minister received
estimates which I now table. It will be seen
from an examination of these estimates that
on the basis of the acquisition of 60 acres,
which was the Council's recommendation,
the cost would be S7.6m, and that on the
basis of the acquisition of 8 acres the cost
would be $ 5.6m. I table a copy of a letter 
dated 28th July 1971, addressed to the
Minister by the Chairman of the Interim
Council. It reads:
At the meeting of the Interim Council on Tuesday,
27th July, it was decided that I should
confirm, in writing, two of the points made in our
personal discussions, as being the firm views of the
Interim Council.
Whilst fully recognising the present need for
economies, the Council stresses that it would be
self-defeating to begin the school inadequately.
Although it would be possible to move more
slowly than envisaged in the original reports, the
Council considers the the school must start off
with adequate resources at each stage if it is
to be developed in a worthwhile way.
The Council also is anxious to make perfectly
clear that its recommendation on the purchase of
the land, now available in a non-intensive subdivision,
is based on the belief that the site should
not be confined to the area needed solely for a
Film and Television School. Other schools in
associated studies are under active consideration,
and their eventual close association and physical
location alongside the Film School is considered
of great importance to its long-term success.
The opportunity to acquire the full site so
advantageously will never reoccur.
I realise I have already made these points in
personal discussions with you, but ' I agree with
the Council that it is desirable that they bz
confirmed in writing.
On 8th September the Minister mae a
statement in the House in the course of
which he said:
Whilst the Council's enthusiasm for this project
is fully apparent from its reports, the continuing
economic stringencies and the substantial cost
which is estimated to be over $ 7m during the
next 5 years have led to consideration of its
proposals being deferred for 12 months. The
proposals may then be considered in the light
of what I hope will be more propitious economic
circumstances. Having regard to the very recent and, I
might add, firm advice that the Minister
had received in Mr Coleman's letter
of 28th July, the Minister was justified in
treating the Council's proposals as being
proposals involving the expenditure of
over $ 7m during the next 5 years.
There remains one matter, namely, the
matter of the number of graduates, to
which -the Minister referred in answer to
a question by the Leader of the Opposition
on 10th September. The Minister
gave a figure of 12 graduates. The report
to the Interim Council by P. A. Management
Consultants Pty Ltd reflected some
doubt about the needs of industry for
graduates. The report said: ' Under the assumption that present trends
will continue, the number of graduates from the
School that the industry believes it could abso,:
has been determined in the range from 30-4
graduates.' However, on the same page the survey
went on to conclude that the School
should cater for an initial output of only
15 graduates a year for the industry. The
Minister acknowledges that he was in error
in referring to 12 graduates. The figure
should have been 15. I table a copy of the
consultants' report.
Mr Acting Speaker, I have stated the
position in some detail, and I have tabled
reports and other papers, so that the
whole matter can be looked at fairly and
squarely. I have done so myself and air
fully satisfied with the account that the
Minister has given to the House. It is true
that consideration had been given by the
Minister to the possibility of proceeding
with the School by itself in an area of 8
acres. But that was not the Council's proposal.
The Council had recommended the
acquisition of 60 acres and on 28th July
it affirmed that recommendation. The
making of a decision was a matter for
the Government. The advice of the
Council was not, however, lightly to be
disregarded. In all the circumstances, and
in view of the economic factors to which
the Minister referred in his statement of
8th September, the Government concluded
that it should look at -the whole
question again within the next year. This
the Government has undertaken to do and
this it will do. I present the following
papers: National Film and Television Training School
Interim Council
First Report of November 1970,
Second Report of March 1971,
Tables of Estimates of Costs of Establish
ing the School,
A Survey of Employment Opportunities
for Graduates of the Training Schoo:.
A copy of a letter dated 28th July ' 197.1
from the Chairman to the Minister f" r
the Environment, Aboriginies and the
Arts,
Answers by the Prime Minister to a
question by the Leader of the Opposition
on 14th October concerning the
proposals of the Interim Council for a
National Film and Television Training
School, 26th October 1971.
19997/ 71W. G. MuRmAY, Government Printer, Canberra 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
THE ARTS IN AUSTRALIA
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 26 October 1971]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
-by leave-Mr Acting Speaker, in recent
years my Government and its predecessors
have given greatly increased support to the
arts in Australia. The response has been
most encouraging. As a result, our policy
on the arts and the interpretation of action
taken or not taken by the Government have
. tracted a good deal of attention from
nonourable members as well as from the
media and the public. It is timely, therefore
to give to the House a fresh appreciation of
our attitude to the arts. It is proper for me
Sclarify some aspects of our involvement
lihich have been under discussion in recent
weeks. The Government sees the arts in a
multitude of expressions and forms-not as
an adornment but as an integral part of
life; not something exclusive to the hours
of leisure but as a force, penetrating and
enriching every aspect of human affairs; not
as the preserve of the rich and the
sophisticated but as a source of delight
for all.
The arts are among the factors which go
to create a quality of life unique in Australia.
In the past we may have been
inclined to stress the physical and material
satisfactions of life at the expense of the
pleasures of the creative imagination. And
as a result many talented Australians who
wished to be painters or writers, actors or
dancers, musicians or film directors have
had to leave Australia to build a career in a more sympathetic artistic climate elsewhere.
We could not afford this leaching of our
society any more than we can now afford to
allow our incomparable environment to be
despoiled and polluted by lack of foresight
and conscience. But, with the growing
cultural awareness of the Australian society
and because of support provided by governments,
the opportunities for talented
Australians to pursue a professional career
in this country have been increased
significantly in recent years. While there is
still much to be done, novelists and poets,
painters and sculptors can now command a
better market as professionals here and
abroad than they could do not so many
years ago.
The Australian Opera Company, the
Australian Ballet Company, the State drama
companies, the Australian Broadcasting
Commission and the Australian Elizabethan
Trust orchestras, and many other smaller
companies, all now employ artists on a
continuing basis, and they attract back to
Australia artists who, having gone abroad
for further experience, wish to return and
work in their own country. This flow will
increase as time goes by and bring great
stimulus and enrichment to the daily life of
all Australians.
The effectiveness of policy in relation to
the arts of course will depend in part on the
vitality and wisdom of the institutions set up
to administer it. In the Commonwealth, 7 1 / 9 4 
overall responsibility for the arts has been
placed by me with the Minister for the
Environment, Aborigines and the Arts
( Mr Howson). This Ministry was created to
take over from the Prime Minister policy
issues of increasing importance on a variety
of matters which demanded more sustained
attention than it was possible for him to
give. Nevertheless, I find a certain logic in
the combination.
The Minister's responsibilities are all in
different ways concerned with the quality of
life which opens out before the Australian
people. It is increasingly clear that the
superb natural environment which this
continent provides for human life can no
longer be taken for granted. It must be
protected with understanding and with care.
If, as I have said, the arts should be deeply
integrated into our lives, they too form
pant of the intellectual and cultural environment
within which our lives are livedoffering
diversity of experience and lending
form and substance to our personal and
natural identity. Aboriginal Australians are
an unqualified responsibility of governments
-a challenge to our conscience and to our
political and social wisdom.
There is, particularly in relation to the
environment and the arts, much that we can
learn from them. For tens of thousands of
years they have inhabited this continent, living
in harmony with it and its creatures.
They established a way of life in which
the arts, of music, dance, theatre and ritual
were woven into the textore of their daily
lives. It is indeed a happy combination of
responsibilities which am sure will give
the Minister and his advisers great stimulus
and satisfaction. In the past, when responsibility
for the arts lay with the Prime Minister,
several separate bodies were set up and
were responsible for advising him on various
aspects of the arts. They continue to this
day and now advise the Minister for the
Environment. Aborigines and the Arts.
The Commonwealth Literary Fund had its
own advisory committee. In the building
up of the national collection of works
of art and on many related matters the
Prime Minister was assisted by the Commonwealth
Art Advisory Board. Advice on
the needs of composers has been provided
by the Board of the Commonwealth Assistance
to Australian Composers. In the field
of the performing arts help was given by the Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust,
a private corporation supported by Government
funds. In recent years several major
institutional developments have occurred
including the establishment of the Australian
Council for the Arts, the completion
of the National Library, and the decision
to begin planning a National Gallery for
Canberra. More recently the Governmentt
established 2 new organisations in the field
of film and television, the Film Development
Corporation and the Interim Counc
of the Australian Film and Televisio..
Training School.
Apart from these bodies, the Australian
Broadcasting Commission, through its symphony
orchestras, television and radio pr~ r
grammes, has continued to exercise powe.
ful direct effects on the content and style
of the performing arts. The Government
has now, therefore, a range of organisations,
advisory and executive, to assist it to form
and give effect to policies for the support
of the arts. The time, therefore, may be
ripe to review the structure of these bodies
and their relationship to one another so
that they can best promote the vigour and
diversity of Australian artistic life. When
the late Mr Holt announced the Government's
decision to set up an Australian
Council for the Arts he said it would t
responsible primarily for the performing
arts, but would also have the task of advising
the Government on those aspects of
the arts not receiving aid through existing
channels. He said also that the establishment
of the Council did not preclude ti.
possibility of an overall council responsible
for all aspects of Government support for
the arts along the lines of the Canada Council
and the Arts Council of Great Britain.
Support has also been expressed for a comprehensive
ministry of culture in the style
common among European countries.
Du ring the last two or three years the
Council for the Arts and other advisers
have given thought to these possibilities.
After consultation with them, I am inclined
to distrust the idea of a single monolithic
controller of public patronage. With all its
faults I believe that our pattern of various
channels of support, with scope for varied
artistic and social influences, is almost certainly
healthier. Nevertheless the arts are in
a perpetual process of change and are
unlikely long to fit a pattern of institutions 
evolved slowly over many years. New art
forms emerge under the stimulus of technological
change which do not fall readily
within accepted classifications.
One of the most exciting aspects of contemporary
cultural life is the crossfertilisation
which now occurs between
different art forms, a process greatly stimulated
by developments in film and electronic
processes. It is important, therefore, firstly,
that the organisational structure should be
. exible and capable of adapting itself to
change and, secondly, that the state of the
arts should continuously be studied so that,
where necessary, gaps may be filled, collaboration
ensured and new initiatives
stimulated. My colleague, the Minister, tells
. ie that he intends shortly, and thereafter
at intervals, to bring together the Chairmen
of the various Commonwealth agencies in
the arts to discuss their present responsibilities
and relationships one to the other.
This will be a valuable opportunity for
them to offer their advice on the effectiveness
of the present structure to meet the
changing demands of contemporary art
forms. It will continue to be the function of the
Council for the Arts to study and report
on those aspects of the arts which are not
; sisted through existing Commonwealth
agencies and to make its contribution to
advice available to the Minister on the balance
and effectiveness of our programmes
as a whole. It was in pursuit of these func-
' ions that the Council presented my prede-
, ssor with a report which led to major
developments in the field of film and television
to which I shall return later.
More recently a study of the state of
music in Australia has been completed and
the Council will shortly be presenting my
colleague with its recommendations arising
from that study. Two additional studies
will be undertaken this year by committees
to be established by the Minister. The first
of these will examine the role of crafts as
art forms in their own right, as a widely
spread experience of creative processes and
as the foundation of good industrial
design. The committee will include representatives
of the Council for the Arts,
the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board
and the Council for Industrial Design who
will jointly advise on the committee's
terms of reference. The second will concern itself with
means whereby children and young people
can be helped to enjoy and practise the
arts more effectively. The chairmen of the
Council for the Arts, -the Commonwealth
Assistance to Australian Composers Advisory
Board, the Commonwealth Literary
Fund and the Commonwealth Art Advisory
Board will jointly advise on the terms
of reference of this study which will also
involve educational authorities. Special
attention will be given in these and other
future studies to the effect of innovation in
art forms and the mutual stimulus they
can provide for one another.
Before leaving areas of the arts for
which the Council is responsible, let me
comment on the increased support for the
performing arts being given this year. The
grant has been increased by almost 17 per
cent to $ 4.5m. The greater part of the
increase has been given deliberately to the
Australian Opera and to the orchestras of
the Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust.
Their share has been increased by 45 per
cent to $ 1,290,000. Some critics have seen
this as an example of discrimination or
favouritism. The Government believes that
increased support for the arts cannot sensibly
be given uniformly across the board.
That way, no large development can ever
be ' achieved, given the competitive pressures
on Government funds. It is more
effective to seize opportunities for major
break-throughs as they are offered by the
occasion or by some other stimulus to
innovation. In 1973 the opening of the Sydney
Opera House will give Australia the
chance to match the splendour of that
building with performances which will be
worthy of it and of the long association of
Australians with this art form. The Government
makes no apology for the emphasis
it has this year given to strengthening
the opera company and its associated
orchestra. Their success will set new standards
for all the arts and I am sure that
the special occasion for others will be not
far distant. Those who love the arts will
rejoice that Australian opera has -been
given an effective opportunity to set new
s'andards of excellence.
* Let me turn now to developments in the
visual arts. As honourable members know,
the first steps have been taken to establish 
a national gallery. Over many years the
Art Advisory Board has built up in the
gallery an historical collection of the works
of Australian painters of the past and the
present. It will also incorporate outstanding
examples of the work of indigenous artists
of New Guinea and aboriginal Australia,
art of the South-East Asian and Pacific
region and art on a world-wide basis,
beginning with the 20th century.
The gallery will be more than the home
for a unique and splendid collection of
works of art. Its functions are broadly
conceived so that it will become also a
centre of creative activity for the exhibition
of collections from abroad and of the
work of contemporary artists, and a focus
of education and research exercising, in
collaboration with sister galleries in the
States, a profound and pervasive influence
on the life of Australians.
When the decision to proceed with gallery
planning was taken in 1% 7 an interim
council was appointed to administer certain
aspects of the initial programme. Its terms
of office expired recently and it is the
Government's intention now to legislate for
a permanent council as a statutory body to
administer the gallery. Much, of course,
will depend on the gallery's first Director.
I am pleased to announce tonight that the
Government proposes to appoint Mr James
Mollison to the post. Pending the submission
of the legislation and the establishment
of the statutory office, Mr Mollison
has agreed to make his services available
under contract to the Government to carry
out the duties and responsibilities that will
fall to the director of the gallery. The
Government has deliberately chosen in Mr
Mollison one who is young as well as
talented and experienced. It will be some
years before the building of the gallery is
complete and its work in full flower. By
then the new director will have grown with
it in stature and have benefited from the
experience of others in Australia and
abroad. The Government is fortunate also that
Mr James Sweeney, the eminent American
Gallery Director and international art and
gallery consultant, has agreed to work with
the new director and the architect during
the present design phase of the gallery. He
will work as a specialist consultant and
adviser to the Government and the National Capital Development Commission
which has charge of the whole project. Mr
Sweeney has already given distinguished
service to the Government and the
National Capital Development Commission
and we value highly the contribution he
has already made to the preparatory phase
of work in the gallery. Honourable members
will share, I am sure, my appreciation
of his work and his readiness to continue
to assist us. I should also add that when
the permanent council for the gallery iappointed
the Art Advisory Board t.
which I have already referred will become
part of the council. The Art Advisory
Board will also perform those other functions
it now exercises which are not directly
concerned with the gallery.
Mr Acting Speaker, I come now to tht
film and television industry. When the
Council for the Arts presented its report
for the development of the film and television
industry it urged the establishment of
3 new institutions-the Australian Film
Development Corporation, the Experimental
Film Fund and the Australian Film
and Television School. The Australian
Film Development Corporation is actively
at work and a number of investments have
been made. The Corporation was designed
to serve as a source of part of the capita'
needed for commercial film and televisio.
ventures, and thus act as a catalyst for
funds from private and banking sources.
The Government looks, however, to
other sections of the film and television
industry to share more actively with * l
Corporation the development of an effective
Australian industry. The Experimental
Film Fund has, until recently, been the
responsibility of the Australian Council for
the Arts. It has already proved effective in
identifying original creative talent in this
medium. The Council has also developed a
more general programme to stimulate the
Australian content of film and television
programmes and to extend sensitive and
critical appreciation of -high quality film
and television. Responsibility for these programmes
will now be taken over by the
Interim Council for the Film and Television
School as has been announced by the
Minister. It was partly with these new
responsibilities in mind that the Government
has decided to add to the Interim
Council 2 men long experienced in radio,
television and film making. They are Mr 
Hector Crawford and Mr Lenard Mauger.
Their knowledge will be, I am sure, of
great value -in helping us to promote plans
for the development of the film industry.
There has been a good deal of misunderstanding
of the Government's attitude
towards the question of assistance for
training of film and television producers.
The Government decided at Budget time
to defer consideration of a proposal to
establish a training school for this purpose.
is was one of a number of proposals
-er the range of Government activity on
which consideration was deferred because
of the need to restrict Government expenditure.
This does not mean that the Government
has abandoned the idea of estabing
a training school. In this House on
L1O~ ctober I informed honourable members
that I had instructed the Minister to
proceed as quickly as possible to collect all
the evidence that becomes available to him
so that the proposal could be presented to
the Government well before the next
Budget and not necessarily, therefore, in a
Budget context. He is doing this.
The current position is that the enlarged
Interim Council to which I have just
referred has been asked to review the
relationship of the training already underen
* by -the Australian Broadcasting
jmmjssion, the commercial television
organisations and the film industry to Ahe
programme of the proposed school. It
will seek the co-operation of those
interests for this review. When it has
ived this report the Government will
Leen consider the most appropriate way
in which it might act to assist the industry
in this important area.
In addition to the institutional develop*
ments recommended to and adopted by
the Government, the Council for the
Arts drew attention to the need of the
Australian film industry for some degree
of protection to establish itself on tin'
Australian market. The Council suggestel.
that advice on this matter should be
sought from the Tariff Board or a specially
constituted committee. Many other
countries have found it necessary to
establish quotas or to provide other forms of protection to prevent their
vigorous but infant film industry being
overwhelmed by imported features. I have
therefore asked my colleague, the, Minister
for Trade and Industry, to invite the
Tariff Board to consider the need and
appropriate form of protection for this
industry. He has agreed to do this and in
due course ' the Tariff Board will begin its
work. I should also remind honourable
members that the Government has done
much to advance the cause of the Arts
by ensuring that the Australian Broad.
casting Commission and, through the
Broadcasting Control Board, the commercial
stations, give a substantial percentage
of their viewing time to Australian
made programmes. Under recently
specified new requirements commercial
stations have increased their quotas of
Australian programmes. All stations which
have been established for 3 years or more
must televise at least 50 per cent of Australian
programmes, and 45 per cent of
peak-time programmes between 6 p. m.
and 10 p. m. must be Australian in content.
Audience surveys in recent years show
that some Australian programmes are
getting top ratings.
There remains much of the more
detailed work in support of the arts of
which my colleague, the Minister, will tell
the House at the appropriate time. This
statement has been designed to expres. s
my Government's deep concern for the
arts as an essential and vigorous component
of our national life; to acquaint
the House with the principles which underlie
our organisation for making that
concern effective; and to inform the House
of certain initiatives which will, I am sure,
be welcomed inside and outside Parliament
by those who share our belief that the
arts can add both richness and diversity
to -the quality of life. Mr Acting Speaker,
I commend this statement to you. I present
the following paper:
The Arts in Australia-Ministerial Statement,
26th October .1971.
Motion ( by Mr Swartz) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
199% 1711991G71. WM. u muy, Government Printer, Canberra 



PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
BEFORE LEAVING FOR OVERSEAS 27 OCTOBER 1971
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
Q. Now that* China's in the United Nations, Sir., how
does this affect our dialogue with Peking? Does it mean that
we'll have to move-quicker towards recognition of the Chinese
Government?
PM No, I don't think it does. I think it would create
a bad impression with the Chinese if it looked as though we
were over-anxious to respond. In any event, I think it's now
become common gossip that there have been discussions in Hong Kong
about the possibility of closer trade relations. I've said before
that we'll proceed cautiously, and trying to ensure that at each
step that each step taken is to the advantage of this country.
I'm sure it's better to handle this carefully, particularly as the
People's Republic are a very careful people, Ney take their time
over making decisions.
Q. Sir, how far off would you think recognition is, within
months, or years?
PM Nobody can make an appre-ciation, because the rapidity
-of. the movement will depend very largely on the actions of the
V Government of the People's Republic.
Q. You mentioned the talks in Hong Kong, Prime Minister,
can you tell us what the outcome of those talks was?
PM No. Because while it has been agreed that I can
go as far as I have gone this morning, we've been consistently warned
that the prudent course is to day as little as possible.
Q. Is there any possibility of a trade mission qoing-to
China this year?
PM I don't know. I. 
. PM How long has this been going on Sir, weeks or months?
It depends what you mean. Talks have taken place
in several areas as well as Hong Kong.
Sir; has your Government decided in principle that
it wants to recognise China?
We've decided to commence a dialogue to improve the
relationships between the two countries, we have gone no further.
Will you pursue this on your visit overseas, for
example I expect the Chinese will be seated at the United Nations
by the time you get there. Willyou try....
That is doubtful, very doubtful.
I wondered if as you are in the United States....
No I would not, because my timetable is full. I want
to be back here for the last three weeks of the House, or for the
opening of the next three weeks Session, and this is a subject that
could not be raised. Will you come back ready to make a statement to the
House., Sir? On China?
On your mission generally.
Yes, of course I will. t
Sir, could you tell us your itinerary?
I understood that Reg MacDonald had given yo~ u a
document setting up an itinerary in some detail.
Reg MacDonald: RIegt ' sac ~ oianld : the boxes now Sir. 
3.
On the economy 7
PM Now wait a minute, can I finish this one. Also
I've asked Mr. MacDonald to give you a list of the people who'll
be travelling with me. That will be available this morning, if
it's not in the boxes already It is in the boxes already,
and I will be drawing on the assistance of Dr. Coombs not in
matters that involve him in the arts and similar matters, but as
a kind of guiding philosopher, if there's any problems I feel
he can make a contribution about.
The international monetary crisis Sir?
PM That will be not I'm-not going to go to any
details about what I will ask him to do, but he'll be ready
to give advice if I want him to give it. over there, and with
me I'll have technical experts with me, who I think are as well
up in the problems of the international monetary problems as
I could want to get.
Q. Sir, why are you taking Dr. Coombs specifically
then. It seems very unusual.
PM Is it. I've just explained to you why I ' ye done
it and I go no further than that.
Q. Sir, who will you be seeing over there who's
connected with the Arts. We haven't seen your itinerary, who
will you be seeing who's connected with the Arts in America
and Britain.
PM Well I didn't-say with the arts necessarily, over
a wide range of subjects. I value his advice very much. I've
been able to use his advice to very good effect over the course
of the last few months, and I'll continue-to use it.
Is this going to be a permanent role for Dr. Coombs
sort of a roving adviser? 
PM I will be using Dr. Coombs' advice in the future
to a considerable extent.
Q. Will he become Australia's Dr. Kissinger Sir?
PM I would use his advice to the maximum, 1 and I believe
I can use him in the interests of the Australian people.
0. Will he have a position within the Public Service,
or will it just be as an outside adviser?
PM He's already got a position with the various positions
with the Aborigines and the Arts. That will be supplemented
he will supplement those activities. Giving advice to me when I
think it is desirable.
Q. Prime Minister, it has been suggested that Sir John
McEwen might take on some sort of
PM I haven't heard it. I haven't heard it
Look what are we doing with this. I'm going away on a momentous
visit. Are we going to turn it into a somewhat frivolous exercise
or are we going to try and deal with things that are of great
importance to this country. Now I want to remind you that on the
last occasion that I had one, the then Chairman had to say to me
that we didn't conduct them in a way that really warranted repetitior
I please ask you if you want me to go on consistently giving them,
can we keep them to what is relevant and what's important.
Q. Can I bring up an important matter Sir. Our correspond
ent in Washington reports today that President Nixon will ask you to
send Australian military advisers to Cambodia to train the Cambodian
Army. He also says that the Americans have secretly sounded out
the Australian Government on this matter. Could you tell me.
PM To the best of my knowledge there has been nIo secret
sounding out of the Australian Government, and I believe I would
have known as soon as anyone. Secondly, I have not heard any
suggestion that we would be asked to make a contribution of a trainin 
TEAM or instructors to Cambodia. It is hypothetical, and I can't,
give answers to hypothetical questions. l
Q. Mr. McMahon you've described your visit your
coming visit as a momentous visit. Could you outline to us the
principle things you hope to achieve'while you're overseas?
PM I've said in the first conference that I've had
here, that I would not be trying to forecast what is likely to
happen. In the first place, we haven't got a precise agenda for
the meetings. But what I did say at the last meeting that the
press have been pretty close in its speculation about the kind
of event that had occurred and would establish the foundations
on which discussions could take place. Both in Washington, and
in London. I'll go no further than that.
0. Mr. McMahon, do you expect that by the time you get
back, Cabinet will be able to make a firm decision on the parity
question. The Australian dollar?
PM I don't know. Nobody could tell you.
0. It's a possibility though?
PM It's a possibility. Angthing's a possibility. But
I think you know as well as anyone that the critically important
factor is for the major countries the dominant countries in the
international monetary markets at the moment particularly the
Japan, the Germans. It is critically important that they
come to some arrangement as to parities which are likely to stand
ov~ r a considerable period. Until these parities are established
it is difficult if not impracticable for any other country to
try and establish a rate which can be continued over a long period.
0. Can we give any consideration to. a temporary
arrangement between the yen and the Australian dollar pendin g the
long term solution?
PM No, I stand by what I said in the House. ' There'll
be no alternation to the policy decision the policy decisions 
TO DEAL WITH THIS interim phase -not change whatsoever.
Q. Are you likely to go to Japan to discuss this?
PM No, I will not have time to. I'll just have
time to go to the United States, the United Kingdom and then
come straight home.
Q. You'd agree that the parity question apropos the
yen and the Australian dollar, is probably more important than
sterling and the Australian dollar. What would be your principal
mission in the UK. then Sir?
PM First of all, I've already answered the question,
I don't think the critical one, or the only one is the change
in parities between the yen and the Australian dollar. I donot
think that it is practicable to have a solution between two countries.
There has to be a general rearrangement of parities and that is k
what the Group of Ten and the I. M. F. are trying to achieve. But
not necessarily fixed parities there can be a greater tolerance
than previously.
Q. Will you have time to Go to Brussells Sir.
PM None at all.
Q. Prime Minister, you describe your trip as momentous
Why do you use that word, why do you think it's momentous.
PM Because it's momentous in a sense that these are
momentous occasions. There have been big changes in the United
Nations, there's been the initiation of visits by the President
to the People's Republic. He will also pay a visit to Moscow.
He will be making another announcement on policy relating to further
withdrawals of Amercian troops from South Vietnam. The British are
re ady to enter into the European Community. If these are not
momentous occasions, then other people have got differences of
opinion from mine. What I will be doing is being in Washington 
and in London at a time when so many decisions are being made
about the future course of events in the areas I've mentioned.
Sir, you announced a couple of economic measures
yesterday, can you foresee other measures being announced while
you are away?
PM I won't go any further than that, but I would like
to emphasise this. That fundamentally the Australian economy
is strong. We've said it before, and it can bear repeating. That
what was said yesterday was dealing with marginal problems, but
directly oriented towards showing that we would take action in
these areas where we thought it was desirable but above all, to
establish the degree of confidence which is so essential in order
to achieve the purposes set by the Budget. -Confidence is the most
important element we need in the community today.
Q. Could Cabinet take any decisions if it felt it was
necessary on the economy?
PM of course it could. But I think they would also
consult me before they took them. But when a Prime Minister is
out of the country the Government of the country remains with the
Cabinet.
Q. There were some new building figures released
yesterday, Prime Minister. Were these brought to your attention,
they did appear to be quite disturbing in that they've got a very
high rate of non-residential building for the second month in
a row.
PM IWe've already emphasised that in the HOuse. We knew
of the trend that is occurring., But there is also outside informatioi
which seems to indicate, however reliable it might be, and I make
no judgment about how reliable it is, that the phase might be
starting to slow down. I see no evidence of: c* it yet.
Q. I see. Because last February I think, one of the things
that the Government intended to do was to dampen down this office
building by attempting to get overseas investors to consult with
Treasury.... nothing was done about this because it seemed to be 
dying out.
PM Are you sure that not~ hing was done?
0. I thought you said in the House...
PM No I didnt say that nothing was done, I said. that...
when you say that nothing was done, it depends what you mean
Q. The Government took no action.
qM That's right it took no action, because it found that
it was not ynt due in any substantial extent to overseas investment
It's purely a domestic matter.* And I dont know of any easy means
that you can take in order to see that in these commercial and
industrial buildings that you can slow down construction too
quickly. In the public area of course, as you know we severely
restricted the rate of growth of the action by the States, and
we have substantially restrained Commonwealth expenditure too.
Q. You're not taking any direct action therefore, as you
say it's difficult to suggest one. I was just wondering if there was
anything you were contemplating.
SM Well isn't it a little bit peculiar that we've heard
some people say recently that there is no inflation, and here are
you in one area now urging that separate action should be tdken. NO
at the moment it's not a matter that I can discuss in any great
detailL. If you want to get a more full answer on this, you should
ask thie Treasurer.
Q. Sir, in Washington, will you be looking at the
effectiveness of the wage and price freeze that President Nixon's
imposed?
PM I've been... Qf course we'vye given a lot of consideration
to them. But I'd be fairly certain, other than unless it happened
to rise casually, but I wouldn't be discussing these matters with
President. 
Q. But you are meeting Mr. Connally though aren't you
PM I have doubts about meeting Connally, but I will be
meeting other people from the Treasury, I understand Mr. Con~ lly
will probably/ 86er seas.
Q. You're likely to discuss the effect of the
surcharge on imports the effect on Australia?
PM I've said a few moments ago I'm not prepared to
forecast what I might be discussing with President Nixon. I thinkit
would be bad politics, I think it would be bad tactics to
start....
Inaudible
PM I wouldn't be prepared if I do something there,
I will certainly let those members of the press who are present
with me, know to the maximum I can what has taken place.
Q. In Westminster Sir, will you raise the question
of the E. E. C. transition-&amp;-period effecting Australia?
PM I have no doubt at all that that will be one
of the subjects raised.
Q. Any new proposals to put to the British Government?
PM I've said three or four minutes ago, that I will
not under any circumstance try and forecast what proposals I'd
be likely to put, or for that matter what the what was likely
to be said to me. I'd rather keep those until I know what the
results of the discussions are, and what kind of result is likely
to emerge from them.
0. Sir, on the wage and price freeze just to clarify
it. I think you said you'd considered what had been done ine the
States. Does that mean that you've looked at the possibility
of doing it here? Has it gone that far? 
PM NO.
Q. Does the idea appeal to you?
PM We have a totally different system to them. As I've
tried to say that ~ If you look at the Australian position, basically
our problem at the moment resides first of all around what we
call wage/ cost inflation. We have an Arbitration Court they have
haven't got one. And we have a constitutional restriction on our
power that they haven't got. The difference between the two
economies are substantial. In the Budget we took action to try
and prevent I've gone through this story before, but to prevent
9 demand inflation superimposing itself on cost inflation. I can't
go any further than that at the moment. But the Treasurer's
remaining here, if you want-to get any further action on the
economy, and details of it, ask him. And here, if I can, I'd
make one point. I am a great believer in a Cabinet System of
government ministerial responsibility. I want as afar as I can
ensur&amp; it, that questions of details of this kind should be directed.
to the Treasurer. He's well capable of being able to understand
them. not only understand them, but answer them.
Q. Mr. McMahon could you give us any back ground on
W why it's taken the Attorney-General's Department almost two months
to decide on the legality of the Tariff Board using outside
consultants? And could you tell us further if they decide that it
0 is illegal, would the Government be prepared to legislate to make
PM it legal?
PM First, I can't tell you why the Law Department has
taken so long, other than/ tlI have been considering it for some
time. It's apparently a difficult legal problem, and you'd
have to ask the lawyers why. The Attorney would give you the
answer I'm sure. Secondly, to the second part of your question
I gave the answer in the House the other day. 



VISIT TO T~ HE UNITED STATES
AND TFF UNITED KIN'GDOM11 1971.
SAN FRANCISCO
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN PRIME
MINISTER, MR W1ILLIAM 71c. 4AHON, ON ARRIVAL
27 OCTOBER 1971.
Q Would you comment on the events in the U. N concerning
admi:: sion of Mainland China?
p;: Yes I would. Our objectives -the combined objectives of
Australia, the United States and Japan were to ensure that the
People's Republic of China became a member of the United Nations
and held the permanent seat on the Security Council, But if we
also belie'-e in the principles of the United Nations and we know
that the Government in Taiwan is in effective control of that
country and represents fourteen and a half million people, including
twelve million Taiwanese, we wanted them to remain a
member. The U. S. and ourselves have cooperated at least over
the last eighteen months to come to a common conclusion about
what should be done and to work out the tactics. At one time
I thought there was every prospect of being successful, but
after the procedural resolution was agreed to, and by a small
majority we failed in the Important Question resolution, it
then became only a question of time before the People's Republic
was admitted and the Taiwan Government was omitted from the
United Nations that is expelled. We think it is bad luck
because we think it w,. ould have been a greater contribution to
world peace if both countries had remained and been able to
play their part in a peaceful solution of the world's problems
but now it has occurred we have to live with it and we have to
do all we can, whether it be the gre~ at countries or the more
moderately sized countries like ourselves, in order to ensure
that China, that is the People's Republic of China, does play
its part in making a contribution to peace in the Asian area,
particularly that part of the Asian area in which we live.
Q What future do you envision for the Taiwan Government
in the world / 2 
02.
PM Well, Taiwan will decide its own future and the course of
action that it will take in world affairs. I don't think it will
make a dramatic difference but so much will depend upon the thinking
of the Chiang Kai-shek Government, but of course trade will
continue between Taiwan and other countries and it is difficult
at this moment for anyone to make a precise analysis or a precise
forecast of the likely course of action in diplomatic relationships.
We haven't in Austral~ a yet considered the question of diplomatic
representation, but we have as a corollary to that, we are having
discussions, preliminary discussions, with the People's Republic of
China to davelop more healthy bilateral relationships between our
two countries.
Q Were you surprised at the outcome of the vote
PM Not surprised. Not being a bet%_~ man, I didn't have a bet
on it. But I thought of the figures and I felt there would be two
or three votes in it that is the Lziportant Question and no more,
and that's how it turned out. If two or three people had changed
their votes, of course, the Important Question would have been
passed and that would have required a two thirds majority to expel
Taiwan. But once the Important QOuestion was lost, then you could
expect a lot of countries would jump on the bandwagon and they did.
And although we had fallback positions, there was little hope of a
fallback position succeeding. People did jump on the bandwagon,
there were a lot I can assure you who disappointed us, even on the
vote of the Jnportant Cxestion, because their best interests would
have been served by voting in favour of the . Important Question and
the retention of the position of Taiwan. But having said all that,
it is up to us now, and all those who believe in peace, particularly
those who live in the Western Pacific area, to do our best and to
try to draw China into the comity of nations and to try to harness
the great power and influence of China in the interests of peace.
Q What effect, if any, does this have on Australia
PM Not a great deal of effect on us, but now we will be watching
very carefully to see what action the People's Republic of
China will take about our initiatives initiatives taken by the
Australian Government to continue the dialogue and impro-9 op7;
relations with them. WNe have already commenced in several countries
and there have been contacts about not so much trade relationships,
but improving trade contatts. We hope to be able to hoar
from the People's Republic soon about these. But might I make our
position clear I think this i. s wise Wc have no restrictions
on trade with them other than in strategic goods. We let our
people go there freely. There are no restrictions placed upon our
own people. We give them their passports and all they have to do
is get a visa from the People's Republic. We wvelcome and encourage
movement of cultural and scientific people. So there are very few
restrictions. But nonetheless we will move steadily to improving
our relationships. Much remains in their hands and, as you know,
they don't move very quickly. 


F A' 1 -kr V TSe.I OF'TM ! AC 1FIT" ZODThe P~ rime M'ilEtur ovaid in reapon., o to P. cquetio-nfrom the Editor ( Vr Oakeso that he did not ocoasidor tiio i-rapaton Australian policy of China's entx7 Into the United lationawould be groat. lie aoo sald that he did not think the t actthat ive had vote-d againot the Albaniari, iieol~ utl oL 1'~ vn&amp; uy par'ticul~ ar effcct on the wa'y in our rolations wt'itthe 1P. H. C. would davelop.Th ?-4riae Xlnietor szaid th-at the concrctclv ot. x1of China's member13hip of' tho United IEationz, or indece, otdiplomatic recoenitiona of China, were ztill tnccrtaino Foroxamplo, it had made little difference to the 1Jriitod xln-domi orcso far, to Ctujada. The Prinme NIiister said it was important thatChina be drawn, into the comity of nations, but we should a. otforget that China was still willing to assiot revolutionarymovements in the Aaian region, including those on the Thai border.Asked uhy so few of its major allieo hadsupported the United State position1 on China, the Prime 1 4inistorsaid that the European countries, for example, were fuirthor awayfrom the north Asian region. They tendered to be se1Af-coi2tredand remote from the problem. B~ elgium had probably not roupportedus after saying it would because it was not consitlted about thetiming of the second Kissinger viIcit to Poking.
2-Tho Pr i M~ nloter &amp;~ dtho ncxt few yearswould be a crucial pr : od in which it i-would be necess= y tofind a new balance botween theo great pawars -the Un-Itod3taton, the Soviet Union, Clhinao Japtx and an intogratedEurope to ensure an onduiring peace.IUiIT.* D ~ TT3AFTSR-VIRT NAP! OThere wasi somel discussion as to whether' or notthe United States was turning ieolationist of tho rolewhich the Unite~ d tatea smiglht usefully 9ack~ to p. hay in Aziain the futre. The Priae niotar said it was unlikelir thatthe United fota" Gea vould got involved again 1. u a land rar ia0Ania. Its rolc ahculd be to enoure st' ic~. it finanasoictence and aid to mtaintain the viability of the coiuitricain thie region, In Viet Nam and Cam~ bodia, in particula-r, theUnited States should assiat in providinS adequate training oflocal forces ac wollas necesedry air and naval support.JAPAN. Tarning to Japani, theo Primie Minister said that-howanted to emphasine the crucial inportanco of Japan. A91riupolicios had already dairiaged the Sato leader2hip. There wasnobody who could replace him. Otherwise, he would probablyhave fallen by n~ ow. This waa partly due to United Slitatec failureto handle its approach to Japan on major iseues adequately.
It waa LrVortaimt that in any Anncirlcem atem~ ito got a detente witil Ch~ ina ara the S3ovict lVntonq japan Musjtnot be forgotte'z Tho United States should not viork in awav; hich w~ ould hinder Japan developingj irear trade.CHiINA: Ini answer to anothor quention about obanpin~ gattitudoe to China, the ]? rinc Alinistor sead that bAstraliahad movod away from the Lullee theories of corxtaiyument andinaotive anti-co== i a~ m, Since last year we had been ret'l-inking the bauis of our policy to-wardo China., This w~ asnot beuause we hacd. csaaed to lie antipat1hetic to comuiibut we accepted the neod to livO ' With It on tho ba~ sis of auaocommodation, Thic acooawodation, howevero atill needed~ tobe backed by strength. In response -to &amp; rnother question, the Pritne k-iistarvaid that it iw true that the United ' States was g~ oing through-somiething of a dowestio trauma. However, he haxd no doubt thatthe problome giving rise to this would be overoome and theUnited btates would continue to play a vcry importwant and activerolo in world affairs.~ i'IG~~ TIN. Asked by the E~ ditor about our "' exclutsive" immigrationpolicy, the Prime ninister said that this was a misleading phrase.Our im. igration policy was restrictive, but it was not exclusive.hlon-Buropeans# including black Americana, could enter Australia for
4 .1aCehe crtvi for inc ude-matf. Were ttmt tho &amp; plicant , toul. dmied to be ) alc to g'tt Into A or&amp; all 2vlt Pnld th~ at h(, xjoha~ ve ' ckilln vhlch iio neecd in Autmla Our policyhad been coniqra~ biy libralifQCd : W 1966aThe IPrituo ! Uiater6~ added tha~ t , x hnd actu&amp; ally bcm,tc. UW. in too nxti y miret zmd he had had the irntake r; dtued x'eoon-t1S. B. C. m~ uoit be aieod. Hiroverv the Euopancontiocondiioted 4-0t', of the rldla trado amd i. t im-ad bo rjnl_tq inditoo t ': Ie to eant into fre trode. inrp coato be~ outuard lookcine a~ nd underiutnd~ t1o value~ of~ larae oltrae. The . C woUdl need to Ulto c glob,-, r-flor th. arogi ona1 approach.* 1'" 11TV43 Im, reiaporns to a questiong the 2rimme 1' Uniotvrsaid tha~ t i~ t Umat Auztralia'o view that it wa neczmvry to oometo a qiLck ncozi~ odation on foreign oxahauro ratev and th e revaluation~upwarda of the Thin, 11eutch Rmr e2nd gold. 120 ntian. dolt-! tiouldbo hurmful. It seevdod strarq to hi that the United ktates amntedSD., AOu# but wa ro1uotamt to aeie toar. 2vinreace iii tho prico of~gold*



VI.! IT L' c' THE U. S. A24D U. K. 1971.
WASHINGTON
PRESS CONFERENC_$ AT BLAIR 11OUSF-,
GIVEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER, MR WILLIAM McMAHON
2 NOVEMBER 1971
Q W-hat was the President's reaction when you told him of
the Cabinet decision of the training of Cambodian servicemen
Pi I dealt with this against the background of what I had
known. And I pointed out that first of all in a Statement I had
made in the House I said we wou~ ld be retaining some advisory and
training troops in South Viet-Nam to train the South Vietnamese and
that we had agreed to train Cambodians in Australia and recently
we had made in principle a decision to train Cambodian troops in
South VietL--Nam in cooperation with New Zealanders and United Sft. ates
people. But as yet we haven't been able to spell out in detail what
is likely to happen. There was no intention whatsoever to train
Cambodians in CAmbodia or te , ride advisers there. Nor was there
any intention to provide combat troops in either South Viet-Nam or
Cambodia. We accept this without any question.
Q This is an in principle decision. THis is the one taken
in CAnberra yesterday
PM Yes.
Q Did the Preqiident express any view o-F this decision given.
PH No.
Q Did he suggest that there might be ( INAUDIBLE) to Cambodia.
PM4 No. He wouldn't be that sort of a person to be presenting
a point of view and he did not.
Q Sir, can you tell us why it was necessary to make the
decision before you saw the President
PM Wouldn't you have done so if you had been in my position?
Feeling that it might be raised by Mr Laird with me. Or if not by
Secretary Laird by Secretary of State Rogers. And by that time too
I had received the letter from David Fairbairn. So consequently 
2.
I wanted to know Cabinet's views in case I was asked the question.
You would have known though when you saw MR Laird of
Cabinet's decision Well look I am not quite certain when I first received
the information but I know I -told Secretary of State Rogers and
I told the President what the position was and it is as I have just
announced it to you.
Are you concerned that you were not aware of the situation?
I was concerned Yes But I did not consider it to be
-a matter of, what shall I call it, very great importance. I would
have liked to have known earlier though.
Sir, have you asked for any investigations how it happened
that the U. S. asked us to do this on September 30 and you did not
find out until I think on the 26th
No I haven't. You must know that I nm here for a particular
purpose. I am here on matters ofgreat moment and importance to
Australia and the Australian Government. I don't want to get involved
in details at this time. I am sure Ir Anthony can look after
it. And already the M4inister for Defence has given assurance that
he will try to insure that it doesn't happen a gain.
Do you feel that the actual decision for Australia to
train troops in Cambodia doesnot mark any great departure from past
policy Have you decided that in your absence to make this decision
in a hurry and saw it as an important policy decision
First of all there will be no intentions of training any
troops whatsoever in Cambodia. There will be a training of Cambodian
troops in Australia and a proposal that they should be trained jointly
by the Americans, New Zealanders and ourselves in South Viet-Nam.
Secondly when I arrived . Ln New York, or the day after I arrived in
Ned York, I was handed Mr Fairbairn's letter in which he said he
would shortly be raising it. And 1 think I gathered the impression
that he had some hope that he might have been able to raise it with
me before I left. 71-ell,~ after heztring a question which was raised
in Canberra by one of your own representatives, I asked immediately
about it when I got to San Francisco. I checked again and when I
was in New York I made a further check and said... ' Look this has
become public knowledge. Now please let me have an answer as to
where we are moving', so that the Defence machinery and the Foreign
Office knew what it intended to propose so there was no difficulty
in presenting it to CAhinket at its next meeting.
Mly question was you said ' Sure the announcement that we
would be training Cambodian troops in Au : ralia was in the Defence
Report. However that would seem to me to be a different matter
entirely from training troops in South ViJet-Nam. ( ITAUDIBLE) From
what you have said I gather you don't see this as a major policy
change but just as a normal extension of what we are doing in Cambodia
Yes, and part-' larly b~ ecause we are prepared to train
South Vietnamese troops in American training centres in South Viet-Nam.
I thought it was just an extension of the existing policy.
/ 2. 
Q Sir, was there a request from the Camb odian Governpemt to
to train their men in South Viet-Nam
PM That I don't know. I dcn't think there was WhatI_
am trying to you are putting me through a cross examination
-at a time when I have had so jnany tremendously important problems to
deal with. But I havenot delved into this at all. I have wanted to
-touch on other issues that are vital to the security of this country
in the future and to learn more about American thinking on issues
world issues of importance so I haven't gone any further than what
I just said to you.
Q Sir, we were told the other day that you had given your
views to Cabinet on this matter. It seems to me that you would have
gone into it fairly well before. Did you give your views to Cabinet
PM What do you mean give my views to Cabinet It had never
been raised in Cabinet while I was there.
Q No but we were told that when you asked for Cabinet's
decision you also conveyed your own views on the subject
PM I felt that this was an extension of our existing policies
insofar as it related to the South Vietnamese but in having said that
I realized it was a matter that had to be dealt with by the Cabinet
in'Canberra who have much better access to information than I had and
they had to make a decision. But in principle they knew the way that
my mind was trending.
Q Sir on the question of Cabinet's decision does this mean
that as small as it may be there will be Australian military advisers
committed to Seuth Viet-Nam over and above those that we had decided
to leave after we withdraw fighting troops.
PM Again you are pressing me on something I can't get an
answer to. I can't give it because I said so far that the decision
is in principle and I have not seen the Cabinet papers on it. I
have seen two cables from fir Anthony and no more. 



VISIT TO THE U. S. AND U. K. 1971
WASHINGTON
PRESS CONFERENCE AT BLAIR HOUSE
GIVEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN4 PRIIIE MINISTER, W1ILLIAI4 McMAHON
2 NOVEBEP. 1971
( See separate text for questions on Cambodia)
PM Gentlemen, I think I can start of f by saying that yesterday
afternoon I saw the Secretary for Defence and he gave me a rundown
of the present position of the U. S. Forces in South Viet-Namn: And
as far as he could his appreciation of what is likely to happen in
the months to come. He painted a heartening picture of the situation
both in terms of military capability and of their development
programme and the kind of assistance that the United States was prepared
to give. Their military -prograrme is not of course, affected
by the decision of the Senate when it threw out the Civil Aid Bill.
So that they will be able to proviie not only the war equipment
but the other assistance that is needed to sustain a South Vietnamese
Army and the Civil Programme. Regrettably I can't go into the
details of withdrawals or transfers of equipment because the conversation
was off the record and I can only give you a general impression
of the discussions. At the same time the Secretary and Mr
Packard who was with me,. gave me an appreciation of the relevant
strengthe of the United States and of the Soviet. They pointed out
that the United States was sufficiently powerful and that the buildup
of the United States Forces was proceeding ra idly and would,
in their view, provide the kind of deterrent that was needed in the
interests o-f the free world. They also explained the position of
the Soviet Navy in the Indian Oc-ean and of the intention of the U. S.
to maintain forces there as a counter-balancing force to the Navy
of the USSR. In particular e~ ither one of them did Tp oint out to me
the need for countries on the littoral of the Indian Ocean to be
prepared to provide base facilities so that the fullest and most
effective use could be made of the United States Forces for the use
of the ' Naval Base at Cockburn. and the Air Force Base at Learmonth
and the extent to which the British/ United. States signal station
would . be put in the future. That's about the sum total of what was
discussed yesterday in outline. Today I saw the President and
again it was an of f the record conversation. I can assure you of
this one point the discussions were frank, they could not have
been put more frankly and in covt plete detail and I have no reservation
whatsoever in saying -that this is the kind of consultation
we like and I doubt whether it could have been better. FirstMr
Nixon, who was accompanied by : 4. r Kissinger, explained their policy
in relation to China that is the People's Republic of China
and their desire to bring the People's Republic of -China into the
comity of nations and to induce it to ado * pt policies that could
lead to an exnectation and a realisation of Doace. Mr Kissinger
took a very active part and explained in copsiderable detail the
kin4 9f conversations that had taken place in Pegiftg orh botfl odcasions.
* He lso explained the necessity for secrecy. The second
point the President mentioned was the mission ' ha wculd pay to M4oscow
and explained that the fact that he was prepared to visit both
capitals clearly indicatoed that they were not trying to play one
country of f against the other, but were attempting to explain
overall Amo. rican policy and its desire for a deten-te and a reduction
of tensions. And the position in the Mediterranean was explained 
2.
in much the same way as it was explained in the discussions with Mr
Laird and the President went over much the same ground as MR Laird
had gone over as to American intentions in South Viet-Nam. Pretty
full details were given to me of what their intentions were,
but for reasons I have given you I am unable to go any further than
I have gone at the moment. One point I can mention to you because I
think that this is of great importance to Australians ,, as that he did
agree with me that the phrase could be used that the United States
Government, from the President down, recognised, or were prepared to
confirm the unqualified and unconditional assurances that had been
given to us in the ANZUS Treaty were as relevant and valid today as
they were at the time the Treaty was negotiated.
We discussed in particular the problems of Japan against the
background of the decision in the United Nations and the proposed
visits to Poking and Moscow and also the difficulties associated with
the realignment of currencies and the import surcharge. Mr Connally
will bo de~ aling , with these matters in Tokyo shortly. But it was
emphasised to me that the difficulties were not associated peculiarly
with the United States and the Japanese alone, but with other countries
and particularly the French. It was a very frank and useful discussion
on the monetary probL , ms.
Other matters were discusscd of our bilateral trading
relationships particularly the export from Australia of meat and the
possibilities due to the dock strike of a carry over of supplies and
matters of a similar kind. All in all I can give you this assurance
that I could not have wished for greater concentration that occurred
on this occasion. I Think I should mention to you too in this context
that suJ-saqan to the second visit of MR Kissinger to Peking the
President did, through the Australian Ambassador, communicate with me
on several occasions. Those communications were, I believe, not only
productive of the greatest goodwill but indicated a desire that we
should understand the American point of view, and why they had taken
the various initiatives they had taken. Later on I saw the Secretary
of State and he too reaffirmed the assurances relating to the ANZUS
Treaty and also went over the ground relating to South Viet-Nam and
American military aid progvammes there. It was a very interesting
discussion and showed, I believe, the very high regard the-U~ iitd
State holds for the Australian people and for the policies of the
Australian Government. To me it has been a most valuable me : ting and
one I think which is of benefit to us because of the concrete and unqualified
assurances that have been given.
Q Prime Minister, on the Indian Oc can a question about the
use of bases in Western Australia. Did the Pkesident ARM yOU if thig
was possible or was it taken as a matter of course
PM It Whs More in the area of Mr Laird that the questions relating
to bases were mentioned. But they would be only too happy to
use the Naval Bases and they will, of course, want some sort of access
in case they need repair facilities. It wad ! AR Laird who was more
interested in this question.
Q You Uave him this assurance that American Forces would be
able to use these Bases.
PM We had, of course, given that already. And they had also
assured us that they would, when necessary, appreciate the opportunity
to use the Bases. 
( See separate text for questions on Cambodia)
Q On the broader area, Sir, you raised just on Cambodia,
is there anything said to you which has caused you any surprise in
your discussions with the Americans porhaps or if not surprise
whether or not they may have adopted perhaps a different tone from
what you expected.
PM -It depended which area you local~ ise it to.
Q I thought I would just leave it up to you because obviously
you have a fair idea on this occasion of the thinking of the American
people on most issues. I was just wondering in your discussioms with
Mr Laird and ! Nr Nixon, were you surprised that they placed emphasis
on any particular areas and were there any new answers which you found
unusual given the Playback you have had in Canberra
PM No but this might be wise after the event because so much
was said that I thought was logical and wise but I didn't expect them
to say and didnot think that their thinking had gone as far as it
obviously had gone. To that extCent I was surprised, Yes.
Q Was this on China?
PM Well, on several issues there their thinking was we had
given a lot of thought to it, we did not know how profound their
thought was or how far they had gone and it was on these that the
profoundness and the lengths to which they had gone that were a little
surprising.
Q It jU8V Odu~ od to me that you said it was several issu(: es,
one of them was China if that's any indication. Is that right
PM Yes.
Q Sir, there has always been a certain ambiguity about the obligation
of ANZUS for the presence of Australian troops in Singapore
and Malaysia. Could that be clarified in any way
P11 No I didn't Dursue that. Whiat I wanted was an affirmation,
-a strong affirmation that I received from both the President and
Secretary of State of. unqualified support for ANZUS, and the view
was expressed to unqualified support not only from the Administration
and the Congress but from the Amcerican people as well. THey wanted
to display complete goodwill towards Australia and this was just as
important, perhaps more important to me, than the actual words of the
Treaty itself.
Q Why did you demand such a strong affirmation Sir
PM Because I think there is a lot of discussion going on in
Australia today by people and not necessarily well informed, that
ANZUS is starting to re Dcede into the limbo of forgotten things. That
is I didn' t think it was true but naturally enough I want to get the
strongest affirmation I can get in order to refute these suggestions. .4. 
Q Sir on this question, if T could just add one further point
on this, the speech that was made by 11, r Bowen in New York. It
caused or was a matter of some controversy in Australia. You yourself
in Parliament defended this speech as being suloported by the Government.
Did you raise the terms of that speech privately with Mr Nixon?
PM No
Q -Well, * put it this way, was it raised in any fashion or did
you raise it that a change in Governmant in Australia would have in-
-volved any change in the existing relationshin between Australia and
America.
PM No
Q Did you discuss with Nixon or did you gat any assurance
from JAR Nixon about trade with the United Sta tes, any suggestion
that wool might get special treatment in import surcharges or tariffs?
PM You're in an area flow that I am not able to discuss in any
detail. I did talke about our trade relations with him and mentioned
meat and wool.
Q Could I I would like to ask just one more thing Sir. Did
you ask M~ r Nixcr_. to come to Australia?
PM I informed him that he would be a welcome guest but at the
same time I indicated that I would un~ derstand it if he found it
difficult to come in an election year. He laughed when I said it
and said well thank Heavens that you recognise the difficul. ties, it
would be ex4-remely difficult.
Q Speaking a-bout requesting an assurance of their support for
ANZUS, Mr Prime Minister, did you explain ' this feeling in Australia,
that it was receding into a limbo of forgotten things and who held
that view
PM Could I make a correction. I did say that there was a feeling,
some feeling, but not necessarily one that was widespread that ANZUS
-was receding into the linbo of forgotten things. I did not ask for a
positive assurance relating to it, it was given then without any
-further prompting. But by this time, his feelings towards Australia,
and towards the Australian people, and the high regard that he had
for us as not only friendly, but willing allies and one who could be
relied upon and trusted and relied upon, had become obvious.
Q Today, Sir, Mir Rogers had a press conference, the one that
the press sat in on and during the course of which he remarked that
the President was concernod for the Foreign Aid cut, that the decision
of the Senate would affect the foreign policy posture of the
United States and the rest of the world. Did the President expatiate
on this with you because M~ r Rogers referred specifically to Viet-Nam
while he was in the context talking about obligations created in Asia
and that this posed a threat in fact to the Nixon doctrine, in fact
he used that expression, to refer to that part of the world if I may
settle this for you ( INAUDIBLE). He also said in the public / 5 
statemnnt that there could be a collapse of the South VietntmeeeJ
economy arising from this fact and there does seem to me to be a
conflict in what he said earlier about it being able to carry on
and that they also will be reconciled... ( INAUDIBLE).
PM First of all turning to what Mr Walsh said, this question
of aid, of civil aid programmes was only touched on perfunctorily
by the President and he did express the view that there would be a
reinstatement or partial reinst'. tement of the aid programmes. He
did not go any further.
Secretary of State Rogers dealt with it in greater detail
but felt that not too much. should be said about it. He was very
sorry for the vote but particularly the large numx. er of absentees
and the fact that it was taken at the time when Mayoral and other
elections were taking place but there is not much more I can add
to what you already know. He also is hopeful that the Congress
will take action to make additional appropriations but he did not
want to be too forthcoming about it. As to what you said, MR Reid.
about there seems tg be an inconsistency, it has to be looked at in
two ways. So far/ me bulk of assistance to South Viet-Nam is
concerned it is under the military funding programme and that won't
be affected. As to the balance, it will be civil aid and I don't
know to what extent civil aid is involved.
Q What is your view?
What do you think of it MR Prime Minister
PM Which
Q Not the Foreign Aid cut, the decision by Senate
PM When I'm in another country I don't like to make any critical
statements relating to what that country has done. It is its
business and I don't like interfering in its own domestic affairs
other than to say this. I thought i t was regrettable, I thought
a mistake was made but I have a feeling that to a large extent the
vote will be, in one way or another, will be reinstated by Congress.
I can go no further than that.
Q Don't you beltve Prime ilinister, that it does affect us
simply because the withdrawal of aid from the Asia Pacific region,
would certainly cause us to rethink changes in Foreign Policy.
-PM I don't th-ink it will be any change to us. We will go
ahead with our aid programmes
Until I know exactly what the United States Government
or Congress intends to do on Foreign Aid, I refrain from
any comment other than what I have already made.
Q Is there any suggestion, Mr Prime Minister, that Australia
may be called upon to put forward more aid to South Viet-Nam
PM Tere might be but I doubt whether it would be practicable.
Q In what circumstances might these be now requested
PM I don't know Ivan. That is hypothetical and I'm not getting
involved into a world of hypothesis. 
Q Sir, M! r Kissinger was in China for the first time at the time
of the Labour Party delegation. Did he talk about that at all and the
effects..., of the visit.
PM No, he didn't, he merely explained the kind of conversation
they had, what it was about and the significance of it and its short
and long term significance.
Q Did you get the feeling Sir that the United States was moving
-quicker towards diplomatU,. recognition of the PRC than we ourselves
are.
P11 No.
Q Did Mir Kissingczr sit in throughout the entire interview Sir
PM Yes, And par-ticipatei to a considerable extent.
Q Did they discuss the United Nations vote and the implications
that it has for the United States relations with not so much China
but the rest of the world
PM They did not do so but Secret.-ary of State Roqers did.
Q And what did VMr Rogers say I have seen his public statement
on the matter. They referred~ more to what they call the atmosphere
in which it was taken than to the actual vote itself.
PM I can't go any further than I have gone because as I said I
am limited to what I can say to what I have already given you. If
there is anything more I think got to go from the Secretary of
State Rogers and not through me.
Q Mir Prime Minister you made the point that... you specifically
made the point of saying that prior to MR Kissinger's visit to Peking
( I am sorry) prior to the announcement of Mr Kissinger's visit to
Peking and the announcement of the pending visit of Nixon that the
White House did communicate withyou on several occasions. Are you
saying Sir that they told you beforehand
PM THis is the second visit
O No, the first visit.
PM I didn't say so, I am., sorry, I was referring to the second.
0-Sir, on this currency thing arising from the conversations
today, were you able to fix mentally upon a timetable yourself, final
decisions on currency
PM No, I can't and they can't either.
Q Did the President seem concerned about the way in which Mr
Sato's position, in jeopardy in politicq would be affected by the decisions
taken in both the economic and political level in America
at the moment. This is the subject of considerable speculation
throug'hout the world. I think I've heard you express some concern
about this yourself. 
PM I can but repeat what I said before. that the President and
the Secretary of State did refer to the importance of Japan in the
world, scene and not only because of its industrial and political
position but because of the problems that were faced on currency realignments
and trade as well. I can't go any further than that.
Q How about yourself Did you raise the question of MR Sato's
position as distinct from that of Japan as a whole
PM Yes.
Q Could you tell us what your feelings were on this?-
PMq No I'm sorry.
T-M!' r Prime Minister, obviously attitudes to defence in our
region was obviously quite a big part in your talk with the President
today. Could . you tell us something about that
Py, It was a big part of our talks. And it was emphasised that
the United States had no intention whatsoever of withdrawing from the
Asian region. Wh~ at it was doing was matching its commitment to its
capabilities and above all they pointed out that the haNZUS Treaty was
for them part of the supreme law of the land and they gave clear and
unqualified assurances that the ANZUS Treaty was just as valid today
in the minds of the Administration, the Congress and the people of
the United States as it was when the Treat' was first signed. That's
the answer.
Q Mir Prime Minister. one of the significant discussions you had
with the President today related to the American Naval buildup as
planned in the Indian Ocean. Iow significant is this and what part
will Australia play
PZ1 I think you have gone a little bit too far in saying the
significant American Naval buildup in the Indian Oce: an. WKhat they
intend to do is to have some kind of parity with the Soviet Union's
Naval Forces that are now or might go into the Indian Ocean and I do
hope that they will be able tc have access to Australian base facilities
when their Navy, or elcments of their fleet, are there.
0 Does that mean an expansion of the facilities there are planned?
PH No, not so far as I know. That was not discussed.
Q MR Prime iinister, what do you believeyou and Australia have
gained by today's talks with MR Nixon
PM They were very frank and honest discussions and they did show
the wish of the United States Government to have consultations with
the Australian Government on matters of mutual interest and importance
to both of us. That was the first important effect. The second one
without any doubt was the interest it has created in Australia abouzt
the viability and the permanence of the ANZUS Treaty. There is a
tendency back home for some Australians to say well it doesn't matter
very much and it is dying from lack of use and people do not care
about it very much more neither do the people in the United States.
Those two statements are wrong. It is a cruciall. y important Treaty
from our point of view. Secondly, so far as the Americans are concerned
that is the United States, from the Government, Congress and the people
of the United States, there is no doubt about it that they regard the
assurances given in that Treaty as of crucial importance to them and
assurances that they will respect. In their minds the terms of the
Treaty will be maintained by the United States Congress and Government. 
8.
one other short question. Did you disagree with anything which
Mr Nixon had to say
PMI Not so far as I can raedmer. I would have to go over everything
that was said in m~ uch greater detail before I could give a complete
answer. But most of what he said and fEor that matter what Mr
Kissinger and Mr Laird, not Mr Laird, and to a greater extent what was
said by Secretary of State Rogers coincided with what we in Australia
are thinking. I would like particularly to compliment the President
for the frankness with which he expressed his vi'* ews and the detail
with1 which he went into the various problems that arose and the informat~
lon conveyed to us.
And I think too if I can say this his liking for Australia
is very great and for that reason I did express the hope that he might
be able to come to Australia next year although I doubt whether it will
be practicable. 



Today before we turn to our questions I want to talk about
some of the problems that we face. First of all yesterday I did
have the great privilege of having a long talk with President
Nixon.. and Dr. Kissingen I can assure you that those talks
could not have been more intimate and I could not have wished
that The President would have taken me into his confidence to
a greater degree than he did. Little was left unsaid and he
I did convince me that he is on the right track in trying to get
a rapprochement in world affairs and to try aiud get a reduction
in tensions so that we can divert our attention to the gcod life
and better opportunities for our citizens than to devoting
so much of our time and so much of our effort to the impediment
of var. No7 I've welcomed my discussions too with Mr Laird and
Mr Packard who will shortly go to Australia. I've welcomed the
discussions I've had with Secretary of State Rogers, who I think
I can claim is a personal friend and a man very Qell known to
me. In Australia we are building one society and I want to
emphasize this. We want one society united in mutual loyalty
but richly diverse in ethnic, religion and cultural back. rounds and
influences. As to our national development and the state of the
economy, I see ahead for Australia a remarkable prospect. 7e
have by good fortune, and I think too by good management, created
all the basic conditions that are the ingredient for success. I
don't know of any country that I have visited in recent years
and I've visited a great number of them but I don't know of ary
countxy that offers quite the same prospects as we do. So if aj of
you feel you would like to become immigrants to nj country just slip
a note up to Mr. President. Let me know your name and address and 
I'll hand it on to one of my officials and see if you're w~ orthy
of becoming a member of my own press corps, particularly if
I feel that you're indulgent towards myself. 14ow as to the
basic ingredients for success. Our population is growing, our
economy is sopundly based. It has diversity and strength and our
national resources are not only immense, but they're growing day
by day. If you open the paper and don't find some newl discovery
that is likely to add to our wealth it's a strange day for the
press I can assure you. are too developin6 all those skills
that the technological age demands and through the combination of
all these qualities and virtues me are becoming a middle power. I
think ' we have a significance in the Pacific theatre that is out of
all proportion to the wealth that is being produced in my country.
I believe we are getting into this position of trust, a position
where people eousult us because they know that over the years we
have been S completely trustworthy and reliable ally. They know
that in terms of the aid programmes civil aid programes on an
official basis that we do at least as well as any other countxy.
pAnd v hen the numbers go up I can assure you that you will see that
our name in terms of performance per head of population is
regarded as remarkably good. As I came along one of your avenues
today, Independence Avenue, I couldn't help but ask myself -the simple
question " Wihy is it tha-t we don' -t parade this virtue of independence
and inter-dependence in the same ways you do here. We have the same
lusty vitality, the same desire to feel that we can express our
opinions and our views. Vie know too that in a world that's becoming
increasingly complex, in a world where you never know what is likely
to happen in the forty-eight hours that are to come, we also have
to have friends and allies. Consequently we want friends and allies wh(
are juist 
as trustwiorthy and reliable as tie are ourselves. There are certain
factors in the Australian economy that ' we have had to 6ive some
considerable attention to in recent years, particularly over the
last twelve months. Not that these problems are singular
to Australia. I can assure you they are not, but we do. face the
problem in exactly the same way as you do. But re have cost
inflation and we have to a minor degree the appearance of a small
degree of unemployment that we feel that ' we have to overcome
as quickly as we can. We have certain other ~ economic problems
too that are not so much the direct consequence of internal
problems but are problems that arise as the resul. ofi our
relationship iith other countries and the changes that occur
in our trade, particularly lately the changes that have occurred in
our international currency situation. May I now turn to one
of your problems the one relating to the currency crisis.
First of all might I say that of course we understand your
position. For long the United States has, as it were, shcltered
more than a fair proportion of the burden of the world. Not
only in the way in which it has provided security for so many
countries but also because it has been a reserve currency able
to provide the additional international currency that it has
provided the free exchange of goods and services. We understood
therefore it " ias necessary not only that you should reduce the
burden of your defence effort but also that you should have
the opportunity to get a better balance in your payment
system. All that ' we had to decide was the amount of the
turn round that was necessary somewhere 
near eight thousand billion dollars per year, but the
ways and means that turn round was to be achieved.
But I go on further to say this: that so far as
we are concerned we are not in a position where we
can be explicit about what our own intentions will
be because we are not a member of the group of ten. We
don't belong to working party three of the OECD.
Consequently un. til decisions are made by the countries
that have the decisive influence in world finance, it
is not sensible or prudent for us to be making up our
minds the way we'll go. On the contrary it seems
sensible that we keep all our options open. Wlhen
the major decisions are made, particularly on the DM
and the yen, we'll be able to make up our minds what
we are to do. What we do hope is that there is an
early re-alignment of currencies, and we hope, even
more importantly, that before that occurs that your
imports surcharge is removed and that trade will be
freer. This way people will have the stars by which
they can guide their economic fortunes, rather than the
mysteries of today that are confusing everyone. If the
difficulties remain for much longer then I think you can
have action by other countries in retaliation and a
hardening of ideas into dogmas that I think can do
damage to all of us. So I do hope therefore that we
will have changes and I hope that those changes take
place fairly quickly. I can assure you that in my
conversations with various members of your Administration
I learnt that they share exactly the same view as we
do in Australia.
The next economic issue is Britains entry into the
European community. For our part we have always C~~
accepted the right of the United Kingdom's Government
to make up its own mind what it thought was in its
best interests. Nevertheless, what we felt was that
Britain, with whom we have had so many years satisfactory
and reasonable trading relationships, would represent
our interests in the European community and try a a 
and protect our exports into the Community countries,
particularly the primary imports to the maximum of our
capacity. But now we do find that there are these
growing trade barriers probably as much as $ 350 million
worth of our goods. We regard it as of critical importance
to us all that not only does Britain do its best
to represent our point of view and attempt to protect
our interests, but that we ourselves discuss with all
the European Community countries our problems, to enlist
support to see that there is a greater interchan:: e of
commodoties in the world. And. that far from being
isolationist and internal-looking that they. will be
outward-looking. And that the principles of the Kennedy
round of negotiations will once again be respeClted in
the world and that freedom of trade will become the
catch-phrase rather than the alternative.
May I now turn to our foreign policy and defence.
Because as I said last night at the dinner that was
given to me by the President: we believe in Australia
and I am sure you believe it to be true too that profound
changes are taking place in the policies and relationiships
of the super and middle powers. The KPeoples
Republic of China has now entered the United N~ ations
and ever since February of last year, continuing right
through to March and until representation was achieved
a few days ago, we have persisted with the poli'cy that
first of all the Peoples Republic of China should have
the permanent seat on the Security Council. At the
same time, because we believe in the principles of
the Charter itself and we believe in the Charter of
* universality, we wanted Taiwan also to remain a member
but a member of the General Assmebly. We-too look at
the Soviet Union with its increasing power and the
kowledge that it is a world power as well. It has L&amp;
begun. starting to exercise that power -Ln a part of
* world the Indian Ocean. Up to the present moment it
has to be confessed that they have not had large fleets 
there. Up to twenty vessels might be there at any one
time. They have pretty considerable afloat capacity and
they have some access to port facilities and to airfield
facilities. We understand just as well as anyone else
the reasons why they want this present. In some way
to counteract the influence of China, in some ways to
balance the influence of the to protect their own
trade interests, and we also believe to be able to make
some political influence on the littoral states if they
feel that the opportunity arises. For our part, and
on behalf of the U. K. we are watching this position very
carefully. Your Government has decided to put in a
signal station in the Diego Garcie, I think I could
take it for granted, although I have not V~ een given.
any concrete assurances about it that you yourself ril
have a counter balancing force there from time to time.
Not necessarily permanently based, but I believe you
will have a counter balancing force that will show to
the littoral states and show to the world that the U0
is prepared to live up to its obligations in the Indian
Ocean as well as it accepts the international burdens
of being the greatest of the western powers and the
greatest of the super powers as well. We are building
a naval base in south western Western Australia at
Cockburn Sound and a first class airfield at Learmouth.
We do hope the United States will be able to join with
us in the use of these facilities when elements of their
fleets might visit our shores. So too the United Kingdom
that has its small interests in South Africa and has also
agreed to take part with tte United States in the signal
station in Diego. Garcia. So you can therefore see that
we are there -the three of us are there not because
we believe that we have any offensive operations in
mind, but purely for defensive purposes. To show the
rest of the world that we are determined to support
the cause of freedom and make our contribution to freedom
whenever the opportunity should arise~. What I do say
to you is this: that we hope that in time our Asian 
and Pacific neighbours will come to form a close-knit
community that will have a political weight and an
importance of its own. By that I mean that I do believe
that we have a degree of importance in the South-East
Asian countries that is out of all proportion to our
own industrial strength and our military capabilities.
But I believe that they think this way because of their
trust in us, but much more importantly believe in it
because they know that we feel that by creating an
Asian identity, by creating the feeling that in cooperation
we can be a deterrent to aggressive action by
insurgency and by other kinds of subversive operations.
By that means we can ward off attack and we can devote
increasing quantities of our assets to developments in
the future, particularly developments for those who
today suffer from hunger and the privations of a primitive
community,,
Might I come to the next and probably the last point
that I want to mention before questions are asked. I
want to again emphasise because it becomes an, article
of faith with my own people that whenever we are faced
with a problem, whether it is in security area cultural
relations, trade or finance, we do make up our own minds
what is in our interest. But I like to use the word
" independence" at the same time as I use the word interdependence.
It indicates the kind of attitude we have
to the world in which we live as well as the world
with which we have to associate. I 
W~ hat re were doing provides a framework for cooperation
amongst several of the countries of Southeast Asia. In particular,
only a few days ago we have sig-ned or initialled a five part
agreement with Yalaysia, Singapore, the United Kingdom, New
Zealand and ourselves. And what we hope is that in time
our Asian and Pacific neighbours will come to form the same
kind of close knit community which will be similar to the five
power arrangements we have with the countries I've mentioned
and that will have political weight and importance of their
own. As we see it this will not be a military alliance or bloc
but a grouping of like minded countries engaged in close
cooperation for their mutual welfare and development whose
collective voice will count for something in the world. None
of this involves any reakening of our alliance with the United
States which remains, and I emphasise this as I emphasise it
again and again the sheet anchor of our security. Indeed we
would not be able to play our part in the security of our own
region without the support for our own defence efforts which
the ANZUS treaty provides. Yesterday, the President himself gave
his assurance in the clearest terms that the treaty was there to
stay and has continuing vitality. Our relationship with the
United States has been tested in conflict. Australia and the
United States have fought side by side in world wars, in Korea
and in Viet-Nam. W~ e have worked closely together for the
development and welfare of Southeast Asia and we enjoy the
closest cooperation and consultation in the day to day condaict
of our international relationships as my~ present visit has
underlined. Of course we make our own independent assessments of
particular situations and problems. T. e vigorously defend and
pursue our own national interests in the international 3cene 
and in your bi-latera. relations. At times there are of course
differences between Australian and American assessments and between
particular Australian and American. interests but the sum of the
differences that mayr arise between us is small compared with the
interests re have in common, the ideals and objectives which
tie share. We see ourselves as a partner Pith the United States
in efforts to produce a durable world order and a balance in
which the medium sized and smaller powers will be able to consolidate
their independence and. live in peace. The support we offer is
the support of a significant and independent countxy in the
Asian and Pacific regions. A countzy grow~ ing in strength and
influence. In short 11Mr President, we see our relationships
not as an echo, not as a satellite but as a partner in the
Pacific. U 
I also emphasise the very close and cordial relationships that exist
between your country and ours. At times, of course, there are differences
of opinion between us, but they axe not very great. It is the coimmon
interest we have and coimon ideals we have that I think are much more
important than the differences of opinion wherever they have occurred.
In the discussions that I have had with your Administration I have found a
very strong disposition to come to terms Pith us whenever I have raised
some difficulty that I think it would be better if we solved. And I
think as a result of the discussions I have had in the last few days we Pill
be able to talk on a more frank and, I believe, more sensiblc basio with
Mr. Packard and Mr. Stans and others when they come to Australia than Re
would have been able to do just a few weeks ago.
Question: Mr. Prime MiUnister. Is Australia worried about deteriorating
relations between the United States and Japan and the resulting effects
on security in the Pacific?
Prime Minister: Yes. We were worried about the ostensible deterioration
in relationships between Japan and the United States because we think that
there are five powers that must take place in a general rearrangement of
equilibrium in the world if we are to ensure the basic conditions of success
both in peace and in future developments and we Iaaow that Japan has to
play a particularly iniortant part in the Pacific theatre. I think that
when the first visit of Mr. Kissinger took place to Peking there was, I think,
a feeling not only of disappointment but almost of despair in the case of
Japan. And since the currency crisis and the ten per cent surcharge has been
imposed I think that the worries of Japan have become increasingly great.
Now it is our view that unless these problems of the currency crisis and
a freer exchange of goods and services take place then you are likely to
have a period of retaliation and you are likely to find, as I said in the
body of my speech, that the views that are held temnoarily can easily tur-n 
into dogmas. I have discussed this -with the President; I have discussed it
' with other members of the Administration; they understand the position
equally as much as I do, and I think I can assure you they know the
necessity for a quick solution. But they also point out and I think it's
wise that I should point this out to you too that the answer doesn't fall
exclusively in the minds and the hearts and in the intelligence of the
~ American and the Japanese people. The EEC countries and particularly
France axe involved and consequently it is wise that we try and get a general
realignment, a general rearrangement of parities as wdll as getting the
import surcharge taken off at the earliest moment. Bthx it will not be of
great advantage to any of us if we find that some countries in the Group of
Ten, not Australia, because we are not a member of it, but if some countries
in the Group of Ten refuse to play their part, particularly refuse to play
their part in ensuring that there is a turn round of something of the order
of eight billion dollars in the balance of payments as between the United
States and the rest of the world.
Q~ iestion: What do you see as the future defence alliances in South East Asia
in the light of the United Nations vote and President Nixon's revised China
policy. Prime Minister: I don't think that there will be any general realignment of
security or military alignments in S. E. Asia because-the truth of the matter
is there is not one country there that is on its own or in combination with one
of its allies capable of defending itself against a major attack by one of
the super powers or one of the very great powers. The second point is that
I don't think the Nixon doctrine itself has undergone any change whatsoever
as a result of the new China policies or the meeting of the President with
the heirarchy in Moscow. I believe that this policy still holds good and it
is a policy identical with our own. Primary responsibility for defence
= awt reside basically with the country concerned but if in the case of
insurgency or subversion it becomes beyond their capacity it becomes an area 
responsibility. After that I believe that is protection against attack by a
nuclear power, whether by nuclear weapons or otherwise, that the United
States will live up to its treaty obligations and its defence obligations.
Consequently I can't see the necessity for any great realignment in the
defence or security sense. I believe the position remains much the same as
it was before these general security realignments took place.
Question: Mr. Prime t-Unister. If Uncle Sam is moving into a balance of powe-.
with Red China where does this leave Australia?
Prime Minister: First of all I don't think that this ifteans that there could
be an alliance between the Peoples Republic and the United States. In myr
view the motive, in fact the sole motive behind the actions of the President,
is to try to get a balancing of power in order to ensure that countries
can look forward to the future free from the dangers of an imminent var and can
consequently devote more of their efforts to developing projects and to be
able to provide the under-developed countries of the woxld with better
opportunities for better living. In other -words I don't think for one moment
the U. S. ' wants to change its relationship with Japan. So far as we are
concerned I have received unqualified assurances from the President as well as
the Secretary of State that the ANZUS Treaty remains as valid today as it did
on the date on which it was signed. So I just want to, if I can, dismiss the
idea of any alignment of the U. S. or ganging up by the U. S. with the Peoples
Republic of China or Russia. On the contrary what he wants to ensure is that
there is a reduction in tensions and the countries, of course, that must
make the major, if not the sole contributions towards the reduction of tensions
is the U. S. S. R. and in particular too China as it moves into the nuclear age. 
Question: Will you please expand on your reference to the dialogue with
China. How soon will relations be established?
Prime Minister: Our own?
Questioner: Yes.
Prime* Minister: This again is one of those questions that is extremely difficult
to answer. As long ago as February/ March last year I did ask myr Department,
I was then the External Minister, and later on I became the Foreign Minister
too, to develope a series of position papers relating to China, that is the
Peoples Republic to the U. S. S. R. and to Japan. We then decided not only
did we rant representation of China in the United Nations but that steadily
we should move toward bilateral improvement in our bilateral relationships
between China and ourselves. You will notice that I don't use the word 6
" recogaition" because I think that would be moving a little too quickly for
some sections of public opinion in Australia itself. I have also been
reminded by many people that when you are dealing with the Chinese they take
their time so you don't want to be in too great a hurry. For example
one country reminded us that it took sixteen years for them from the date they
started till the date recognition or the formalities of recognition were.
completed. So far as we in Australia are concerned we permit our own citizens
to move freely subject to security requirements. We have got a very liberal
trade attitude. Apart from strategic goods of a war-like character we permit
them to sell to us and for us to sell to them. In cultural and scientific
relationships there are no bars whatsoever. So far as we are concerned, leaving
defence and security out of it, there is complete freedom of movement and
restrictions are very very few. We do have some problems on trade. And at
once I think I sho" u I make it clear that if China has the opportunity to play
politics of course it will do so, but equally too if it believes it can get
advantage out of trade or other relationships with Australia or some advantage to
China, there might be greater advantages to ourselves, of course, it will
deal with it in a matter of fact and businesslike fashion. So me are there 
ve have been negotiating with them in various countries and particularly in
Hong Kong. Wie haven't got very far in the improvement in our relationships
but the matter is in their hands if they indicate shortly that they would
like a trade mission to go to China or they would like officials of our own
G~ overnment to be associated with a trade mission ' we would take action, but
we are in no hurry. At every step we vill consider our own interests, our
own best interests, and what we should do in our best interests. We certainly
are not going to be creating the impression with the Peoples Republic of China
or the Government of the Peoples Republic of a great anxiety at any time
to have better relationships with them. Vie will do what we can but we ' Will
be just as patient as they are and above all we will be continually
considering Australia's major interests.
Question: Would Australia favour a U. S. military presence in South East
Asia after Vietnam and also what do you consider the prospects for peace
will be in Indo-China after the American withdrawal?
Prime M-inister: The first part of the question is very easy to answer.
But it is a question that should be directed to the United States Administ.-atio
and not to me, because in a country where I am a guest I think it is a little
imprudent to be offering suggestions to the gove rnm ent of that country as to
its conduct of either -diplomatic or military affairs. I believe in the
Bandung principle of non-interference in the affairs of other countries, but
speaking as it were at a press conference where I suppose everything will be
kept relatively secret, of course we want the American presence to remain
there just as long as it can and of course we want them even when ground
combat troops have been withdrawn. We would like them to maintain residual
air and naval forces providing the people of the United States feel that it is
proper and in the best interests of the Indo-Chinese people. As to the
question of the viability of Indo-China, or the four states of Indo-China,
from all that I have heard during the course of the last few days, and I 
have been briefed at very senior levels, I think that both aspects of
Vietnamisation are turning out to be successful. First of all on the
military level your own advisers informed me that the poeple of South
Vietnam axe increasingly able to look after themselves, and the United States
Administration is determined on an aid programme that will give them the
opportunity for development programmes that in a civil sense permit them to
remain viable. As to our own efforts ve. have a very large civil aid programme
of the order of twenty five million dollars and vie have now under
consideration proposals for agreement in cooperation with N~ ew Zealand and
the United States proposals to establish or to participate in, training
centres both for advisers and for military training personnel. We will
do this in South Vietnam not only for the South Vietnamese but for the
Cambodians; in other words what I do say is this; that whereas five or six
years ago it looked as though it was impossible for South Vietnam and
Cambodia should remain independent and free. The prospects are much greater
today and with a little good fortune and a little good luck and provided
' we are able to give the civil aid programme what they need in a residual
capacity in terms of military effort,, then I think the prospects of success
are ever so much brighter than they were two three or four years ago.
Qaestion: Senator Muskie a likely Presidential candidate says that it
is only a matter of time before South Vietnam goes communist* Do you agree?
Prime Minister: If you express an opinion iike that frankly ittS one of
the occasions when I'm driven to despair. It would be a tragedy for this world
if after so mach American blood and effort had been spilled, after so mach
life has been lost, and such a tremendous effort has been devoted to the cause
of South Vietnam, of the right of the South Vietnamese people to determine
their own future, we should be so despairing as to think that all we have done
will turn out to be valueless and that the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong 
r~ ill overrun South Vietnam and probably too Cambodia. I hope it doesn't occur.
I don't kn1ow on what grounds Senator LMuskic has made his views known other
than of course he is an aspirant for Presidential honouxs. But if I
emn take note of what was said yesterday by men I believe to be ever so much
better informed than he is, then in their views the prospects of survivial
are pretty good. I would be inclined to take their views ever so imch
more than I take the views of Senator Muskie. I 
Question: Would Australia, and New Zealand and the free nations of South
East Asia feel more secure if the U. S. kept a permanent naval for-ce in the
Indian Ocean to counter Soviet influence in that area?
* Prime Minister: Not only can I give the most emphatic yes to this but it
would be a constant source of delight to me and as one who is given to
turbulence in the middle of the night I can assure you it would make my
life ever so much happier and my evenings ever so much more enjoyable.
qu~ estion: Do you have any reservations at all about f6reign investment in
Australia. If so, could you tell us what they are. Do you have any preference
between sources of capital inflow?
Prime Minister: Wie haven't any strong preferences for where capital comes from.
But what I can say about capital coming from North America is'that they, I
believe more than most other countries, want to live up to the basic principles
of overseas investment in Australia. First, we want increasing Australian
equity participation in corporative activities. Second, we want AostraliJans
to be able to participate in management and administration. For that reason wte
welcome American participation. We also welcome their technological Ikiowhox
and the contributions they have made particularly in the development of our
vast mineral deposits in the west andour Bass Strait oil deposits. I can't
in a question like this go right into the details, but American investment in
Australia is welcome to us providing only the provisions I _. entioned a few
moments ago are observed. * V'e do want greater Australian participation. WNe
do want greater Australian participation in management, but at the same time
we welcome American contributions to our future.
Q4uestion: One of your predecessors once said here regarding Vietnam
" all the way with LBJ". ould you now subscribe to the 1968 political assertion
that " Nixon's the one?" 1 
Prime Minister: I think it would be indelicate of me and a kind of plagiarism
if I was either to copy or appear to be copying what was said by my predecessors.
And I don't know which one of my predecessors you're referring to in the last.
part of what you said. I think prudence demands that I keep my own counsel.
I coin imy own phrases and if before the next ouestion is asked I can think of
something even better but less provocative I will tell what it is.
Question: In view of Australia's strong protest to the* French over its
pacific nuclear testing programme do you propose to make similar protests
to the U. S. over its controversial underground test this weekend?
Prime Miniter: I think you can take it that our attitude has been ,: ade clear
in the agreements we have made. So far as nuclear testing in the atmosphere
is concerned we have protested no matter what country carries out nuclear
tests in the atmosphere. So far as underground tests are concerned wie have no
agreement and consequently we do not think that we are in a position legitiinatel
or according to international law, to make a protest. But we have also been
assured that these underground tests do not have the dangers or anywhere near
the dangers that can be carried out either in terms of pollution or danger to
life or limb that you have from atm~ ospheric tests. Consequently no protest
will be made by us. certainly anxiously enquire as to what the prospects
of pollution, what the prospects of danger might be, not only to Australia but
to the people of other countries as well.
Question: Has the all-white( IMj@ igtatinpolicy of Australia changed?
Prime Minister: I don't know that there ever wls an " all-white" policy in
Au stralia but I think I could say this to you, and it is worth while repeating.
Ibelieve that in my own country there is less of a feeling about racism than
in any other country I have visited. In short while there can be a lot of
discussion in the media and there can be a lot of provocative talk about it,
Australians do accept people of other races and other colours and they are an 
extremely tolerant people. Tolerance probably isn't the right word. They
just happen to accept people and particularly they accept the people of
South East Asia. Nlow our policy is a quite clear one. We want one Australian
people. 11* wiean t those who come there to live permanently to be Australians.
We don't want little enclaves that can be a source of irritation or a source
of difficulty for us. Secondly vie do permit non-Europeans to come in providing
and providing only three qualifications are complied with. The first one is
that they have the skills that we need, the second one is that they will make
a contribution to our development. The third is that'-they are capable of
intergrating and in fact do become integrated with us so that in time,
particularly in the case of their children, it is impossible either to discern
the origins of their parents or that they have any other loyalty than loyalty
to the country in which they reside and in which they find their welfare. So
I just have to say this about any so-called rarticular Australian policy: it is
one that I think is wise and prudent. It is one that is not based upon racisim,
it is one that I believe that anyone who has been to the country will1 recog-nise
that the people are not given to racism but to welcoming people for w: hat they
are and what they are capable of contributing rather than the origins of their
parents. uestion: Prime Minister. The--ydney Opera House has been called Australia's
Fill. Which will get off the ground first? And also how does it compare with
the Kennedy Centre?
Prime Minister: Fortunately the opera house is on the ground and as yet we
haven't been able to get the 1ll off it so I can't in precise terms answer your
question. As to the Kennedy Centre and the opera house I don't think you can
compare them. The opera house, our opera house, is something completely novel
and astonishingly beautiful. You have got to see it; it is not built in
accordance with what I would regard as the Washington model. You see a building
that is rectangular, however beautiful it might be, but nonetheless it conforms 
to classical Greek or Roman tradition. The opera house is entirely novel
and I wouldn't therefore like to make a comparison. But to each and everyone
of you who are here and you wouldn't be here if you weren't interested in
Australia the opening will be in 19735. I hope you will be able to have some
little investment in the future of Australia and by 1973 You will be able to
-have sold your investment and out of the profits attend the opening concert
when it appears. because I hore by that time not only wuill we have a good
orchestra but the best singers we are capable of taking from the United States.
Question: As England joins the Common Market won't this bring Australia and
New Zealand closer together?
Prime Minister: Vie are pretty close and the only time vie ever seem to, or we
appear to be disagreeable, is when it is suggested that New Zealand should
become the seventh State. But without saying it so that it can be heard in
New Zealand, we still look at them as the seventh State, but I don't think the
relationship between the two countries is capable of very much improvement today.
p( 4uestion: There are easy questions also. Will there be war between Pakistan
and India?
Prime Minister: I don't think that either the Government of India or the
Government of Pakistan want war. The real danger arises from the fact that the
people of East Pakistan are being trained in guerilla warfare and by accident
it could so happen that armed attack might occur either from the Pakistan army
or the freedom fighters in East iakistan itself. No one, I believe, can tell
you what the prospects are likely to be. What we must all do, and I will
certainly be playing my part ,41 will have the good fortune to talk to Mrs. Ghandi
tomorrow A, is to press with her and to press with the President Khian that
war must not take place. It can't benefit India, it can't benefit akistan and~ 
Zil
above all it cannot benefit any of the people of these two countries. Those
of us who feel we can play a part, however humble it might be, have got to
bring home to everyone the lesson that war will benefit no one. The sooner we
can persuade the Pakistanis to permit democracy or democratic regime to be
established under the Awarni League in -last Pakistan as part of a total Pakistan
solution, the better it will be. He has made his promise. I only hopne he will
be able to live up to it.
Question: The final question: what impelled you to buy the dress M'rs. Mc~ iahon
wore at the VWhite House last night?-
Prime M'inister: I know her better than anyone. I like the shape of her legs,
I like the look of her face, I like the fact that she chose me for her husband
at the same time I chose her to be my wife. V.' hen I happened to be walking past
a shop in Double Bay and saw a dress in black I then said to her I thought she
should buy it. That was six weeks ago, before the President had asked me to corm'
here, and before I knew the President was g iving a State Dinner in our honour.
When I beard of the dinner I gave instructions not that they matter very much
in my household but I gave instructions that she was to go down and have
the dress, not in black because i thought that there was nothing to mourn about,
but in white because this was something we could acclaim. And above all as
immediately before I had the good fortune to become the Leader of the Liberal
Party in Australia,-one of the assets I wa.; supposed to have was a photograph of
my wife with one leg projecting unnecessarily from a maxi shirt. I felt, well,
if you can have one split on the maxi side, well why couldn't she have two
sides it might be twice as good for me so there's the answer. I wish,
Sir, that I had known you were going to ask this question because as I chose
the dress, I practically designed the colour and insisted on the two splits up
the side, I think I could have ensure~ she wore it here today even though
it isn't the kind of dress that you would wear on an occasion similar to this. 



FO) R PRESS: ARRIVAL -STATTM~ ENT -NEW YORK
TH-E PRI1M F M h11IS7ME~ R OF AUSTRALIA
THE RT H10N. WILLIAM McIMAITON, q71
I am visiting the United States of America
at the invitation of President Ni-xon at a time of.,, considerable
change in world. hffairs.
I deeply appreciate the opportunity to exchange
Cv jews on matters of mutual interes~ t and to advance the long-
Cstanding frziendship between the. United Stateas and Australia.
I hope to discu~ s-in paxticular, with the
President the changes occurring in the Asian and Pacific
region and the United States response to these changes,
There is also a nu-mber of trade matters which,
. Ln illy Might usUI-Iy o~ uhrtol~ n thvC
visit of the Deputy Prime Miniztc: and Minister for Trade at the
end of June. We are moving into a significant era of re-adjustments.
if peace is to be assured3 in our part of It. hq world., the three
g-Jeat powers., the United States, -the Soviet Union and China
all nuclear powers -as well as J0apano, must reach some acco. rtmodationg
a new balance in which there is ul recognition of. a-id respect
for, the rights and aspiratipns oZ theixc countries.
The place and role of u.-iddle and smaller powers
in our region have special relevance to 5such a balance and
Austrai~ a wishes to do all within its Dower to advance their
nterests as well as its own. 
2
I had a most instructive talk with the
United States Commander-in-Chief, Pacific ( Admiral McCain)
in Honolulu on the strategic and security outlook in the
Pacific following this week's decision in the United Nations
on the entry of the Reoples' Republic of China and the
expulsion of the Republic of China ( Taiwan).
While in the United States I will have talks
with President Nixon on 2 November and with senior members
of his Administration in the same week. I
ft
; y 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Ri Hon. W. MeMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
Visit to the United States of America and
Great Britain
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 23 November 1971]
MW McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)-
I seek leave to make a statement on
my recent visit to the United States of
America and Great Britain.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted? There
being no objection leave is granted.
Mr McMAHON-The statement is in 3
parts-the United States, Britain and
general matters common to both countries.
I think most honourable members in this
House would agree that Australia stands
on the threshold of a transitional period in
its development as a nation. We are living
in a world in which relations with our
traditional allies and friends and with the
nations of the Asian and Pacific region are
changing significantly. And so, having
received invitations from ' both President
Nixon and Prime Minister Heath, I
believed it was wise to go to Washington
and London.
It was natural that as the head of a
recently formed government I should welcome
the opportunity for discussions with
the leaders of 2 major powers who are
traditionally close friends and allies of this
country. With the passage of time there is
inevitably a risk that changing circumstances
might erode the understandings and
contractual arrangements of long standing
between us and put under strain the com-
23253/ 71 mitments; embodied in them. Moreover,
changes are taking place in the world strategic
balance of power which are of fundamental
importance to us. As honourable
mem'bers know, I left Australia on 27th
October and returned last Thursday, 18th
November. 1 believe this visit was timely,
successful and to Australia's advantage.
A new -balance is emerging which
includes the United States, the Soviet
Union, the People's Republic of China,
Japan and the European comnmunity,
including Britain. In this situation the
voice and influence of a medium power
such as Australia is becoming increasingly
significant. On behalf of the Government
of this country, I wanted to establish close
personal contact with leaders in the United
States and Britain and -to explore their
thinking on major international issues,
their attitudes to which are of importance
to us. I also wanted to put at the highest
level our own views on some of these
bilateral and international questions.
My visit to America followed closely the
United Nations vote on the admission of
the People's Republic of China which
created a new situation in the world body
and in the Asian region. It followed Dr
Kissinger's return from his second visit to
Peking. And, as it happened, it occurred at 
the same time as the defeat of the foreign
aid Bill in the United States Senate. It
came shortly before Mr Laird's visit to
Vietnam and President Nixon's planned
announcement of further American troop
withdrawals from that country. It also
preceded the President's planned visits to
Peking and Moscow. My visit to the
United Kingdom followed immediately
after the House of Commons had voted in
favour of British entry into the European
Economic Community. It also preceded Sir
Alec Douglas-Home's present attempt to
find a solution of the Rhodesian. problem.
In the international economic field the
world's currency arrangements are in
disorder and the stability and growth of
international trade are threatened.
In the United States, I had lengthy and
very frank discussions with President
Nixon, Secretary of State Rogers, Defence
Secretary Laird, Deputy Secretary Packard,
Dr Kissinger, Under Secretary of the
Treasury Volcker, Chairman of the Council
of Environmental Quality Russell Train,
and Senator Fulbright, Chairman of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee. I also
had discussions with many others including
tthore SRceoptut; b ltihcaen SeLceraedtaerry inf orth eC oSmenma-eter, c eS, enMar-
Morris Stanq, who is to visit Australia
shortly; and the Managing-Director of the
International Monetary Fund and the
chairman of the Export-Import Bank. All
of these talks were very frank and
friendly. I have returned with the firm
impression that the American Administration
is well disposed towards Australia.
This reinforcement of our relationship at
the personal level is worthwhile in itself.
An important result of my visit was the
public reaffirmation by President Nixon of
the continuing strength and validity of the
AINZUS Treaty. President Nixon gave me
an unconditional and unqualified assurance
that ANZUS is as valid today as it -was
when it was signed, 20 years ago. The
ANZUS Treaty, as honourable members
will know, provides that in the event of an
armed attack on any one of them or on
their forces in the Pacific area, the United
States, Australia and New Zealand would
each act to meet the common danger in
accordance with its constitutional processes.
The reaffirmation is important for 3
reasons: Firstly, it was described by the
President as one of the fundamental pillars of American Policy in the Pacific, giving it
a special emphasis at a time when a new
balance of forces is emerging throughout
the world; secondly, it was a most positive
public affirmation of the Treaty following
the announcement of the Nixon Doctrine
which outlined new American attitudes in
the Asian and Pacific region; and thirdly,
it came at a time when a minority in Australia
was doubting its worth and others
were downgrading its importance. I should
add that, in all my discussions on this subject,
it was clear that we shared the view
that ANZUS is more than a Treaty. It is
the symbol of the close co-operation which
exists between Australia, the United States
and New Zealand. But more than that, in
addition to providing for the annual meeting
of Ministers, it furnishes a framework
of practical co-operation under which there
is constant exchange of information and
views of the greatest importance to Australia.
Senator Fulbright, who has been
critical of many of America's involvements
beyond its shores, also said-to use his
own words-' ANZUS was different' and
was a commitment of indefinite duration.
None of this must suggest any easing off in
our determination to strengthen and
enlarge our defence capacity. We are a
nation of increasing influence in the world
with a fundamental responsibility for our
internal and external affairs. This responsibility
is ours and ours alone. But if circumstances
beyond our capability arise, we
know we have reliable allies.
On my way home I discussed defence
strategy in the Pacific with the United
States Commander-in-Chief, Pacific, in
Honolulu. We spoke of the continuing
danger of Communist subversive and
insurgent activities throughout the region. I
also remind the House of the uncompromising
speech by the Chinese delegate to
the United Nations on his first appearance
at that for-um earlier this month. We have
no hostility to the great Chinese people
who have contributed so much to the culture
and history of mankind and we
favour an accommodation with them.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I remind those
honourable members who are interjecting
that there is a great deal of interest in this
statement both inside and outside the
House. The Leader of the Opposition is to
follow the Prime Minister and I hope that
he will be accorded the same kind of 
reception as is given to the Prime Minister.
So I suggest that honourable members contain
themselves.
Mr McMAHON-But we should not
forget that this great revolutionary power
in Asia still holds fast publicly to its policies,
including its support of National Liberation
movements. We will seek to
advance our own dialogue with China but,
as I have said before, we will proceed with
caution. In my talks with the Secretary for
Defence and Deputy Secretary Packard,
who has recently visited this country, I
raised the question of the security of the
Indian Ocean. It was agreed that the
increased Soviet naval presence does not
constitute a serious threat at present to the
vital sea lanes across the Southern Indian
Ocean, but it was also agreed that the situation
needs to be watched with care, particularly
in view of the fact that the Soviet
presence, of course, can be built up
quickly and sustained, especially if the
Suez Canal were to be re-opened. I am
satisfied the United States is fully aware of
the political and strategic importance of
the Indian Ocean and agrees that a careful
watch should be continued in this area.
The United States will continue visits and
transits by its naval ships and naval exercises
in the Indian Ocean. They have welcomed
the possibility of using facilities at
Cockburn Sound and are, with the United
Kingdom, maintaining a communication
station at Diego Garcia.
During my talks with President Nixon
and Mr Laird we exchanged assessments
on the situation and the future in Indo-
China. The view, which I questioned
closely, was put forward that Vietnamization
in both the military and the economic
sense was making very good progress and
that the situation in South Vietnam was
much more stable and promising than
seemed likely 9 months ago. I was also
informed of American intentions regarding
troops to remain after the withdrawal of
American combat forces and on the maintenance
of air and naval support for the
Vietnamese forces for some time to come.
I informed the President of our decision in
principle to assist in the training of Cambodian
troops in South Vietnam after our
own combat forces are withdrawn if practicable
arrangements can be made in conjunction
with the other countries concerned. The President and other members
of the Administration expressed their
appreciation in the warmest terms of our
constant support and help in Indo-China.
If I might digress for a moment, our hope
in Vietnam and indeed in Cambodia and
Laos is simply that these countries will
have the opportunity to live in peace and
to determine their own futures, rather than
have imposed upon them, by force,
unwanted communist regimes. Can anyone
in this House seriously contest the sense
and propriety of this objective? In essence
our policy towards Cambodia, which
attracted so much public interest while I
was overseas, is to play a modest part
through aid and training programmes in
helping to give that country a chance to
survive as an independent non-communist
state. As I have emphasised before, there is
no question of sending Australian military
advisers or instructors to Cambodia. During
my discussions I invited President
Nixon to visit Australia at a time when it
would be possible for him to do so.
The Australian Government has been
giving much thought to the question of the
environment. I took the opportunity while
in Washington to have discussions with Mr
Russell Train and other members of the
council on environmental quality. From
these discussions I gained valuable insights
into American experience of the problems
of dealing wi'h pollution and environmental
protection measures, especially in
the context of a federal-state relationship.
They are willing to assist and advise in this
field where they have already made some
notable advances. In Washington, I took
advantage of the presence of the Prime
Minister of India, Mrs Gandhi, to have a
full discussion wi'h her on the situation in
the east of the sub-continent. After this
meeting I sent another message to President
Yahya Khan urging upon him once
again the need to deal with the elected
representatives of East Pakistan and with
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. During the discussion,
Mrs Ghanii said she would
welcome a visit by Australian members of
Parliament to see for themselves conditions
in the refugee areas.
I turn now to * my visit to Britain. In
London I had detailed discussions with the
Prime Minister, Mr Heath; the Foreign
Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas-Home; the
Minister for Defence, Lord Carrington; the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Barber;
the Minister responsible for the British
relations with the European Economic
Community, Mr Rippon; and the Governor
of the Bank of England. I also addressed
the Cook Society, the Confederation of
British Industries and the Australia-British
Tiade Association. Naturally, I spent a
great deal of time discussing the British
entry into the European Economic Community.
I started from the point that,
while we had been disappointed at the
terms agreed upon for British entry, those
terms were now a fact and we should look
towards the best arrangements we could
make for the future.
Generally, I expressed the hope that Britain,
having made its decision, would now
use its influence to ensure that the community
was outward-looking and international
in its approach, that it should be flexible in
its approach to world trade, rather than
regionally exclusive in its attitude. I also
pressed strongly for assurances that during
the transitional period the British would
adopt as helpful an attitude as possible to
Australian commodities affected by the
British entry. I was assured by Mr Heath,
Sir Alex Douglas-Home and Mr Rippon
that Britain would use its influence to see
that the European Economic Community
adopted an outward-looking policy. The
point was made to me that Britain
depended heavily on its trade and, consequently,
the widest area of multi-lateral
trade and payments was a source of
strength. The point was made to me also
that a weak Britain would be of little use
to its old Commonwealth friends. A
strong Britain within the EEC woruld be of
value to countries like Australia. Mr
Rippon also explained fully the inclusion
of a clause in the entry agreement that if
imports of an agricultural commodity subject
to import levies were seriously affected
or likely to be affected by British entry,
either Australia or Britain would have the
right to raise the matter before the
commission. Assurances-the value of which
admittedly can only be fully tested in
time-that Britain would, during the transitional
period, be ready to discuss on a
commodity basis those commodities likely
to be affected by British entry into the
Common Market, were reaffirmed to me.
The point was also made to me that it would be desirable for the industries concerned
to be active in presenting their
cases themselves. I urged upon British
Ministers the need for the EEC to adopt
measures to ensure that the exports of
tropical produce from. Papua New Guinea
are in a no less favorurable position than
those from other developing countries
which are to receive special treatment.
Notwithstanding that Papua New Guinea
is still a trust territory, the British are
hopeful for early progress towards agreement
on this matter. I should tell the
House that I questioned repeated assertions
that although the United Kingdom is to
enter the Common Market its bilateral
relationship with Australia would not
change. I can report that I was assured by
Britain's Ministers that there was a pervasive
desire to maintain the closest possible
co-operation with Australia.
During my talk with the Chancellor, I
raised with him my concern that the voluntary
restraint on the movement of British
capital to Australia should not be
maintained, while, at the same time, movements
of capital were liberalised in respect
of the EEC countries with consequent
disadvantage to the traditional flow to Australia.
Members will be glad to learn that I
received an assurance of the fullest consultation
and co-operation before any decisions
are made. When Britain enters the
EEC she will be creating a situation in
which her longstanding trading preferences
in the Australian market will come to an
end. These foregone preferences will be
available to us for bargaining purposes.
our policy in any negotiation of new
arrangements will be based on recognition
of the principle that trade, to be successful
in the world of today, needs to be multilateral.
In my discussions with persons
involved in commerce and industry, I
repeatedly emphasised the point that,
despite some problems, our economy was
fundamentally sound and that we could
look to a long-term annual growth rate of
around 5 per cent or more. These views
were generally well received and British
interests with whom I discussed the matter
continue to regard Australia as a country
of promise and a suitable place for British
investment. Mr Health and I agreed-and
this was followed up later in my talks with
the Minister for Defence and the Foreign
Secretary-that even closer consultation and
communication should be effected between 
the two Governments. This included strong
confirmation of the policy that the British
and Australian High Commissioners should
have, when needed, immediate direct
access to the respective Prime Ministers.
At the same time, we would take the
opportunity to step up our direct contact
with other EEC members and strengthen
our representation -in Brussels.
I had useful and wide-ranging discussions
on defence matters with the British
Prime Minister, the Minister for Defence
and the Foreign Secretary. I was assured
that the Heath Government in-tends to
maintain its political interests and defence
commitments in South East Asia. We
reviewed the five-power defence arrangements
for assistance in the defence of Singapore
and Malaysia. The signature of the
new arrangements on 1st November
reflects the readiness of the Heath Government
to make a contribution to the security
and stability of our region which is both
welcome and timely. I am aware that the
British Government is actively considering,
with other Governments in the five power
arrangement, further areas of co-operation
in the defence field. There was also -a close
identity of views on the security of the
Indian Ocean. I was left in no doubt about
British concern for the implications of the
Soviet naval influence in the area.
Mr Heath indicated to me that his Government
intends to maintain a naval presence
in the Indian Ocean. This reaffirms
his statement to the conference of Comnmonwealth
Heads of Government in Singapore
last January. We also had useful
opening discussion directed to increasing
defence co-operation in the Indian Ocean
area and work is proceeding on proposals
about improved procedures for co-ordinating
resources and surveillance. I ws given
a survey of the situation in Western
Europe, includng NATO and was informed
that Britain would maintain -its commitments
to SEATO, in which it still sees, to
use their own words, itself as a ' full
partner'. I want to turn now to some of the mattens
which are common to my visits to
America and Britain. As a result of my
visit, the Australian Government now has
a deeper appreciation of American and
British thinking on a wide range of international
issues of importance to us, such
23253t71-2 as: The British entry in the EEC; the
future of China and Taiwan; the future for
Vietnam and Cambodia; the Soviet presence
in the Indian Ocean; overseas trade;
President Nixon's forthcoming visits to
Moscow and Peking-, the international
monetary situation; and the Rhodesian situation.
For our part, I was able to give
American and British Leaders a clearer
picture of our Government's thinking on
the role we expect to play in the Asian and
Pacific region. And to emphasise that,
while we are a dependable friend, we shall
make our own independent judgments
based upon our own national interests.
I also took the opportunities available to
me in my discussions to emphasise our
changing role in a changing world. I
emphasised the need to take full account
of Japan in the emerging balance between
the United States, China and the Soviet
Union in North Asia. I emphasised the
role we were seeking to play in regional
economic co-operation and regional
defence co-operation in South-East Asia. I
also emphasised the importance of a stable
and peaceful Indonesia in South East Asia
and the weight we give to our relations
with that country. I believe the administration
in the United States, the Government
in Britain and leading representatives of
the media in both countries now have a
greater awareness of Australia-as a
country of stability and increasing
influence in the South East Asian region. I
believe, too, that they may now be more
conscious of the importance and vitality of
Japan and Indonesia in the Asian region.
, Before I left I had been concerned for
some time to find that, perhaps because we
are so far from North America and Europe,
ignorance about Australia and misunderstanding
of some of our policies are still
quite widespread in these areas. For these
reasons, I talked in New York over 2
special lunches to the editorial writers and
correspondents specialising in Foreign
Affairs of ' The New York Times' and of
the Time Life Incorporated. A member of
my party did a similar briefing on Australia's
role in South East Asia for The
Washingyton Post. In London, at a similar
lunch I was able to speak to the editors of
nearly all the main newspapers published
in England. I believe this was worth while
in focusing the interest of leading opinion
formers in the media in the United States 
and in Britain on Australia and its prospects
and policies. My mission also
received considerable public notice in the
media of both countries, particularly in the
responsible Press. And I think this, too,
served to project Australia effectively to
the man-in-the-street.
I turn now, Sir, to the international currency
situation, a difficult, unresolved
problem for us all. I discussed the situation
with the President and members of the
Administration in Washington-with the
Prime Minister. and senior Ministers in
London-and with high officials and trading
and financial interests in both
countries. In both Washington and London
I emphasised that Australia wants an early
resolution of the present impasse as being a
matter of the greatest importance for the
whole trading world.
I pointed out the impact which the
United States import surcharge and the
uncertainty about exchange rates has had
on the market for some of our products,
including wool. I mentioned the charges
that temporary expedients could harden
into dogmas and that a widespread slowdown
in economic activity could result.
Unless there is an early, sensible and adequate
readjustment in trade and currency
arrangements, competitive devaluation
could occur, and increasing protectionism
in trade develop, with a consequent threat
to economic stability and growth around
the world. I stressed, particularly in the
United States, the indirect implication for
Australia of any sharp check to economic
growth and trade in third countries, such
as Japan, as a result of the United States'
measures. There were dangers in isolating
Japan, which has to be seen as a country
finding a new role in the world, and particularly
a role in the economic development
of South East Asia. I have made it
clear that, in relation to currency matters,
Australia reserves its position. We will take
our decision when any realignment is settled.
Our decision will be based on the
interests of the Australian economy and
the Australian people. way of world trade in agricultural commodities,
and raised at the highest level the
problems we face in our attempt to export
Australian wool and meat to the United
States. These discussions were followed up
at other levels. There are good grounds for
believing that the United States is seeking
ways of being helpful to us in respect of
both wool and meat.
Sir, in concluding this outline, I think it
would be appropriate to say something
about Australia and where we stand today.
I believe that my visits to New York,
Washington and London did something to
project Australia to a Britain, which is
becoming increasingly involved in Europe,
and an America which is subject to varying
degrees of pressure to withdraw from
its overseas involvement, and to remind
them that they have in the southern hemisphere:
A vigorous, like-minded but independent
friend; a country of great prospect,
of influence and stability in the South
East Asian region; a country willing and
able to make its contribution to a secure
and stable Asian and Pacific area increasing
in economic strength.
I pointed out that we have our problems-
such as inflation and the state of
some of the rural industries-which we
must solve but, at the same time, our
friends should not lose sight of the fundamental
soundness of the economy and the
great promise of this country. For our part
we should concentrate on representing
Australia to the world as a tolerant, stable,
healthy member of the international community-
increasing in size and strength as
it develops, but threatening no-one. I
attempted to do this during my tour.
In short I emphasised that we in the
Government will direct our energies to
building a greater Australia based on selfconfidence,
determination, co-operation,
and a vision of an unlimited future. Mr
Speaker, I recommend that this statement
be studied by members of the Opposition. I
lay on the table the following paper:
In America I urged on the Administra-Visit to the United States and Britain-Ministion
the need to remove barriers in the terial Statement, 23 November 1971.
W. G. MURRAY, Government Printer, Canberra 



AUS WAL
PRIME MAIFSTER
STAT2i!: NT VMADE IN T-14 HOUSE OF FEPRECSENTATIVES BY
THE RT HON. WILLIAM , CMAiHON, M. P.
PAPUA/ IIEW GUINEA ANID TKE EtIROPEA11
ECNOM! IC COMM~ UNITY
Noveraber 1l071.
In my recent statement to the House on my overseas visit, I
mentioned the representations which I made in London on the problems
for Papua/ New Guinea-ariSing from British entry to the European Economic
I am now pleascod to be able to inform the House about the
successful conclusion of negotiations on behalf of Papua/ New Guinea.
The iDritish Government has acceDted an offer from the Six under which
exports originating in Papua/. sew Guinea will be able to enter the
United Kingdom until 1 January 1973, under the conditions which apply
at the time of British accession to the Community. The offer also
provides for review of these arrangements.
in making these arrangements for thie Territory. the Community
has stressed the excep tiotial features of the Papua/ New Guinea position
both from the point of view of it1-s international status andi from that
of its economic development.
In accepting the offer by the Six, the British Government
expressed its confidence that thc~ Co. mnmunity would makl-e reasonable
arrangemaents for Papua/ New Guinea in the context of any review.
I am sure the House will join with me in expre SS nc appreciation
for the special efforts made by the 7 uropean Economic Community to
recognise and proviCde for the unique nee&amp; is of PaoDua/ I~ eW Guinea. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE UNTIL 8 PM ( EST)
" ADDRESS TO THE NATION"
BY THE PRI7E MINISTER, MR WILLIM Mc!,' AHON
OVER THE NATIONAL RADIO AND TV NETWORK 26 NOVEMBER 1971
Good Fvening: I want to report to you tonight about my recent
mission to the United States and to the United Kingdom.
About the middle of October, i received a personal
invitation from President Nixon to visit the United States. Now
I did so in extraordinary circumstances because momentous events
were occurring in world affairs which intimately affected us as
well as the rest of the world.
There was a growing change in the balance of power
amongst the great countries. No longe2 did the United States and
Soviet Russia dominate the scene. Communist China was becoming
increaslingly important, and so, too was Japan and the European
Community, including Britain. As well, the President of the United
States was about to visit both Peking and * oscow. And Dr Kissinger,
on his behalf, had been to Peking on two occasions. There was an
international monetary crisis. Britain had just decided enter the
European Community and, of course, in the countries that I was to
visit, aueries were made about problems that we might have to face
at home. So I went to the United States first, that is, to New
York and to Washington. And I had interviews with most of the
important members of the United States Administration, from President
Nixon down. In my discussions with him, he first of all raised the
question of the .7erican presence in South Vietnam. And he explained
to me in detail what the Americans intended to do and the rate at
which their forces would be withdrawn. He also gave me and I regard
this as of vital importance to us but he gave me an assurance that
the ANZUS Treaty was as valid today as it was on the day on which
it was signed. Now this Trepty is important to us for this reason:
That, as you will probably know, the ANZUS Treaty provides that in the
event of an armed attack on Australia, the United States and New
Zealand would act to meet the common danger. There could not have
. een a better assurance than he has given, and it virtually guarantees
our freedom from attack.
I also had discussions on such matters as trade of
meat particularly and a visit of Y'r Stans to Australia, their
Secretary of Commerce, relating to the problems associated with
wool. It was also suggested to me in discussions with their Treasury
officials that the United States, Japan, and ourselves, should
co-operate in order to try and get better terms cfaccess to the
new European Economic Community. / 2 
2
Of course, I had other discussions, but I haven't the time
to be able to go through them tonight. But I did have discussions
on the environment and pollution. And the Americans assured me
that our officials would be able to go there, and they would make
available all the information they had so that we would avoid the
errors of other countries.
So I can assure you of this. The visit was timely it
was successful and it was to your advantage.
I then went to the United Kingdom, and had discussions
with Mr Heath, the Prime Minister, and most of his senior Ministers.
The big problem we faced there was that Britain was
shortly to enter the European Economic Community. And that
consequently the historic trade ties between Australia and the
United Kingdom would cease.
So I sought guarantees that our interests would be
protected. And I am glad to be able to say that from Mr Heath
down to his Chancellor of vhe Exchequer and the Minister responsible
for Economic Affairs in the European Community, Mr Rippon, that
they would do their best to protect our interests now. And they
gave me three guarantees.
The first one was that if we did have some difficulties
with particular agricultural industries, we could make representations,
or the British would make representations for us, to the Community
to try and get corrections made. They also agreed that if we had
a threat of serious injury, we could take it up with the European
Community. And above all, they stressed the nend for industries
themselves to become involved in these problems, and not leave the
sole responsibility to the Government.
In the case of Papua-Mew Guinea, they said that if the
Community could be prevailed upon to accept their ideas, they would
give special privileges to the export of goods from Papua-New
Guinea into the United Kingdom. Yesterday I received a message
which I'm glad to say I was able to relay to the House, that they
had lived up to their promise and special advantages would be given
to Papua/ New Guinea, a dependency country that is really for the
time being dependent on us.
So, too, did I have pretty important discussions on other
economic matters. It was oointed out to me that Australia and
England are both great trading powers. And consequently in the case
of the United Kingdom, the greater the trade and the greater the
degree of flexibility, the better it would be.
For my part, I asked them in fact I impressed upon them
that they must not be isolationist and inward-looking, but Britain
should exert its influence to ensure that the European Community
was outward-looking and international. / 3
L 
3
Now I am sure that the arrangements, or the arrangements
that we made, will be of advantage to Britain, to the Common
Market, to the world, and above all to ourselves.
I then had discussions with the Minister for Defence,
Lord Carrington, well known to most Australians. And again
we discussed problems of great importance to us, the first being
the recent signature of wh,, t is called the Five Power arrangements
relating to Malaysia and Singapore.
Now, as you know, Malaysia and Singapore, together with
Indonesia, are vital to us.
We want the British to maintain a presence East of Suez,
and particularly in Malaysia and Singapore, just as long as they
can. And I received assurances of this kind from the Government.
They are willing to participate in the security, and tq
engender a feeling of confidence in this part of the world, and they
are certainly willing to participate in training arrangements for
the Malaysi-ns and Singaporeans. And so it went on.
I had discussions on many other subjects of great
importance to us: Consultations with very nearly every senior
Minister there was in the United Kingdom.
And this brings me to the story that I want to tell to you
as Australian people.
The first one was that on each occasion the consultations
were full, frank and with candour. Nothing was held back. They
told us what they knew and we told them what we knew.
For example, I was told of what was about to happen in
Rhodesia. Mr Nixon told me of his hopes in the visits that he
intended to make to Moscow and to Peking.
And I can assure you, and I want you to realise this fact,
that they trust us, I believe, more than they trust most other
countries, and are willing to confide in us and are willing to
co-operate with us too,
The second point was this: Wherever I went I found that we
were regarded, not as one of the super or the great powers, but we
were regarded as one of the medium powers one that was playing
an increasingly important part, and having an increasingly important
influence: Not only in South-East Asia, but in the United Kingdom
and the United States as well.
The next point that came home to me and I want to repeat
it to you ia that now that we are accepted as a completely
independent country, that our foreign affairs reflect the interests
of the Australian people, we must also recognise the fact that we
have to take primary responsibility for our own defence. And we have
to take complete responsibility for our own economic affairs, although
the others will assist us when the occasion is needed. / 4
.01 
-4
But let me look at the problem of our economy first.
We have a great economy and I'll say a little more about this
later but in our economic affairs overseas, we have to fight the
battles.. and industry has to join with the Government in achieving
success and not lot the Government do all the fighting for it.
And on defence, too, the primary responsibility depends
uuon us. Now it's true tL.. t we have the ANZUS Treaty, and we have
the Five Power Arrangement with Malaysia and Singapore. But that
doesn't mean that we can just lay back and let the others take the
responsibility. In fact, what it does mean, and this is certain and
something that has to be conveyed to you over and over again
that the more we do, the more they'll be inclined to do with us.
But when we get into a position as we got into at the
middle and the latter parts of World ! Iar II, then we will know we
have reliable friends and allies, and that is why the ANZUS
Treaty will be so valuable to us, and that is why for the Moment,
and while the British orcsance is maintained, their presence in
Malaysia and Singapore will be valuable too.
And the third point that I had to make and I want to
make is thisz There were some misgivings in both the United
States and the United Kingdom as to where we were going. They had
heard of the problems of inflation, industrial disputes they knew
of thie problems associated with the sale of wool.
I was able to give them this assurance, and T think they
recognise it now because they admit there is no country that is
more suitable for investment or more attractive to investment
than Australia is.
This, I believe, is the test of how a country is going
and how great its prospects for the future are.
But I did point out to them that our population is now
thirteen million and growing, that our production is growing at
the rate of somewhere ab. out five per cent per annum, and that our
industry has now become much more diversified and stable than
ever before. So we you and I have got every reason for confidence,
and I believe they have confidence in us too. In short, I think
I was able to point out to them that we know where we're going
and we know how to get there. They understand co'ar problems and
thev understand the outlook for the future. It is a future in which
via should have absolute confidence, and I want to express to you
tonight my personal confidence too.
So as I said, we pointed out to them we know where we're
going. I hope thie Australian people will accent the fact we know
where we ' re going and we will get there and I am sure in a way
that will be satisfactory to you.
Good evening and thank you. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
Relief of Non-Metropolitan Unemployment
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 2 December 1971]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)-
by leave-I wish to inform the
House that I have written to each of the
State Premiers seeking agreement to the
introduction as soon as possible of a
scheme of Commonwealth grants to the
Sta-les for employment-creating activities in
non-metropyolitan areas where such -action
is desirable for social and economic
reasons. Te Government has been concerned,
as I know the State governments
have been, at the difficulties confronting
some of our rural industries-wool, in particular-
and the communities dependent on
them. We are, of course, with the cooperation
of the State governments, where
appropriate, already providing massive
assistance to the industries in quest-ion.
Indeed, as the House will know, I have
had correspondence recently with some of
the Premiers on these matters and particularly
on the problem of unemployment in
non-metropolitan areas.
The Government is determined to meet
and overcome the problems facing the
rural industries that are in difficulty. But
that will take time, and we believe that
meanwhile there is a need to take temporary
measures for the alleviation of unemployment
in non-metropolitan areas, with
the social problems associated with that.
This is a particular aspect of the difficulties
facing our rural populations and one which
is of increasing concern to us. Much of this non-metropolitan unemployment
is of a structural kind and, therefore,
requires particular rather than
general economic measures to deal with it.
As the health of the rural industries concerned
improves, this will contribute over
a period to the alleviation of non-metropolitan
unemployment. The current rural
reconstruction scheme and the retraining
programme and rehabilitation assistance
associated with it will make a useful contribution.
But all these measures will take
time to become fully effective and, in the
meantime, the stubborn economic and
social problem of rural unemployment
seems likely to continue unless specific
short term action is taken to deal with
it. Following my return from overseas the
Treasurer ( Mr Snedden) had discussions
with me about this matter, and subsequently
Cabinet has considered the problem
and possible responses to it. A
measure which we believe would have a
quick and direct impact on the problembut
without significantly impeding the long
term adjustments necessary to meet changing
economic conditions in rural areas-is
the provision of funds for employmentcreating
activities in affected non-metropolitan
areas and I have written to the Premiers
proposing a scheme of grants for
this purpose. 
The details of the scheme would, of
course, be determined in consultation with
the States. In -broad terms, however, the
Government envisages an arrangement providing
for grants for employment-creating
activities to be made to the States for the
period up to 30th June 1973, subject to
review after 30th June 1972 in the light of
the then prevailing conditions.
The objective of the scheme would be to
make a significant impact on the level of
unemployment in non-metropolitan areas.
Thus, grants would be made for the purpose
of reimbursing expenditures on additional
labour-intensive activities of a productive
kind which might be undertaken
by State, semi-government and local government
authorities to provide employment
for those unemployed in non-metropolitan
areas. Recent grants made to some States
under the drought relief arrangements to
enable the employment of persons who
were unemployed as a result of drought
might be taken as a broad indication of
the type of scheme the Government has in
mind. Obviously, since the details of the
scheme remain to be settled with the Premiers,
it is not possible at this time to put
any precise figure on what the cost of the
scheme might be in the balance of this
financial year. Details will, of course, be
given as soon as they can be worked out.
and, on the assumption that the proposal
will meet with the approval in principle of
the Premiers, the Treasury will be moving
speedily to arrange the necessary discussions
between Commonwealth and State
officials. The chief costs involved are, however,
likely to be wage costs, plus some lesser amount-perhaps up to 25 per cent
of the total-for the purchase of materials
and, perhaps, equipment. A figure of $ 2m
a month or thereabouts might approximate
the kind of broad order of cost we have in
mind but having said that, I must add that
there are numerous uncertainties about
such a figure at this stage. Much will
depend not only on our discussion of the
details with the States but on the extent to,
and the speed with, which they can give
effect to the proposals. In this latter regard
I may mention also that we would envisage
the Department of Labour and National
Service being closely associated with the
scheme at the ground roots level. But, for
all the reasons I have indicated, we do not,
at this stage, have a closed mind on the
question of the precise amount to be
provided during the balance of this financial
year even though we have in mind
something of the order already mentioned.
On the assumption that these proposals
will be acceptable in principle to the Premiers
we shall require to bring forward to
the House early in the autumn session legislation
to authorize the necessary grants to
the States. Meanwhile, however, temporary
arrangements will be made for the financing
of the scheme in the interim. I believe
that that would, in all the circumstances,
meet with the approval of the House. This
proposal, of course, demonstrates the Government's
readiness to respond to changing
circumstances. Designed as it is to meet
the emerging social and economic problem
of unemployment in non-metropolitan
areas the scheme will, I believe, be warmly
welcomed by the House and by the community
at -large.
19999171I9999G~. 7 1MWuR. A1Y. Government Printer. Canberra 



MONDAY CONFERENCE
( Broadcast: . MONDAY 5iTH DECEMBER, 1971)
This edition of ',! ONDAY CONFERENCE was recorded on
December 5th, 1971, in the ABC's Core Hill Studios, Sydney, for
transmission to all states on Decemiber 6th. In New South Wales,
the programme goes to air at 9.35p. m.
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE WILLIAM4 McF'AT[ ON, M. P.
Prime Minister of Australia
IS ON CAMERA WITH
ROBERT MOORE, ABC Executive Producer and Programme Anchorman
ALLAN BARNES Canberra Correspondent of " The Age"
RICHARD CARLETON Canberra Correspondent of " This Day Tonight"
DAVID SOLOMON Political Correspondent of " The Canberra Times"
ROBERT MOORE: The Right Honourable William Yc~ 4ahon, Prime minister
of Australia. Mr. McMahon was elected Leader of the Liberal Party
in March of this year. He's been a Member of Parliament since
1949.
Tonight, on MONDAY CONFERENCE, the PRIDTE MINISTER.
Good evening. Next year, some time, there'll be a
general election. M~ any people have an opinion about when it will
be and what the result will be, but the man whose opinion really
matters is of course the Prime Minister. fir. flci~ ahon will have the
final say as to when the election will be held and it will be his
judgement, more than anybody else's, which will be vindicated or
not by the result. M4r. M cMahon has recently returned from
discussinns on foreign affairs and related matters in the United
States and Britain, and last week his Government survived a vote
of no-confidence on its handling of the economy. Wlell those two
subjects, foreign affairs and the economy, are very much bound up
with the next election.
To question the Prime Minister:
Allan Barnes, Chief Political Correspondent of " The Age";
Richard Carleton, Canberra Correspondent of " This Day Tonight"; and
David Solomon, Political Correspondent of " The Canberra Times".
Prime Ifinister, on Monday Conference at the end of October, Senator
Gair said that the economy would bo the paramount issue at the next
election. Last Week, as I've said, there was a no-confidence motion
in your Government's handling of the economy, and in the last few
days you've been subjected to a very strong attack in a number of
newspaper editorials about the economy. In the light of this, do
you see the next election being fought on the economy? 
PRIPE MINISTER: No I don't. I think there are a number of issues on
which we'll fight the elction. The basic one, I believe, will be
defence and security. Then of course there will be the economy, there
will be the problem of industrial law and oublic order. There'll
be the problem relating to our immigration programme and many other
problems of a similar kind.
MOORE: Prime Minister, could I ask you this then? Are you
suggesting that one reason why the election won't be fought on the
state of the economy is that you will delay an election until the
economy is in a much healthier state?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm not going to give you any help at all as
to when the election will be held, but I can assure you your gess
isn't right.
MOORE: Could it be in March?
PRIME MINISTER: It could be later than March. I haven't made up my
mind, so that it's not much use you probing me as to date. You
won't get any help.
ALLAN BARNES: Prime Ministerr M1r. Snedden on this programme some...
a couple of months ago, said that he thought the economy would not
be an issue against the Government if the election was held at its
normal time, the end of the year, implying that he thought the Budget
strategy would work through and the economy would settle down. You
seem to be taking a similar line. Would that be appropriate?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not taking any line about the date of the election,
and I told Mr. Moore that and I'm not going to help you either.
RICHARD CARLETON: Prime Minister, what sorry.
PRIME IMlINISTER: The simple look, I wonder if I could finish,
because if I am asked a question I think there's a responsibility
to let me answer the question in full, rather than get interrupted
half way round. So if I want to answer your question completely I
agree with what Mr. Snedden said about the date of the election if
it were held late the economic issue would not be a real one. But
after all I feel confident about the way the economy is going now,
and the way in which we were able to virtually annihilate the
Opposition on Wednesday, as you well know, was a clear indication
that we're handling the economy pretty well by world standards too,
and I think we'll go on handling it exactly the same way between now
and the time we hold an election, no matter when it might be.
BARNES: The day after you annihilated the Opposition in that censure
motionhowever, you did take measures to correct the unemployment
situation in the country. Does this indicate there may be more
measures in the pipeline?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, we took those the decision had been taken
beforehand but I couldn't I felt first of all it was inappropriate
to mention the measures during a no-confidence motion, and secondly
I had to let some of the States or virtually all of the State
Premiers know first. / 3 
So that was the reason why I didn'tmentionit then but I've made
clear over and over again that if we find there is some difficulty
emerging then we will take action to either prevent it or to
introduce remedial measures. WAe won't hesitate. Tie did it in the
case of nursing home attention, we did it in the case of rural
unemployment, and we'll do it whenever else we think that a need
has arisen which we feel demands or requires action.
BARNES: The question of unemployment is however one of the primary
ones worrying you at the moment, surely?
PRI'VE MINISTER: Yes, it is. It is one of the primary ones. But I
don't want you to forget for one moment that the dominant one is
inflationery p~ ressures, due fundamentally to the wage-cost squeeze.
So they are two, but they are virtually the same because unless we
solve the inflation pressure then in the long term we create great
troubles for ourselves in unemployment.
HOORE. Prime Minister, could I sorry interrupt just for
a moment. In the short run, on this very point, does the Government's
attack on inflation depend on the-P being less than full employment?
In the short run.
PRIME MIINISTER: Not necessarily, no. our policy is one of combating
inflation, at the same time getting a fairly good growth rate and
I hope you'll ask me questions about this later and at the same
time keeping unemployment to a minimum. Those are our goals and I
think we've got reasonably good prospects of keeping them.
BARNES: How would you define a minimum, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I wonder if I could get a little bit of coherence
rather than everyone coming in and stopping mo from giving a complete
answer. That's what I want to do, because there are a lot of vie:: wers
and they're entitled to get the full answer, so please, which one is
the next one?
CARLETON: Mr. McMahon, let me ask you what are the factors that are
going to weigh in your mind in deciding in favour of an early
election or putting the election of f until the say the end of
next year?
PRIME I-INISTER: I've answered that already Mir. Carleton.
CARLETON: You haven't mentioned the factors.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes I've would I give away whatever advantages I
had of surprise? Would I commit myself at this early stage? Of
course I wouldn't, and I won't do so.
CARLETON: Well, I think it's fair to ask you Sir
PRIME MINISTER: Well I don't think it is; well it might be fair, but
it's not reasonable. When I feel that an election should be held
and is in the interests of this country then I'll make my mind up,
but at the present time I haven't made up my mind and consequently
I feel that this is not an occasion when I could give you a finite
answer to the question you've put to me. 
CARLETON: Well what's the attitude of the Country Party towards an
early election?
PRIPM MINISTER-. They haven't discussed it with me.
DAVID SOLOMON: Prime Minister, on the question of the economy, could
you give us an indication of how high you expect unemployment to
go in the next few months, when school leavers will be a real
problem.
PRIME MINISTER: No, I couldn't give an answer to that question, but
what I can say is the numbers today are just a little above the
-year average. But we have certain problems we have to deal
with and the main one is that over the next few months, in fact
from the last two weeks in November right through to January, we
have 190 thousand school leavers, and people who've passed their
tertiary education 190 thousand; and under the economic conditions
in which we live, particularly the matter of overseas... problems
of overseas parities in the international exchanges, the difficulties
associated with the rural economy, industrial indiscipline, we have
a set of circumstances that we've not previously had to face, so
anyone wanting to make up his mind and give precise figures is, I
think, looking into the crystal ball and not being realistic.
SOLOMON: Sir, some of the ecomomic conaitions are those of the
Government's making, in terms of the last Budget the restriction
on public service employment for example; the limitation on the
amount of money that the Commonwealth was making available for works.
Are you convinced that these are the right measures at this time.?
PRIM-E MINISTER: I've said that I believe that whenever it is necessary
for us to take any remedial or preventive action, we will do so
so of course to deal with the first vart of your question, when I
saw that Public Service recruitment was not as high as the approval
we'd given for the whole of the Budget year, I asked that it be
corrected and that we adopt a liberal policy about it. Similarly
too, I took other action, so far -as it related to the rural unemployment.
Just prior to that as you know, before I went away, went
overseas, I had a look at the interest rate policy, and on bonds
we reduced interest rates over the whole range.
Those were but just some of the measures that we took and of course
we look at other lines of action that we feel may be helpful and
when we think~ a change is necessary, I can assure again I assure
you we'll take the measures.
MOORE: Prime Minister would you see the state of our primary industries
as being the most permanent weakness in our economy at present?
PRIME MI14ISTER: It depends which part of the primary industries you're
talkingabout, and if you're looking at the problems of wool, I
think that this is a long term problem that we have to handle and
if I can make this one comment, a commendatory comment the fact
that we've had a growth rate this year, or will1 have a growth rate
of something like five por cent, despite the fact that the price of
wool has fallen so dramatically and sharply, is I think, a tribute
to the resilience of the Australian economy, and I believe the
energy and the industry of the Australian people.
MO0ORE: Does the Government have a long term strategy to get those
farmers who must leave the land of f the land Are you working
on it at that level: 
PRIME MIINISTER: We had an immediatte and~ then a long term problem.
The immediate Droblem was this, that because no-one could forecast
what the price of wool would be at the opening or during the season,
and because we had to keep up the income flow during this year, we
had to take immediate steps; first of all to give as it were
subsidy to the wool producer, and secondly to permit the Commis!  ion
to buy in wool if it was thought necessary to sustain the price.
But evcn at t-he last Budget time we had a look at the long term
prospects as, for example, taking people off the land, giving long
term finance and farm reconstruction, and now we have appointed a
committee under Sir Richard RAndall, the former permanent Head of
the Treasury, who will be able to recruit a large proportion of
his own staff, and will be assisted by senior representatives of
other Government departments, and we hope he'll put up long term
answers to us, or recommendations to us, by the end of March next
year.
M4OORE: Do you in fact see a lot of people leaving the wool industry
in Australia
PRIM4E 1M1INISTER: Yes, I do, I do; and in fact when we first looked at
it at Budget time this year, we thought that there were at least
between eleven thousand and fourteen thousand who should be withdrawn
from the industry.
CARLETON: Prime~ Minister, have you made an in-principle decision not
to continue thei wool subsidy in next year's Budgct
PRIME MINISTER: Not an in-principlc decision, no, but we have said we
will not again give open-end commitments, either to the deficiency
paymonts, or and that is of coursel the subsidy nor will we give
unlimited authority to the Commission to buy in wool. But everything
will depend upon... first of all upon the facts as presented to us
by the Randall Committee and our analysis of conditions as they
exist at the time we have: to make the decision.
SOLOM4ON: In last year's Budget, Sir, your Government gave a t~ irtv
million dollar grant for special aid for woolgrowers which was
going to be for one year only, and this year the budgeted amount
for spocial assistance on a one-year scheme was sixty-million, and
it looks as though that'll probably be 120 or 150 million. Could
you give us soma indication of the -amount of money that the Government
would be prepared to commit in future years 7
PRIISE MINISTER: No, I couldn't give that. We haven't thought of it
yet because, as I said to you, we've just a ppointed the Randall
Committee, and I think it'd be wise for us to wait until the
Randall Committee has submitted its roport before we make up our
minds.
BARNES: On the general economic question, Prime minister, your predecessor,
MR Gorton, in speaking in the censure motion last week,
suggested some form of variation of a wages and prices freeze.
Does this appeal to you
PRI14E MINISTER: Not very much, n, because I don't think it's practicablc
in Australia. We have no constitutional power to control
prices. Under thle arbitration pirt of the Constitution, that part
of the law of the Constitution, it is the Arbitration Commission
that has the power to d, terzmino official awards and consequently
sets the pattern for wage rates throughout Australia. We haven't
got that power. 
BARNES: On ' the short.... I'm sorry Sir.
PRIME MINISTER: No in the long run. On any run. But in any event
one of those parts of the recommendations of the group of ten who
the ten economists who made some recommendations to us last week
I think the one part that I would agree with was that in Australia
an attempt to control wages, prices, is a pretty difficult proposition
and is rather apt to lead to a misappropriation of resources
and create bottlenecks rather than find real solutions.
BARNES-, President Mixon applied this only for three months the
Ninety Day Freeze. Couldn't you do the same thing by using your
taxing powers without the necessity for a Constitutional
PRIME MINISTER: I doubt it, I doubt it, but in any avent that would
be a very long term measure to introduce taxing powers. Nixon
fortunately had the power to do it, but I wonder even in his case,
I wonder how long it'll be successful for, and in any event our
problems arc nowhere near as serious as theirs.
BARNES: The problem as I see I'm sorry, I just wanted to follow
this the problem as I see it is that the Commonwealth will
go before the Arbitration Commission and either recommend no
increase whatsoever in the National Wage Case, or a mtinimium increase,
and.., but you leave yourself open to thce criticism that you're not
doing anything about profits or prices. Surely this shows up an
inconsistency zand surely the Governmcnt needs to use some powers
to balance the picture in the minds of the workers
PRI17. MINISTER: Well on the facts, and the facts are important, let's
establish them; I think you'll find that average earnings went up
between thirteen and... well'about thirteen per cent in the corresponding
period of last year, and that was mainly due to Arbitration
awards, but... not ' awards, but agreements that were made outside the
Commission, and that was the basic cause of our problem. But
profits did not go up substantially at all. In fact they went up
to a minimal extent and they have slightly increased in the
corresponding pcr-iod of this year as compared with last year ; so
we haven't got the problem of profits rising in a way that is
completely unacceptable. But that doesn't touch the basic problem;
the basic problem is how to be successful, and I doubt whether
under Australian conditions we would be able to introduce a system
of income controls, whether it was on wages or on profits. But
there are two ways in which we c,-ngo about this. The first one
relates to the Arbitration Commission. THere of course we were
willing to intervene in the Metal Trades case, but an agreement was
made outside the Commission and we were not able to put arguments.
But we did intervene in the carpenters' case, we did in the annual
leave case, and we did, as you know, also intervcne in the national
wage case. Secondly, if we felt that we really wanted to take
action so far as profits are concerned, we've got the taxation
mechanism, and when we looked at profits we realised that wasn't
an angle that needed immediate attention. So we can do something,
but I don't think it is the answer to the problem. The real answer
to the problem of inflation is trying to dampen down the conditions
that arc favourable to inflation and that is create conditions when
people can write into thcir prices any awards that might take place,
or over-award payments, or the losses that can occur because of
industrial indiscipline.
MOORE: Prime Minister, do you read into Sir Richard Kirby's report on
the Arbitration Commission a warning against the Government taking
stronger action in industrial relations o./ 7o 
PRIME MINISTER: No, bu ' t you put me in a very difficult position
here because Sir Richard has written to the Government over the
last few days protesting about the way in which his report had been
presented to the public, so that on Tuesday either the Minister for
Labour and National Service, or myself I hope the Minister for
Labour and National Service would in one way or other have to read
out the protest of Sir Richard. I think it's a pity, a great pity
that he's been misrepresented in the way he has been.
MOORE: Does the Government in fact intend to adopt a tougher industrial
relations policy?
PRIM1E MINISTER: Could I go back -first of all to Sir Richard because
I think he is as I said he has been misrepresented. I've known
Sir Richard for a long, long time. I was Minister for Labour and
National Service for eight years and I knew him before then and I
know he would never be critical of a Government for what it did in
its legislation. He thinks of himself as there to administer that
legislation and to have the arbitration in the legislative context
and wouldn't present a view of the kind that he's been represented
as presenting. Then the other part of your question
MOORE: Well, does the Government intend to adopt a tougher industrial
relations policy?
PRIME MINISTER: Again, it's been made plain that my colleague, the
Minister for Labour and National Service, will be making a statement
next week on the Government proposals relating to arbitration. It
will be a comprehensive review of the whole of the Arbitration
processes and procedures. We've been working on it now, I believe,
for very nearly seven months, and we completed our final review of
it on Thursday of this week. I don't want to, as it were, get into
his jurisdiction. I think it's appropriate and proper that I leave
him to explain his own case on Tuesday or Wednesday. But this I can
say to you. It is a thorough-going review, it is one that will
cover many aspects of arbitration, and we will not introduce a Bill
on this occasion, but we will put down a paper that will open up the
way for others to see what we propose, and so that they will be able
to present their arguments, whether it's the the trade
unions, whether it is the industrialists or the commercial interests,
they'll be able to say well look we don't like this, we think a
different sort of an approach should be made. So we hope for widespread
debates, widespread discussion, but we do hope it'll be the
beginning of a process that we can have another look and a better
look at industrial law.
MOORE: So there won't be legislation
PRIME MINISTER: No, no, it'll only he a statement and the legislation
will not be brought in, a Bill will not be brought in, until the
next session.
SOLOMON: Sir does Sir Richard's statement, in this letter, counter his
own statement in his report that he thought that improvements in
industrial relations are more likely to arise from changed attitudes
from the employers and the trade unions, than mere Acts of
Parliament? 
PRIME MINISTER: Look there are several points on which he' made a
complaint at least six, and probably more. I don't think that
one is isolated by him, and I don't think it is referred to, but I
couldn't be sure.
SOLOMON: No, he put that as a very strong view in his report.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, well, I too believe that one of the remedies
is better relationships between employer and employee. To that
extent I do agree with him.
M. IOORE: Can we turn to foreign affairs , I'm sorry can we move
on to foreign affairs now for a while, and I we do have to begin
with the conflict between India and Pakistan for the moment anyway.
how serious do you see that conflict?
PRIME MINISTER. Very serious, and very regrettable because I don't
think either country can really afford to get involved in a war of
this kind and of course there can be too great a loss of life that
was avoidable. I did write, or make diplomatic representations to
Yahya Xhan, President of Pakistan on at least four occasions; I
spoke to Madame Gandhi's representatives, and I wrote to her too.
I just feel it's something that we all hoped we could avoid,.
particularly amongst two members of the Commonwealth; but they've
declared war now, it's in the hands of the United Nations I believe,
and my colleague, the M-inister for Foreign Affairs, has made a
statement and again, this is within his jurisdiction and I don't
want to add anything to it tonight.
MOORE: Prime Minister, I'm sorry, could I
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, you can.
MOORE:. Could I ask you, what did President Yahya Xhan say in his
replies to your letter?,
PRIME MINISTER: He didn't give one.
MOORE: He didn't give you a reply?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
BARNES: There was a suggestion
MOORE: Are you disappointed in that?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, very disappointed. other countries have done
exactly the same. Some have got a rather sharp response, an
unfortunately sharp response. We hope that there can bo an agreed
solution, but it is n extrenely difficult problem and the big
nations, the more powerful nations, must all gct together to see
if they can try and get an agreed solution between the two.
MOORE: Do you see it possible for Australia to play significant
and s, 3ecial role in this kind of conflict? / 9 
PRIME MINISTER: No I don't. I think this is will be basically
between India and Pakistan, and I only hope that thyl see the
light and that they'll start to negotiate now. B3ut I don't see an
immediate prospect of that happening. But I don't think the great
powers either would be able to influence them to any great extent.
BARNES. There were reports from New York when you wore there Sir,
that you were contemp* la ting actually going to India and Pakistan on
your way home from London, and then later it appeared that you'd
either abandoned it or been dissuaded by your talks over there. Is
that correct?
PRI. ME ! INISTER: I didn't know of any reports whilst I -was in either
Washington, New York or London. ' But before I left, some of the Press
Gallery in Canberra suggested. to ma that I should go to Pakistan
and to Ncw Delhi. I knew I could not go -to New Delhi because Mrs.
Gandlhi would be in Washington at thc same time as I was there and if
I went to Rawalpindi, if I went to Pakistan first and then didn't
go to India, I think it could create greater troubles than * I wanted.
And in any event I also decided whilst I was in ' Washington that I
would write another letter to the Presidcnt of Pakistan. We did all
we could, and other nations, particularly the United States and the
United Kingdom, have done all they could, in order to minimise, even
to avoid, a war breakirna out between the two countries. They feel
the same as we do about it.
BARNES: Prime Minister, could I move the discussion a little further
south. The main area of dobate recently has been regarding the
Indian Ocean, in Australia. How seriously do you view the presence
of some Russian ships in the Indian Ocean, from Australia's Point of
view?
PRIIME M4INISTER: Not at the omont very seriously. The real problem
arises from the fact and this hasn't been made clear before but
the real problem arises from the fact that now, the Soviet has taken
an interest in the Indian Oceapn. Until a few years ago she'd had
no interest whatsoever. The second important fact is that at least
at the mo-ment her naval forces are concentrated in the west and the
north, mainly around the Suez Canal., R~ ed Sea and the Gulf area, and
secondly, they are able to mobiliso and to add to their naval
presence very quickly. It is this that is the cause of worry to us,
and of course, none of us know what the future is likely to hold,
particularly the relationship between the People's Republic of China
and of the Soviet, so we must remain constantly aware of the~ ' thnqers,
we must be ready to build up our own defence capabilities steadily
build up our defence capability and try and ensure that our allies
have the same approach to the problem of the Indian Ocean as we have.
BARNES: Haven't the Americans in fact played it down in rather low
key? I tL-hink in your report to Parliament you said that Mr. Laird,
particularly in your talks with him, had indicated that America
didn't see it as any sort of a threat whatsoever. There seems to be
some conflict between the attitude taken in the Australian
Parliament and by our major allies. 0/ 10 
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think you could put it in quite that language
because in my talks with Mr. Laird ho recognised the difficulties in
the ability to build up for the soviet to build up its naval
pres ncn fairly rcrpi1?. But they havc problems, not only with the
Administral-jon but the prubipmms they have with their Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, so they're not prepared to be too outspoken
about this probleyp, but they understand the Problem in exactly the
same way as we do. They've indicated that they will use, if it's
necessary, Learmonth and Cockburn, that's the naval base at Cockburn
thtwe're building; they're establishing a signal station at Diego
Garcia; they've indicated clearly that they will have voyages there,
missions there by naval presence, and as you know only recently they
had a carrier and a support crew, support ships, travelling around
the Indian Ocean. They know the difficulties. But just as importantly
the British know the difficulties that exist too, and whilst I was in
London, Mr. Heath gave me the clear assurance that what he said in
Singapore about Britain maintaining a presence in the Indian Ocean
would be confirmed, and it was confirmed. They are interested in the
Indian Ocean as a great trading area, as an area that is necessary
for them to live by, and they'll keeD a presence there too.
BARNES: Is it worthwhile us spending eight hundred million on a fleet
of ships to patrol the Indian Ocean the light aircraft carriers, the
light destroyers I'm talking of now.
PRIMYE MINISTER: Up until the -moment I have no proposals before me from
the defence machine as to the size of the presence they would like
in the Indian Ocean. Until I get a submission from them I couldn't
give you an answer to your question.
MOORE: Prime rinister I'm sorry what has happened to the study
group that was set up at the Commonwealth Conference in Singapore at
the beginning of the year?
PRIME -MINISTER: It's wasted away.
M4ORFE: It's wasted? Well are you sorry about that, or glad to see it
go?
PRIME MINISTER: No I think it would have been a failure. When I was
in Singapore I felt it would not succeed and it hasn't succeeded.
We have said we were willing to participate if necessary, or to give
whatever help was necessary, but we also believe that political
problems would intrude and would superimpose themselves on the
analysis, and it was only analysis that was to be attempted. I think
each country itself has got to make up its mind what the problem is,
and take whatever action it thinks is in its best interests.
CARLETON: Prime Minister, can I take you up to Vietnam. The
Government's position seems to be that -the position in Vietnam has
improved to the degree that we can now withdraw all our troops. If
the situation in Vietnam was to deteriorate next year, could our
troops go back?
PRIME MINISTER: I stated in the House we have no intention of sending
troops back to South Vietnam. I stand on that statement. 0../ 1 1 
11.
CARLETON: No matter how much it deteriorates?
PRI14E MINISTER: I would not commit myself.-on-a hypothetical question
as to what might happen if thcere-were completely changed circumstances,
-but-I-belie've, and I state this as a belief, that the probability, or
the possibility, of sending any troops back is extremely remote.
SOLOMON: Sir are you concerned that the Democratic Labor Party has not
seen great merit in your statements on your return to Australia,
regarding defence?
PRIME, MINISTER: The Democratic Labor Party is also a political party,
and of course it has to play the game politically, in the way it
thinks suits its best interests. That doesn't moan to say that they've
got necessarily grave doubts about our defence posture, and what we
intend to do. What it does indicate is they'd like to see us doing
much more because that is the kind of policy on which the Demoncratic
Party must succeed.
SOLOMON: Are you going to accede to their demands?
PRIME MINISTER: I will riot ma-ke any forecasts about future policy.
I respect the Democratic Labor Party but that doesn't necessarily
mean that . because I'm asked a question at a conference, however
ikLLgortant this one might be, when I'm askcd a question I immediately
give an answer on what is a high level political and policy decision.
BARNES: You were to the Defence Minister, Mr. Fairbairn, was to
have made a statement to the House during this session he's now
said it won't be made why have you postponed this if defence is so
important to you?
PRIME MINISTER: I gave instructions that I wanted a White Paper
prepared because we first of all had a strategic appreciation that
gives the global picture of the dangers of warfare, whether of a
general kind, a limited kind, or insurgency or subversion. It was
pretty reassuring and said we couldn't expect global or even limited
types of warfare during the next decade; but I pointed out at that
time that I felt that we also needed, based upon that strategic
review, something to do with the size, the structure, the disposition
and role of the Australian military forces, and I asked that a White
Paper be prepared for presentation to the House. The Dafence
machine tell me they can't do it in time, that you can't make instant
coffee decisions and we have to wait till somewheile about February.
Regrettably I have to wait. I'm sorry about it, ut that's the
answer.
BARNES: I thought the idea of Mr. Fairbairn wanting to put down a
statement, during this session, was to give these defence planners a
bit of time to work out their priorities, instead of the usual
scramble for money in a pre-Budget period, when everyone's in for,
whatever, guns and boats. Aren't you defeating this by not giving
them some quidance now?
PRIME MINISTER: No, it was my oai idea and I believe it's based upon
normal Cabinet or Government practice. I wanted a document setting
out the role, composition and size of -the forces, and therefore the
way in which they should be equipped and manned. ./ 12 
12.
But they told me Mr Fairbairn himself told me that they could
not do it in-time.. That is the reason, there isn't any other one.
MOORE: Prime M4inister, how close are we to recognising China?
PRIME MINISTER: I can't tell you because it's in the hands of the
Chinese.
MOORE: Why do you say that?
PRIME MINISTER: Because we opened up, or wanted to open up a dialogue
with them. So far as we're concerned we permit our people to freely
go to China and to come back. Subject to security requirements, any
Chinese can conme to Australia. We trade with them freely, other than
in strategic goods. We welcome cultural and scientific exchanges,
and I did say, I think you know one of the first speeches I made as
Minister for Foreign Affairs, largely as a result of my own
initiatives, that we would want to open up a dialogue with China as
soon as we could. And we thought, quite frankly, that we were on the
way to some sort of success, but the Chinese act in their own
inscrutable ways, and suddenly they cut off, ' without rhyme, without
reason, and we don't know when they're likely to resume them again.
MOORE: In your Departmcnt's discussions, does the Government of Taiwan
still claim to be the Government of China, or has it recognised
reality?
PRIME MINISTER: I can't anssQ -that on bohalf of the Taiwan Government,
but our attitude is a clear one. The de facto control of continental
China resides in the Peking Government, that's the Pcople's Republic.
De facto control and jurisdiction in T'aiwan resides in the hands of
the Taiwanese Government. So consequently we don't recognise the
claim that is made by Taiwan to jurisdiction over co-ntinental China.
MOORE: Can we turn, just back to defence for a moment. What again
what is the present status of the Jervis Bay nuclear powcr station?
Is that
PRIME MINISTER: That's postponed for the time being. I haven't heard
of it since the statement was made by my colleague, the Minister for
National Development.
MOORE: But in principle, do you see the n~ eed for Alistralia to be
prepared to be able to make nuclear weapons if it needed to?
PRIME MINISTER: Thatis a question I as you know I couldn't answer,
because as you know, we have signed, or we have initialled I'm sorry,
not signed, the document of the united Nations relating
to nuclear weapons and while we haven't ratified it we've kept that
in abeyance because other countries haven't ratified it either yet
we are keeping well up with nuclear developments, particularly in the
industrial world, and that of course would help us if ever in the
future we had to make up our minds which way we wanted to go.
MOORE: But you don't soce it as a matter or urgency?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't. / 13 
BARNES: Prime Minister, could I open up the area of politics,
domestic politics? Mr. Killen, your ' former Minister, the former
Minister for the Navy, gave notice I think a couple of months ago
that he wanted a special meeting of the Parliamentary Liberal Party
this session to decide the issue of an elected ministry or otherwise.
Do you intend to held that meeting this week?
PRIME MINISTER: I will hold it as soon as I can, probably this week.
BARNES: What is your attitude towards an elected Ministry?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll reserve my statement about an elected Ministry
until I have to discuss it in the Party room, and I will listen to
what they have to say, but hitherto I've been Qpposed to an elected
Ministry.
BARNES: Are you concerned about Mr. Killen's approach to this as
maybe damaging your position as Prime Minister, the traditional role
of ai Liberal Prime Minister of being able to choose his own MinistersZ
Does it concern you that this may be damaged by the adoption of an
elected Ministry?
PRIME M4INISTER: No I don't think that, but in any event, because I want
to discuss it in my Party room first, I believe that's the place
where my opinion must be expressed, and I think that it would be
imprudent for me to openly discuss it before I lot my Party knew
what I thought.
SOLOMON: Sir are you concerned about criticism which Mr. K~ illen has
been making of you and the way you've been handling yourself as
Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: I will not discuss Any of my colleagues publicly. I've
stated over and over again that I believe in fighting on issues and
on policies, and relying* on : the public approval for what we do andthe
way we comport ourselves, and I will not under any circumstances
discuss Mr. Killen or his views, or for'that mattert any other of my
colleagues and their views.
SOLOMON: Do you think that things which people say within your Party
can be of political damage to the Party?
PRIME MINISTER: I think they can be of political damage. Yes of
course they can be. But I think if you look at the recent Gallup
ratings, includin~ g the one in " The Age", " Sydney Morning Herald",
I think you can see that our rating's going up nicely and I think
better than most people would have predicted, and in any event I
believe that there's been too much exaggeration about the extent Of
the difficulties within my Party, and particularly the state of my
Party today. I don't think the public have been effectively presented
with the state of the Party as it now exists.
BARNES: Do you think this has been a misinterpretation? Do you think
the Press has mishandled the reporting of the state of the Liberal
P arty? / 14 
that we'are prepared to act, not only in thc interests of those
people in need and defence and othor avenues, but wherever we feel
it's necessary we'll act, and we won't be bound by precedent and we'll
not hesitate to take action when we think it's necessary.
BARNES: You mentioned social services, sir. In Melbourne, on Friday,
you promised a war on poverty. The economists, whom you mentioned
earlier, suggested that the first shot in this war could be fired by
imcreasing unemployment benefits and pensions, as a way of
stimulating demand. Does this appeal to you?
PRIDT MINISTER: I think you know that at the last Budget we gave the
biggest increase, single increase in the pensicn that had been granted,
and that followed one, a mid-term increase of a half a dollar; added
together they were pretty big increases, and accepted as such by the
Australian people; because I've heard less comment about the pension
increase this year than in the twenty-one years that I've been in
Parliament. I doubt whether that is the way to stimulate demand.
The way we are going about it now, and I'd have to repeat this, but
I might have even made it clear before; I think you know though I'd
better make this as a preface but there is a potential for very
much in very great growth-in demand becausG savings are at an a~ l
time high, and if the economy starts to gather speed, and it can do
that fairly quickly, then we could have demand inflation superim~ posing
itself on cost inflati~ on, and that would create great damage -nd great
problems for the community. But what we've done I'll mention them
ene by one to you. We gave help for, I thought, the area of grqatest
need and that was nursing homes and nursing attention. We then
intervened on interest rates. We took action so far as migration was
concerned, to cut it down, particularly over the Christmas period.
And I announced what we would do, on Thursday, about rural
unemployment. So you'll see here a Government anxious and willing
tC? take action when the need arises. But you asked me another
question, and that was the question of w~ here we'd gone wrong. I don't
think we've gone wrong anywhere and I'd like somebody to tell me
where we'ye gone wrong, and if they can, I'll give them the answer,
the answer from my Government's point of view.
MOORE: Sir, in the light of your experience as Prime Minister, are there
any. major changes that you would like to see made to Parliamentary
procedure?
PRIME MINISTER: I am disturbed about Parliamentary procedures, yes. I
had one major one Mr. Solomon will well recognise about the bank
up of Bills at the end of sessions, and we've overcome that, I think
more or less completely.
MOORE: Are you happy with the working of Question Time? That's often
being criticised.
PRIME MINISTER: At the moment, at the momrent, I think the main problem,
about Questinpi Time is that petitions are presented in the way they
are, and I think it's taken away from the vitality and the great
interest there was in Question Time. If you have fifteen minutes on
petitions, somehow or other the interest goes out of it and the
vitality is gone. Now petitions must be presented, but I'd like to
see Question Time get back to its former vitality. 
The second point that I'd like to make is that I think too much is
made of trying to concentrate on the Prime Minister in matters that
are outside his jurisdiction and portfolio. I'm trying to ensure
that we got back to the British Cabinet system of Government practicer
and for that matter the Menzies Government Cabiinet practices of
directing questions to the responsible Minister; I'd like that to
change.
But the other big change that I'd like to ensure is that matters of
great public importance, like the state of the economy, defence, the
Ind~ an Ocean, social services, are debated in the House. We can't
do that because we really have so much legislation, so many Bills'
comning forward, that if we want to get through within a reasonable
time, then we have to reduce the time during which we can discuss
matters of great public importance.
MOORE: Would you like to see Parliament televised?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
BARNES: Sir, Mr. Gorton said on the eve of the last elections, that
h , e believed 18-year olds would have the vote by the next election.
Will they?
PRIIC MINISTER: Again you're asking me what is a policy decision and I
wouldn't answer a policy decision on a quostinn and -answer sessi~ on,
even though it's as an important a one as the one I'm attending today.
SOLOMON: Sir, are you considering any changes in your Ministry?
PRIME MINISTER: I beg your pardon?
SOLOMON: Are you considering any changes in your ministry or are you
satisfied with the way all of your Ministers have gone?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm very satisfied with my C--abinet and Ministry.
CARLETON: Prime Minister, can I raise a major political issue within
your jurisdiction....
PRIME MINISTER: I hadn't quite finished what I wanted to say to David
Solomon. Would you mind if I just finished it? I'm sorry to keep
saying this to you, but I would like to finish the answer. Leaving
Sir Robert out of it, I think this is probably leaving myself out
of it, too, I think this is probably the best Cabinet I've sat with.
They each have an opportunity to, nresent their views when they want
to, and they do so. They're highly intelligent people and I believe
the decisions they've been making are right, so I'm proud to be a
member of the team, and I'm proud to be able to lead a group of
blokes who .1 think have got a lot of intelligence, and certainly
present their ideas in a very cogent way.
CARLETON: Sir, a major Political issue rIght within your jurisdiction,
and that is the issue of Parliamentary salaries. Now the argument
from yourself and from the Treasurer so often is that the economy
falls down because the unions demand too much by way of wage demands.
Is it not incumbent u. Don you to set a good example next week and not
tdke a salary rise yourself? 
17.
PRIME MINISTER: It is incumbent upon us and a very heavy responsibilityto
use my own phrase to show moderation andl to give leadership, and
we will.
BARNES: Sir, when Mr. Whitlam was on this programme, he challenged us
that if ever you were on the programme we'd ask you the same matters
on law reform. May I ask you sir what is your attitude towards
abortion reform?
PRIKE MINISTER: I gave the answer to this question in the House.
Fundamentally this is a State problem and it only concerns us in the
Federal capital and in the territories. I would not give an answer
to this until I had discussed it with my Cabinet and with my Party,
because there are strong differences of opinion there and I would
want to test their views before I'd be prepared to introduce a Bill
into the House, I see no prospect of introducing a Bil. in the House
during this Parliament.
BARNES: But do you have a personal view on the matter sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I have a personal view, yes. I Wkould not express it.
SOLOMON: Does that mean that the prnposed criminal code for the A. C. T.
and the Northern Territory which was tabled in the Parliament in
1969 and which was going to be introduced next year won't come in?
Because it deals with the...
PRIME MINISTER: a question. I did not know about this
pxoposal relating to the Australian Capital Territory. I've not
heard of it before and I can't give you an answer to that question.
As you know I've been the Prime Minister for nine months and if it
was introduced then it was introduced at a time when I was not the
Prime Minister and it didn't come within my jurisdiction as the
Foreign Minister.
BARNES*: Capital punishment is also included in this Bill Sir. The
Committee which set and recommended the Bill declined to make
recommendations on what they saw as policy issues. Capital
punishment, abortion refonmhomosexuality..... . we've dealt
with abortion. Could you tell us your attitude towards capital*
punishment?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I can tell you my attitude towards capital
punishment. I've got a horror of capital punishment. It seems
stringe that I should put it to you in that way but I have, and on
every occasion when the question of capital punishment has come into
the Federal Cabinet, I have expressed my strong, and I believe,
unchangeab-1-view that I don't believ. e in capital punishment. I
don't think it's a practical question therefore because in all the
time that I've been there twenty, twenty-one years whatever it
happens to be the recommendations, if there have been any relating
to capital punishment, have never been agreed to, and consequently no
such recommendations have been made to the Governor-General. I
think it's improbable, highly improbable, that there'd ever be
capital punishment, certainly whilst I'm the Prime Minister, or while
the Liberal-Country Party is in power. .4./ 18 
18.
CARL~ ETON: A very very quick question, Mr. McMahon. Will you ever go
on television in a television debate with Mr. Whitlam?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll make up my mind when the circumstances arise.
CARLETON: Prior to the next election?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to.. mnot going, to commit myself
under any circumstances to hypothetical questions, but when I've
previously been with Mr. Whitlam I think most people remember the
results. I've got a phenomonally good memory and know what I'm
talking about.
MOORE: Sir, we began we're nearly to the end of our time we
began this conference by looking ahead to the~ next election, and
tees one issue that some people think may be an issue at the
election that we haven't mentioned yet, and that is immigration,
our immigration policy. Do you see our immigration policy as being
an issue at the next election?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I do, and a very important issue, and we will not
change our policy, which is based on two seprartate considerations
or three. The first one is that we must be certain that the person
can be integrated into the A11ustralian community, that he has talents
of t"-he kind that we want, and that he will be able to make his
contribution to the development of our country. Now we are not
racist but we are selective in the people that we chcose to comne here.
On the contrary the Labor Party's attitude is one that it believes
that apart from family reunions then there should be a nondiscriminatory
practice with regard to others. Now if this happened,
over sixty per cent of British migrants would be prevented fr-) m
coming; we'd get practically none from Western Germany, from the
Scandinavian countries, or from South American countries; or I think
too, but I'm not absolutely certain of this, from North America. So
their poli&amp; j therefore is one that is dif-ferent to ours in this
sen ' se. We base ours on what we regard as in our best interests, the
best interests of Australia, and consequently we select those that we
think will help uis. Theirs, so far as I ye said. is non-discriminatory,
and consequently you can find people coming in that won't make the
kind of contribution I think they should be in a position to make.
MOORE: Do you believe in a homogeneous Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I do.
MOORE: And what does that mean to you homogeneous?
PRIME MINISTER: It means integration, it means the people will become
Australian6, and we won't have little enclaves here, and we won't
introduce the kind of problem that other countries have at the moment.
MOORE: Is colour a factor in determining whether the country is
homogeneous?
PRIME MINISTER: No I don't think it is
MOORE: It's irrelevant? ./ 19 
19.
PRIME M4INISTER: I'don't think it is, but we want to be certain that
as I said, and I gave this answer before, so I'm really repeating
what I said a few moments ago, we are not racist and I think my
history is enough--to show how well I get on with the Asian and
African people, my great liking for them. But we're not going to
introduce problems here of a kind they have in other parts of the
world.
MOORE: But you also said that colour is not a factor to be taken into
acQount?
PRI14E MINISTER: No, and if you look at our policy, you will find, and
I haven't got the figures readily in my mind, but they've been
mentioned in the House on several occasions, that of course we
introduce, or we allow people of different colours and different
religions and different races to come in here.
BARNES: Sir isn't it racist to allow those people to come here and yet
not pay them assisted passage, and yet to pay assisted passage to
people who are white skinned?
PRIME MINSITER: I don't think that that's got anything to do with the
principles at all. That's the means by which you get them here.
BARNES: But it's a racist discrimination between one another, sir, I would
suggest.
-PRIME, M INISTER: I don't. I think you're playing with words saying that;
merely because you don't give then assisted passages doesn't mean to
say that it's racist. We've got our policy relating to the kind of
people that we'll bring in anA it is non-racist in origin. -The mere
fact as an incident of that we have p~ roblems associated with assisted
pas sages I don't think is relevant. But can I take you a little
further? Shortly the British will be terminating, or giving-an
indication or a clear indication that they will terminate assisted
passages. Now does that mean that because we might not then, if this
comes to fruition, we might not then have assisted passages from the
United Kingdom, does that mean to say we're treating them as racist?
BARNES: No, if white and black are treated the same, sir , I wouldn't
call it racist.
PRI14E MINISTER: Well I can't agree with you, with qreat respect to you.
I don't think it is relevant. The real problem is one, the real
issue is one of what are our principles and policies, and our
principles and policies are the three that I mentioned, and we do
allow coloured people to come in I don't like using the word
coloured pople but we do allow noeple of other race and ! other
colours to come in, and I'd be only too happy to get the figures for
you and let you have them some time tonight.
MOORE: Prime Minister, thank you very much for giving us so much time
on MONDAY CONFERENCE. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
Additional Assistance for Government and
Independent Schools
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 9 December 1971]
Mr McMLAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
-by leave-I wish to inform -the House
of decisions the Government has taken
to provide additional assistance to both
government and independent schools : n
areas of special need. Decisions taken in
association with Commonwealth and State
conferences over the last 18 months or so
have resulted in a significant increase in
the level and rate of growth of general
revenue assistance from the Commonwealth
to the States. The current expenditure
on primary and secondary education in
State schools has benefited significantly
from these arrangements and the Government
is convinced that additional assistance
in that area would not be justified. However,
the States have not been able to allocate
as much as they would -have liked from their
available capital funds for primary and
secondary school buildings. They speak of
problems including the provision of additional
classrooms and associated facilities
and the replacement of outmoded and
cramped accommodation.
We have decided that it would be desirable
to assist the States to increase their
capital expenditure in respect of primary
and secondary schools. We have given very
careful thought to the form in which we
should provide this assistance and we have
decided that the best approach would be to provide this assistance by way of additions
to the interest-free capital grants
which the Commonwealth is making to the
States as part of their annual works and
housing programmes, and as a substitute
for loan raisings. These capital grants are
being paid for the purpose of assisting the
States to finance non-productive capital
works, without incurring debt charges on
the funds used. However, as these grants
are being made in recognition of the need
expressed by the States for additional capital
expenditure in primary and secondary
schools, we would expect them to be so
used by the States. We would prefer that
science laboratories and libraries in
secondary schools, for which there are
existing special purpose grants, be excluded
from these grants.
The additional grants will also be paid
entirely without any matching conditions
attached to them. I should add that the
Commonwealth expects that the States will
continue with their own planned levels of
expenditure in this area so that these grants
will represent a net addition to the facilities
in government schools. The amount of the
additional grants will be $ 20m of which part
will be paid in the remainder of this financial
year and part in 1972-73. They will be
distributed between the States in proportion
to the capital grants presently being received 
by them, which in turn are distributed in
the same way as the States' Loan Couqcil
borrowing programmes for works and
housing. The additional grants will be
amalgamated into the basic capital grants
for the purpose of determining the proportion
of the works and housing programme
that the grants Will represent in future years.
The amount that each State will receive on
the basis indicated is as follows: New South
Wales, $ 6.36m; Victoria, $ 5.10m; Queensland,
$ 2.53m; South Australia, $ 2.74m;
Western Australia, $ l. 87m; and Tasmania.
$ 1 .40m-a total of $ 20m. I have written to
the Premiers inviting them to agree to
accept these grants on the basis I have
outlined. Since 1969 running costs of government
schools have risen by at least 30 per cent
to 40 per cent and even more in some
cases and it is now costing over $ 300 a year
to educate a child in a government primary
school and over $ 500 a year to educate a
child in a government secondary school.
The general financial assistance grants from
the Commonwealth represent about one half
of the State's current Budget expenditure
and on this basis it can be said that the
Commonwealth is supporting approximately
one half of the increased expenditure by the
States on primary and secondary schools.
The independent schools have received additional
assistance from the States, but they
are facing increasing difficulties in their
efforts to provide adequate facilities for a
reasonable proportion of the school-going
population. Many of the independent
schools have been paying their teachers
salaries at rates significantly lower than
those paid in government schools. However,
there is now a number of awards
which require these salaries to be increased
to full parity with the operative rates in
government schools over a short period.
This development has resulted in relatively
greater increases in costs in the independent
schools than in the government schools. The
independent schools have limited capacity
to charge higher fees and collect other
income, and for boarding schools there are
additional difficulties arising from the downturn
in rural activity. The combination of
these factors has resulted in a continued
drift in enrolments to government schools.
The need for immediate additional
assistance to independent schools in emphasised by the following current developments.
The Roman Catholic authorities in Melbourne
are considering seriously a proposal
not to expand secondary schools but to concentrate
resources in primary schools. In
Tasmania a number of Roman Catholic and
other independent schools are faced with
the prospect of having to cease operations.
The Government hopes that a contraction
would not be necessary in either area.
As a further measure of assistance to the
independent schools, the Government has
decided to increase the rates of the annual
per capita grants to both primary and
secondary independent schools throughout
Australia. These grants were first made
available from the, beginning of 1970 at
annual rates of $ 35 per head in primary
schools and $ 50 per head in secondary
schools. These rates will be increased to
$ 50 per head in primary schools and $ 68
per head in secondary schools from the
beginning of 1972. These additional per
capita grants to independent schools in the
States are expected to cost $ 9.7m in 1972
of which half, that is $ 4,850,000 will be
payable during the financial year 1971-72.
The amount in each State will be approximately:
New South Wales, $ 3.58m; Victoria,
$ 3.14m; Queensland, $ 1.46m; South
Australia, $ 600,000; Western Australia,
$ 700,000; and Tasmania, $ 220,000-a total
of $ 9.70m.
Independent schools in the Australian
Capital Territory and the Northern Territory
share in the per capita grants which
the Commonwealth makes available to
independent schools in the States. They also
receive a local component in their per
capita grants broadly equivalent to those
paid * by the State governments to independent
schools in the States. In addition
to the increases I have already mentioned,
the local component in the annual per
capita grants to independent schools in the
2 Territories will be increased from the
beginning of 1972. The increases will be
from $ 20 to $ 35 per head in primary
schools and in secondary schools from
$ 30 to $ 45 in forms 1 and 2, from $ 40 to
$ 45 in forms 3 and 4, and from $ 45 to
$ 50 in forms 5 and 6. The increased grants
to independent schools in the Australian
Capital Teritory and the Northern Territory
are expected to cost $ 347,000 in 1972
of which $ 173,000 will be payable during 
the financial year 1971-72. The Government
will introduce appropriate legislation
covering these measures during the autumn
session of the Parliament next year.
My Government will continue to cooperate
with the States in measures both
direct and indirect to expand and improve
education services in government schools.
Our policy for the independent schools is
that, relying on their own efforts and with
assistance from governments, they should
be able to continue to provide places at a
reasonable standard for that proportion of the school population which in the past has
sought education in non-government
schools. The action we are now taking is a
further indication of our determination to
assist those directly concerned to improve
the standards in all types of schools. I
present the following paper:
Additional Assistance for government and
independent schools-ministerial statement,
9th December 1971.
Motion ( by Mr Swartz) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
20001/ 71W. 0. MURRAY. ioernment Prtnter. Canberra 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 98/ 1971
SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon.
I have been informed that the Labor Party opposes significant
parts of the Bills relating to Mr Justice Kerr's rec~ ommendations on
salaries and allowances for members of the Commnonwealth Parliament.
In my statement in the House on 16 September, I said that the
Government had decided that there should be an enquiry into
Parliamentary salaries and allowances.
The Laad~ r of tne Opposition, in reply, said that the opposition
had suggested, arid it supported, the approach which the Government
had adopted. The Leader of the Opposition complimented me on having
sought and secured the services of a Judge of such distinction in
industrial matters.
Hitherto there has been a non-party approach to these issues
and it was implicit in the Leader of the opposition's statement of
16 September that this approach would be followed on this occasion.
The reported new attitude of the Labor Party is a breach of
this approach. In these circumstances, the Government reserves
the right to take whatever action it considers desirable.
CAN BE RRA
9 December 1971. 



FOR PRESS PM No. 99/ 1971
PARLIAMENTARY SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES
Statement by the Prime Minister Mx. William McMahon
The Government has decided not to proceed with any
of the three Bills relating to increases in Parliamentary A'alaries
and allowances. In practical terms this means tZhat Parlian~ entary
salaries will not be increased in the life of this Parliament.
Parliamentary salary determinations are a difficult subject at any
time. They give rise to a variety of public consideration and
emotions. For this reason, it has been customary to proceed in the
Parliament only on the basis of unanimity or near unanimity, The
recent decision to have the salaries and allowances independ~ ently
reviewed was initiated on that basis.
The Leader of the Opposition wrote to me on
13 September, 1971 and said that his executive had discusse4 replies
which I had given in answer to questions in the House concerning
Parliamentary salaries. He went on to say that, in the opinion of
the executive, the salaries should be periodically reviewed by a
member of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission or by an
industrial judge in the same way as salaries of other citizens.
Further on 16 September, after I had decided upon an
inquiry into Parliamentary salaries and allowances, the Leader of
the Opposition, in a statement in support, said that the opposition
had suggested, and had supported, the approach which the Government
had adopted. Also he expressed pleasure that the Government had
sought and secured the services of a judge of such distipction in
industrial matters. Mr. Justice Kerr submitted his report in which he put
forward a set of detailed recommendations. He expressed the view'
t~ iat the report should be considered as a whole. In paragraph 217,
from which I quote, he said:-
" I have considered remuneration as a whole an4 my
r~ commendations in respect of particular financial matters are
cOnnected with my recommendations on other related matters and the
results should be looked at as a whole."
The Government exercising its responsibility put forward
to the Parliament proposals based on Judge Kerr's recommendations.
The one point of difference was that exercising its responsibility
to give leadership in the present situation of wage and salary
pressures it proposed that the salary increases recommended by
Judge Kerr should in all instances members, ministers and other
office holders be reduced by 28.6% This is not in conflict with
the Judge's recommendation that the report be treated as a whole.
Judge Kerr said that he did not recommend any reduction by way of
creating an example. But he also stated that it was a matter for
Parliament to decide what, if anything, it should do along these
lines. 
The Opposition has indicated that it does not accept
the Government's proposals. Instead it proposes. that only those
sections of the Bills relating to the basic salary and allowances of
Senators and Members should be adopted. This would upset and
distort the pattern of Judge Kerr's recommendations. Further, there
would be no unanimity between the parties. In the circumstances,
the Government sees only one responsible course. This course is
not to proceed with any of the three Bills. Whatever procedural
steps are necessary for their ,. ithdrawal-will be taken.
9 DECEMBER, 1971. 



PRIME MINISTER 7/
COMMONWEALTH OFFER TO THE STATES OF FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE FOR THE RELIEF OF NON-METROPOLITAN
UNEMPLOYMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
The Prime Minister said today that following fruitful
discussions between Commonwealth and State officials, which ' e had
proposed in his letter to the Premiers on 1 December, he hae now
written to the Premiers putting the Government's offer in fi... l form.
The Government's view is that the arrangements which have
been developed for the administration of Commonwealth funds provided
to the States for the relief of unemployment under the schemes of
drought assistance should serve broadly as a model for the scheme now
proposed. In particular, it was envisaged that in the pr%( ent case,
funds would be provided in the form of advances paid monthl. y.
As to the types of work to be undertaken, thie Prime
Minister said that the Gov'rnment sees this as a matter which the States
are well equipped to determine, but recognises a need to enchasise
labour-intensive activities, of as productive a kind as possble.
There are, however, limits to the oronortion of expenditure which could
usefully be devoted to labour costs. Thus, in all the circumstances,
the Government would now be prepared to regard it as appropriate if up
to one-third of the funds provided over the balance of this financial
year was, on average over all the projects undertaken, devoted to
expenditure on other than labour costs.
As to the kind of labour to be employed, the Prime
Minister continued, the Government believes this also to be a matter
for each State to decide in the light of its own particular requirements
and priorities. Iowever, the Government believes that as far
as possible, those employed sh uld have been registered for employment
with the Commonwealth Employment Service, and envisaged that the
Department of Labour and National Ser-ice would be closely associated
with the scheme. The rrime Minister then referred to the question of the
amount and distribution of the funds which the Government is now
offering on a firm basis to the States.
In approaching this question, the Government had
commenced from the figure of $ 2 million a month which, as the Prime
Minister had said in his statement to the House of Representatives, was
the order of cost which the Government had in mind. At the same time, / 2 
in the light of various complexitites associated with the working out
of the detailed application of the scheme, the Government had not had
a closed mind on the matter of the funds to be provided. For example,
the decision to increase the proportion of the total funds which might
be applied to expenditure on other than labour costs was a factor which
had been taken into ,-ount in determining the Government's final
position. Another important consideration in this respect has arisen
out of the consideration of how the total funds should be distributed
between the States. This is, of course, a very complex matter. In
eaching the position finally adopted, the Government had sought to
take into account, as far as possible, the particular problems and
needs of the unemployment situation in the non-metropolitan areas of
each State. While any pattern of distribution arrived at must
ecessarily be open to debate, that now proposed is, in the Government's
iew, the most equitable which could be devised in all the circumstances.
Against that background, the Gover. nment has offered to the
States grants of $ 2.25 million a month, and is willing to apply that
figure as from 1 December last. The total amount of grants payab: le to
all the States during the balance of this financial year woul-. herefore,
bc. $ 15.75 million, distributed as follows millic.
New South ' Tales 6.065
Victoria 3.54;
Queensland 3.15
South Australia 0.. 94:
Western Australia l. lf(
Tasmania 0.865
15.75C
The Government intends that the scheme will :.. j: ct
to review, within six months or so before 30 June 1l972);-i t'. he
light of the then prevailing conditions.
The Prime Minister emphasised that, on the assumption
that it can be put into gear immediately, the Government is prepared to
base the scheme as from 1 December last and, on that basis, the amount
available to each State would be as indicated. He concluded by saying
that, so far as the Government was concerned, the States would be free
to put work in hand immediately.
CANBERRA, 12 December 1971
A 1 



OPENING OF THE NATIONAL JEWISH MEMORIAL CENTE
CANBERRA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
13 December, 1971.
Mr. Jacobson, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies
and Gentlemen-, This afternoon we are about to add something to the
history of Canberra and something of enduring importance to the
vast panorama of the Jewish story in Australia.
I wonder if I could, with some architectural licence
considerable licence in fact describe this fine new building as
a pillar. I do so because I see it as a pillar of faith in our
national capital. A pillar of faith which will stand for a long,
long time,. as the national centre of Australian Jewry the first
of its kind and as a meeting place, a House of . worship, a school
and a memorial to Jews who died for Australia.
I sometimes think we miss the sight of history in the
making whken we get mixed up in the process oursel-es on a summer
afternoop in Canberra with familiar sights and familiar faces around
US. But history this is, and my wife and I are h1onoured be with
you on this very special occasion. I'm afraid we arc both ' oing to
make speeches. We each know what the other is going to say and as
I'm speaking first I have to be careful to keep in my own corner,
Sir, I think it is almost ten years since the foundation
stone was laid here by Rabbi Brodie, Chief Rabbi at that time, you
have built well as the result of your own energetic fund-raising and,
I understand, some help from friondly governments. The Commonwealth's
corntribution to this centre.. as you know, is a perpctual lease of the
land for a rental of ten cents a yaar on demand. To my knowledge the
demand has never been made, nor likely to be, it's just one of those
curious things put in to make overything look legal. All this
having been said, I do congratulate those who havc worked so hard to
make this Centre. You should bc well content and very proud. It is
a handsome addition to the buildings in Canberra and, as I said, at
the beginning, it is -a pillar of faith in our midst.
Jewry has won an honoured and permanent place in
Australia and I am proud to be Primo Minister in a country where
bigotry is at a discount and where Australians accept each other
for what they are. We are not troubled by what each man's faith
might be or what form t4-he worship of his God might take. And I
take this opportunity of acknowledging here what the Jewish community
has done for Australia. It is to the la~ sting credit of the Jewish people and it
is evidence of the durability of the spiritual values which bind them
together that they have maintained their identity no matter where
they have been born or where they have settled. ./ 2 
They have done this in Australia and their integration
in the Australian community is complete. The Jewish community in
Australia has given much to the development of an. Australian culture
by the infusion of elements of their own rich, rare culture. And
its members are sharing, very fully, in Australia's great effort at
nation-building. I take just two names among many from the list of
distinguished Jews who have brought honour to Australia. The late
Sir Isaac Isaacs, our first Australian-born Governor-General and the
late General Sir John Monash who led us in the first great war and
gave so much of his talents to works of peace in this country when
the battles were won. We remember them today because they were big
men who thought and acted in a big way. They were national in their
outlook and in their achievements.
I think, too, gn this occasion, it is right that wt
should pay our tribute to the fortitude of the Jewish people in
Israel who press on with nation-building though the shadows of war
lie always along their frontiers.
There are three things, I think we should remember
about Israeli-
The first That Isreal came to be because of the courage of
its people.
And the determination of a majority of nations that
the Jews shQuld be free, independent and able to live
in the land of their fathers.
Through its active membership of the United Nations
Palestine Commission and the General Assembly, Australia
helped to make this possible.
The second That forbearance, courage, resolution and industry have
made a nation in a timeless desert.
And by that result the world is reminded once again
that there are few limits to what men and women can do,
given freedom and faith.
and
The third That the future holds a tremendous challenge for
Israel, for other countries of the Middle East and
indeed for us all. A challenge which has its dangers
as well as its opportunities.
Sir, there is much in common between cur two countries
and in many ways we have faced the same hazards of nature in nationbuilding.
It is distressing that tho issues which divide Israel
from its Arab neighbours, with all of'whom Australia enjoys friendly
relations, have not yet been resolved.
The Australian Government is convinced of the need for
a settlement which ensures the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Israel and all other states in the Middle
East. Without that there can be no lasting peace.
Sir, this year international attention is being focussed
through the United Nations on prejudice and discrimination on racial
grounds. 
My Government has strongly supported, in the United
Nations and elsewhere, the riahts of peoole, including minorities,
to freedom from fear and suspicion-without distinction as to race,
language or religion.--In the United Nations last month, we again urged, as
we have in earlier years, that Governments which find it difficult
to eliminate prejudice against, for example, Jewish minorities,
should at least allow those people to emigrate if they desire to do
so. We hold strongly to the belief that people should be
able, both in law and in practice, to pursue their cultural and
religious heritage and traditions as they wish. This national
centre, this -pillar of faith, reflects that belief. It expresses,
too, in a noble form the confidence of the Jewish people that while
their ancient homeland lies faraway along the Jord7. n, they have a
home here where they are part of one people inhabiting one continent.
And where Australians of every faith and persuasion are free to walk
the ways of peace together.
Now Mr. Jacobson, Ladies and Gentlemen, I understand
I am to unveil the plaque and n-. mo this building. I am delighted
to do so, and I name this building " The Mona and Louis Klein
Building". 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 101/ 1971
MASTER PLAN FOR BRISBANE AIRPORT
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William
McMahon and the Premier of Queensland, Mr. J.
Bielke-Petersen
The Joint Coimmonwealth/ State Advisory Committee on
Brisbane Airport has completed the first major step in developing
a master plan for the future of Brisbane Airoort. This was
announced today by the Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon and the Premier
of Queensland, Mr. Bjelke-Petersen.
The Committee comprises representatives of the
Commonwealth and State Governments and the Brisbane City Council.
In a joint statement today, the Prime Minister,
Mr. McMahon and the Premier of Queensland, Mr. Bjelke-Petersen,
said: " The Committee's chief object was to devise a master plan
which took into account the foreseeable qrowth of aviation in
Brisbane, the latest plans for the further development of the
Brisbane metropolitan area, including port development in the
Brisbane River, the Nudqee area, and the Serpentine Scheme, and
plans for improving the highway network.
" The ecological problems must be considered and it also
had to remove the noise nuisance to the south-west of the Airport
without causing unacceptable noise levels in other closely settled
areas. " It also had to take regard of the need to lift the
building height restrictions over the heart of Brisbane which at
the moment lies below the approach oath of the main runway at
Eagle Farm. " The Conmittee had also to consider that a larger
terminal area would be needed to handle the volume of passengers and
freight which must be expected in the not too distant future".
The Prime Minister and the Premier said. " The
Committee has recommended that the runway system should be moved to
the position astride the existing northern boundary of the airport
and that the runways should be so re-aligned as to avoid noise in
any nearby populated area. / 2 
" This means that the building height limit over the
central business district would be abolished.
" In the lone term the Committee recommended that
there could be widely spaced parallel runways and it was with this
in mind that it is proposed that the new terminal area should be
located in a central position between the runways with direct and
convenient surface access from the south-west side of the airport.
" This is a most modern concept". The Prime Minister
and the Premier added that the master plan involved the diversion
of the floodway. However this would not present any major engineering
problem. The floodway would be maintained by appropriate
earthworks and outlet control works to ensure that the probability
and level of flooding upstream of Nudgee Road would not increase.
They added that a more detailed assessment of the
environmental effect on the foreshore would also be made.
The Prim . e inister and the Premier said: " It is
recognised that this future development would be a very extensive
project with the Commonwealth virtually creating a new airport and
with the State and the City of Brisbane financing bigger highway
projects which would not only better serve the general area but which
will also meet the need for speedy -ccess to the airport".
The Prime Minister and the Premier said that their
Governments would give prompt consideration to the Committee's
recommendations. Mcanwhile the Prime Minister has asked the Departments
concerned to accelerate the detailed planning of the airport and
see what can be done to provide preliminary estimates as quickly as
possible. CA3NBERRA 16 December, 1971. 



FOR PRESS. P" 1 102/ 1971
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
During my recent absence overseas, it was proposed
by the Premier of New South Wales and supported by some other
Premiers that a special Premiers' conference be held to
discuss the economic situation.
The Government has given full consideration to this
proposal and I have forwarded letters to the Premier of 3ew
South WTales and all other Premiers advising them of this decision.
I have informed the Premiers that in view of the
scheme being put in hand for Commonwealth ( rants to the States for
employment creating activities in non-metropolitan areas, the
easing of restraints on bank lending including the large reduction
in the statutory reserve deposit ratio applying to the major
trading banks, and the significant reduction in interest rates9 on
Government securities, I believe it would be more appropriate to
hold a Premiers' conference, as has been done in the last two years,
during the month of February.
By then, of course, all parties will be in a better
position to assess the impact on the economy of the measures that
have already been taken.
Accordingly, I have suggested to the Premiers that the
meeting be held about mid-February and I await from them their
reaction as to the actual dates I have proposed.
CANBERRA, 17 December, 1971. 



FOR PRESS: PM 103/ 1971
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR.-WILLIAM McMAHON
ON THE AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR
The Government has decided to establish the market
rate-for the Australian dollar on the U. S. dollar at an
appreciation of 6.32% on the Previous parity relationship. This
means an overall depreciation in relation to the parities of our
trading partners as a whole of approximately 1.75%.
On this basis, the Government has decided that the
Reserve Bank will fix market limits for buying and selling centering
on a mid point of U. S. $ 1.1910 equals $ 1 Australian.
The Government has also decided that, in future,
exchange rates for the Australian dollar will be fixed on the
Uni ' ted States dollar rather than on sterling as has previously
been~ the Practice. on this basis the daily quotations for the
Australian dollar will maintain a fixed relationship with the
U. S.,-dollar. Turning to the other aspect, i. e. the gold parity, and
havihg in mind the margin of 2h% about parity recently approved
by ti-i International Monetary Fund, the Government's decision is
consistent with the maintenance of AustrAlia's gold parity in the
Fund. Australia's gold parity shows an appreciation of 8.57% on the
previous'parity relationship with the U. S. dollar. The gold parity
of a country's currency is, of course, a matter for its own
determination. Nevertheless, as a member of the international
Monetary Fund Australia, like other members, also has an obligation
under the Articles of Agreement of the Fund to obtain the Fund's
concurrence to any change we might wish to make in the parity of the
Australian dollar. Having regard to the Present strength of our
balance of payments, there would not have been any possibility of
demonstrating to the Fund that we are suffering from a fundamental
disequilibrium, the condition that must be satisfied to gain the
Fund' s concurrence. At the same time, however, the Government has noted that
the strength of the balance of payments over the past eighteen mor-. hs
has been the result, in no small measure, of an extraordinarily high
rate of capital inflow. The Government has already indicated its
concern as to some aspects of this matter by its public indication
that it has the whole subject under urgent examination. .9e./ 2 
We shall. in fact be pressing ahead with that examination and I can
say now that we will not hesitate to take what action we consider
to be necessary. The changes in international exchange rates will
adversely affect some of the rural industries in which producers
re. already experiencing difficult times. The Government is
therefore.. prepared to. examine and consider the position of those
rural. industries which are-seriously affected.
CANBERRA, 22 December, 1971. 



PM 104/ 1971
QUEENSLAND CYCLONE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon, M. P.,
today sent the following telegram to the Acting Premier of
Queensland, the Hon. G. W. Chalk, M. L. A.
" I HAVE YOUR MESSAGE ABOUT THE DISASTROUS
CYCLONE IN NORTH QUEENSLAND. ON BEHALF OF THE
COMMONWEALT1 GOVERNMENT I EXPRESS DEEP SYMPATHY TO
THE RELATIVES OF THOSE WV-O HAVE LOST THEIR LIVES
AND TO THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN INJURED AND OTHERWISE
AFFECTED BY THE CYCLONE.
WE ARE READY TO JOIN WITH YOUR
GOVERNMENT IN PROVIDING FINANCE FOR THE RELIEF
OF PERSONAL HARDSHIP AND DISTRESS IN THE
AFFECTED AREAS. THE CO-OPERATION OF COMMONWEALTH
FACILITIES IS BEING ADE AVAILABLE.
Canberra, December, 1971.
FOR PRESS: 



FOR 105/ 1971.
NEW YEAR'S DAY
MESSAGE FROM THE PRITME M~ INISTER
My Colleagues in Government and I wish you all a
Happy New Year. I believe 1972 offers us all a great opportunity to
make real progress towards the fulfilment of our long term goals
of security, progress and prosperity.
And I believe there are two main ingredients for
success confidence and co-operation.
There is no problem so great that it cannot he solved,
but we must have a will to win and a readiness to meet each other
half way. The past year has had its problems. I do not wish
to minimise them, but we must keep them in persp ective.
Inflation, the rural crisis and industrial strife have
proved troublesi~ mc at home. World prices for our international
currency exchange rates have added to our difficulties.
We have been sadd( ened by the tragedy of the war between
India and Pakistan. But I have every confidence in our future and I ask you
to share that confidence.
So in 1972 let us press forward with the business of
making Australia a better country for us all.
CANBERRA, 31st December, 1971. 



T1HE FOLLOWING STATEMENT WAS GIVEN riO THE PRESS ON 6/ 1/ 1972 IN THE
NAME OF " A SPOKESMAN FOR THE PRIME MINISTER
ACCESS TO COMMONWEALTH-ARCHIVES
The recent release by the British Government, under its
' archives policy, of official records including Cabinet papers from
the Second World War, has given rise to questions about access to
Australian Government records, a spokesman for the Prime Minister
said today. The archives policy of the Commonwealth Government was
reviewed in December 1970. A statemcnt announcing the new policy
a was then made. In accordance with this policy, the general run of
records is, with certain specific exceptions, subject to a " this ty
year access" rule.
0 Cabinet papers because of their special nature were
differentiated. Under the decisions taken in December 1970, the
fifty year rule was retained for access to these papers and release
was also to require the Prime Minister's approval and consultation
with the Leader of the Opposition where such papers originated under
a Labor Government. The Prime Minister stated today that further consideration
would be given to the policy of access to Government decuments.
CANBERRA, 6 January, 1972 n 



~ 2 / i
r V
FOR PRESS: Statement by 1? % o PRIMAE MINISTER, CAN BE R RA.
PM. No 2/ 1972
STATE FUNERAL
the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The Prime Minister ( Mr. W. McMahon) announced today
that a State Funeral wbuld be accorded the late Hon. Benjamin
Courtice, Senator for Queensland' 1937 to 1962, and Minister
for Trade and Customs in the Chifley Government.
The State Funeral will be held at Christ Church,
Church of England, Central Avenue, St. Lucia, Brisbane, at 11 a. m.
on Tuesday, 11 January.
CANBERRA, January, 7 1972. 



FOR PR~ LESS: PM. No 3/ 1972.
STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, ZIR WILLIAM McMAHON
RELEASE OF SHEIKH MUJIBUR RAHMAN
We welcome the decision of the Government of Pakistan
to release Sheikh Mujibur Rahinan.
The Australian Government has sent several messages to
the Government of Pakistan designed not only to ensure the safety
and welfare of the Sheikh, but also to promote direct negotiations
with Awami League leaders, including the Sheikh in particular.
This was done in the interests of promoting a settlement
in the region which would lead to the return of the refugees and
the restoration of normal conditions of life.
We hope that the return to Dacca today of Sheikh Mujibur
will prove to he a significant step towards achieving these
objectives as well as a stable political environment and
Government administration.
CANBERRA January 1971. 



FOR PRESS: PM No
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
On 17 December last I announced that I had suggested
to the Premiers that the next Premiers' Conference should be
held about mid-February as, by then, all parties would be in a
better position to assess the impact on the economy of the
measures that had already been taken.
I have now received the agreement of all Premiers
to the Conference taking place in Canberra on Monday, 14
February, and continuing, if necessary, on Tuesday,
February, 1972.
Canberra 14 January 1972 



EMBARGOED Until 0001 hours 18/ 1/ 72
PRIME MINISTER
FOR PPESS: A 2 5 PMN No95197
AWARD OF GEORGE CROSS ( POSTHUMOUS)
Statement by the Prime Minister, M~ r William McMahon
Her Majesty The Queen has approved that the George Cross
be awarded posthumously to the late Errol John Emanuel in recogqiti~ on
of the conspicuous courage he displayed as District Commissioner for
the East New Britain district of Papua New Guinea.
As Deputy District Commissioner at Rabaul from July 196~ 9 and
later as District Commissioner for the East New Britain District, Mr
Emanuel was engaged in the arduous role of influencing deeply hostile
groups of the Tolai people to discuss their difficulties i. n a peaceful
and tolerant atmosphere. Even when tension was at its highest, he
visited villages by day and night, almost always alone, to talk
personally to leaders of all groups to gain their confidem-nce and. trust.
On a number of occasions, between March and the date of his
death in August, 1971, involving pulblic confrontations and imminent
violence between police parties and large groups of people, Kr Emanuel
displayed outstanding courage. on each occasion Mr E--manuel deliberately
left the cover of police protection and, regardless of his own satfety,
moved among the people in order to pacify them. Each time h-e war,
personally responsible for avoiding possible bloodshed or loss of life.
He never wavered from his task, choosing to expose himself to danger
rather than risk the lives of his fellow officers and the police,
culminating in his ultimely death on 19 kugust 1971 while carrying
out his official duties.
M1r Emanuel's sustained acts of conspicuous courage over a
long period in circumstances of extreme danger and in complete
disregard for his pearsonal safety were in the highest traditions of
bravery and sacrifice carried out beyond the call of duty.
CANBERRA 17 January 1972 
BACKGROUNDf Errol 7ohn ( Jack) Emanuel joined the Papua New Guinea
Administration on 24 August 1946 as a Patrol Officer. He
served with distinction in the Paoua, Mainland and Island
areas of Papua New Guinea and spent mors than 9 years
between 1956 and 195 as Assistant District Officer and
Deputy District Commissioner working among. the Tolai
people in the Fast Mew ritain district.
In July 1369, he was posted to Rabaul as Deputy
District Commissioner and was appointed District
Commissioner for the East New Britain District in March
1971 until the date of his death on 19 August 1971.
The award of the George Cross to the late Mr Emanuel
is the 9th award to an Australian over the past 25 years,
the most recent being in 1955 to-the late Chief Petty
Officer J. Rogers for his outstanding courage during the
" Voyager" disaster.
Mr Emanuel was born at Enfield, on 13
December, 1918, and is survived by his widow and three
children ( including a son and a daughter from an earlier
marriage). His first wife died-in 1965 and his widow is now
residing in the Brisbane suburb of St Lucia. 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PM No. 7/ 1972
RETIREMENT OF THE HONOURAXBLE C. E. BARNES, MA. P.
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
I announce the retirement from the Ministry of the
Honourable C. E. Barnes, Minister f'r External Territories.
I propose, in conseqavence, to recommend to His
Excellency the Governor-Gefieral the following appointmients:.-
The TIon. Andrew Peacock, to be Minister for
External Territories;
Mr. R. C. Katter, to be Minister for the
Army.
I am proposing to His Excellency that the swearing
take niace in Canberra next week. Mr. Barnes' retirement will take
effect from that time.
T place on record my appreciation of Mr. Barnes' very
great public service directed to the interests of the Australian
nation and also, in a particular sense, to the interests of the
Australian exte. rnal territorias.
CANBERRA, January, 1972. 



E0T0AB0R1( 0 : h ours 26/ 1/ 72
FOR PRESS: PM No 6/ 1972
AUSTRALIA DAY 1972
Message from the Prime M4inister, r.! Wr illiam Mc! 1ahon
Australia Day is our own National Day. it is a day for
Wreflection. A day when we should forget we live in States, cities
and towns, and remember we are all citizens of one great nation,
recognising no frontiers other -than the seas around us.
In defying and defeating the worst floods, fires and
droughts and winning the best from the seas, soil, iron ore
mountains and our factories we have built a wonderful country
for ourselves and our heirs.
On thi-" s day we acknowledge with pride the successes of
our forebears for whom few difficulties have been too great. Their
spirit, I believe, remains with us in tChis busy, bustling technological
age where we cannot yet presume to say " We have crossed our
last frontier". As a nation where pioneering is part of the present as
Swell as the past, we are strong, vigorous and growing. Few other
countries are better equipped to face the future and exploit the
ever-growing opportuhities. History supports this view and the
future will confirm it.
There is still much to be done. We should remember, too,
that the immediate problems of the day are transitory. lie must not
let them dampen our enthusiasm, or destroy our confidence in the
future.
Canberra 26 January 1972
EMBARGO: 



fl ./ 2
PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PM No. 10/ 19072
PRESIDENT NIXON'S PEACE PROPOSALS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
The Prime Minister, Mr. William McIAahon, commented
this evening on President Nixon's statement made earlier today,
Australian time, on efforts to-7.7ards peace in Indo-China.
Mr. McMahon said all Australians would be pleased that
President Nixon had made Public his imaginative and far-reaching
propo~ sals for ending the fighting irn Indo-China on honourable
terms. Fair-minded people would be impressed by President Nixon's
account of the US negotiating efforts and the persistence with
which those efforts had been carried on.
It was a matter for raegret that the United States
initiatives had so far met with a negative response from Hanoi.
MLr. McMahon commended the statesmanlike attitude of
President Thieu and Vice-President Huong in declaring their
readiness -to step down while new Presidential elections were held.
Mr. McMahon drewa particular attention to the following
points in Mr. Nixon's statemqent!-
" Both sides will respect the 1954 Geneva
Agreements on Indo-China and those of 1962
on Laos.
There will be no foreign intervention in the
Indo-Chinese countries and the Indo-Chinese
peoples will be left to settle their own
affairs by themselves.
The problems existing among the Indo-Chinese
countries will be settled by the Indo-Chinese
parties on the basis of mutual respect for
independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in each other's
affairs. 
2.
" Among the problers that will be settled
is the implementation of the principle
that all armed forces of the countries of
Indo-China must remain within their
national frontiers."
It was to be noted that it was now for the North
Vietnamese to accept or reject proposals under which elections
would be held under international sunervision and open to all
political forces and parties in Vietnam, including the NLF.
Needless to say, the Australian Government would
welcome the achievement of a negotiated settlement under which
hostilities in Indo-China would be ended. This would, amongst
othe2r things, permit the withdrawal of the small Australian Army
Assistance Group which is now engaged on training duties.
Mr. McMahon said he looked forward to the detailed
presentation of the joint United States/ Republic of Vietnam
proposals. He sincerely hoped that they would be most carefully
considered by Hanoi. It would be a profound disappointment to us
all if the North Vietnamese reaction were no more than a repetition
of its sterile demand that the United States bring the war to an
end by, as President Nixon put it, " joining its enemy to overthrow
its ally".
CANBERRA, 26 January, 1972. 



PRESS BRIEFING GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR WILLIAM McMAHON TO HEADS OF BUREAUX IN
THE PARLIAMENTARY PRESS GALLERY,
CANBERRA 26 JANUARY 1972
PRIME MINISTER Just before Christmas, David Solomon asked me
' if I would have a meeting of the Press Gallery to give them
a briefing on those papers that had been considered by
Cabinet and to which I could give a press release. And I
said I would do my best to meet the wishes of the Gallery.
This is the first attempt. We have sat until rather late
0 this afternoon, so it took a pretty substantial effort to
try and get these three statements out for you, but I have
done it. And I arranged with David that I would give
you the press release I regret that I haven't begn able to
give you as much time to read through and chew over it as
I would have liked; and that there would be a briefing
relating to these press releases, but not to be a general
cross-examination, relating to my tortious activities in the
past I was going to use the word " criminal" but I bit
my tongue just in time!
So I have now given them to you and I thought if
you~ liked, the one that probably had -the greatest interest
for you is this one relating to war-time Government papers.
The statement is there and I think you bill agree that we have
now adopted a practice that is much the same as the British
practice in other words, the thirty years' access rule
will apply. We are making the rule apply to the War Gbinet
itself, the Advisory War Council and the Production Executive
as well as Cabinet documents that come within the thirty-year
period. I mention, too, that there are some papers that we
will have to look at, and I think you will find that what
I have said closely follows the British practice of protecting
specially sensitive papers, documents containing information
supplied in confidence and documents containing information
about individuals. Now we have one problem, and that is and I have
set it out here that for some time we didn't keep archives
in the same way as other countries have done, and now that 
2.
we are building up the archives themselves, we will find.
that we haven't got at the moment sufficient personnel
to process the papers, to be able to make them available
quickly. So I will take it up with the Public Service Board
I gave instructions that the matter was to be taken up
urgently with'the Public Service Board to proiide staff to
permit it to be done. I believe round about twenty will
be asked for and probably agreed. But uttil we get the
staff recruited and trained, we will borrow them from
other Departments and get temporary officers, particularly
retired persons, and if necessary from the university.
The only other matter that I think I should
specifically refer to is that while the War Cabinet papers,
War Council and Production Executive papers have been to a
large extent kept and they are indexed and I believe can be
pretty quickly processed, the others will take a considerable
period of time and therefore we will probably have to do it
in groups. I think that sets out the matter as best I can
in a short compass, but I have got the officer of the
Department, Mr Keith Sinclair, who has done a lot of work
on it since I first-gave them the instructions to work on
it, so if. you want to ask any questions, I'll answer them.
IfI ha ven't got the information imm~ ediately avaiable I'll
get Peter to do it for me.
~ Q. I was just wondering why the seleiction of 1941
will this be the change of Government 1939-41? Why select
that period, and not year by year?
PM: For what purpose?
Q. t ell the firtt ones going to be released are 1939-41
and the others will be separately.. do the 39-41 ones only
deal with a Labor Government came in or
PM: No, it was just because it was the first three years.
1939 was the year the war started and it was the first one,
and 39-41 the first years as a group that we can handle as
possible, and we want to get them out in groups. We feel
this could be done expeditiously. / 3 
3.
Q. Whose responsibility will it be to decide the
number of exceptions, what is an exceptionally sensitive
paper7? This is obviously a matter of opinion very often.
Will there be one officer who makes that decision that a
particular paper or document is a sensitive one? Will it
be yourself, or will you allocate that responsibility to a
Minister?
PM: All of this will now be handed over to the Department
of the Environment..
iIt will be open to Mr Howson to
PM: No, I will lay down the rules, but I think youcan
take it that in the archives themselves, that is the section
dealing with the archives we will ap~ oint a fairly senior
person to look at the documents to see whether or not they
come within the exception provisions. And if they feel that/ they
are in any doubt, any seiious doubt about it, they can refer
it through Department of Environxnentlo myself.
Q. Sir, would you elaborate a bit more on this officer
I am a bit concerned about who will decide whether they
are contrary to the public interest or.. security. Will this be
an of~ icer that you7 are going to appoint or will it be an
officer that you have already in mind?
Well I have got one in mind, yes, but I have not yet
decided whether I will get a panel of names and then ask one
of the people in the panel whether he will take over the
responsibility. It will be a very senior person.
It will be one person?
PM: I am not sure of that either, but it looks as though
it will be one person.
Q. will it be a public servant or
PM: An ex-public servant, I think. A public servant, or
ex-public servant. / 4 
Q PM:
O PM: Will he make any recommendation to you or Cabinet?
No, he will get his charter, he will get his terms
of reference, but in cases where he feels doubt-, he can
refer it to me though the Departmen't of the Environment.
PrimeMinister, interest in these documents was
sparked by the release of particular documents by the
British Cabinet relating to the exchange between Prime
Minister Curtin and Prime Minister Churchill over the
re-posting of the Australian Forces. Haven't you felt
that it might be fairer to get those documents brought out
first rather than some time in the future, as they won't be
covered by the first release?
I don't know whether it will be fairer or not
because. I haven't read the papers and I don't know what
is in them. I know they are a massive lot of documents
and if I start picking and choosing, I think you will
find we will get into a mess, But nonetheless, if a
person comes along and has a special requirement, it could
thebne reerred to me and I will then make a deci-ion
whether. it should be looked at specially. I think this is
the way. I wanted to look at it whe-n the paper was being
prepared. Could" 1 just say this to you, I want to assure
you that there is a mass of documents. How many feet of
paper there, Peter?
MR BAILEY One hundred feet of. War Caloinet papers, solid papers.
And that doesn 6t mean fileEv, it means individual papers.
One hundred feet tall J. f you like, yes.
And then volume, what is the volume?
PM: That is the volume, one hundred feet tall.
MR BAILEY That is foolscap. And similarly with the Cabinet
papers. There is something like another twenty feet not
as much.
Q. Has the Leader of the opposition been consulted, or
will his consent be required for any of the documents
concerning the time the Labor Government was in power.? ( o&amp; 
PM: Well, he has already sent a message that he would
be willing to do this. Of course he will be informed of this
decision, and in sensitive cases relating to the Labor
Government, of course he will be consulted.
Q. You meptioned that this will happen as soon as
possible, Prime Minister. Is it possible to put a more,
definite..?
PM: No, I can't.
Q. Could you say weeks or months?
PM: No, I can't do that. Unless, Peter, you can give
some guidance on it. All I wanted ' to do was to get the
decisions out because this is what I can do as a Pr'ime
Minister. As to the details of the administration, I have got
to leave it to the Department of-* the Environment, but they
know they have got to act quickly.
Q. Prime Minister, Sir John McEwin, when he was in
the Cabinet when the Cabinet previously discussed the release
of. Departmental papers, I understand made a specific proviso
on'documents relating to the Country Party...
PM: Not so far as I am aware. Certainly it isn't in the
records.
Q. There is nothing of that nature that would preclude
any individual particular Party..
PM. No0.
Q. When they do become available, what form can we as
journalists... . will we be able to2'? n and pore over them as
PM:. Well they are to be made available generally. We
thought primarily it would be for the purpose of scholars,
but certainly the newspapers will have access to them. / 6 
6.
MR BAILEY There will be a difference, PrimeMinister, between
the Cabinet papers which will be put in order before they are
released, as it were, so there will be pretty quick access to
those. The vast number of documents that the Archives Office
has from all Departments occupy acres and acres of space, so
they can't do th~ t as quickly, but they will be trying to.
So this is why the Government has said they want the extra
staff to get those papers in more order from the middle of
the year. They won't be for immediate access. It's not
possible for them.
M: Look, I can simplify this by say'ing that the Department
of the Environment know how urgent it is and so do my own
people in the Cabinet Secretariat, and they will be doing all
they can to make them available as soon as they can.,
Q. In future now that the thirty-year access rule will
apply to Cabinet papers, will they * be made available each
year on the 1st of January or will there be a batch made
available every couple of years?
SM: Oh, I think you will have to leave that. I haven't
considered it. I don't regard it as relvant. The main thing
is to get these War Cabinet papers out and the Advisory War
Council. I think this is what the public wants and I think this
is what the media and the scholars want.
Q. One point has been made in the past and that is the
man in charge of the Archives is a middle level Third Division
officer, and a Class 8. And it has been put to me that nothing
very much Will happen until that position is made into a Second
Division position.
PM: Well he is an Assistant Secretary level, but what you
are asking me now is something relevant to the principles
involved here, not the techniques. We will be expanding the
Department as I said. The fellow who is head of it now is
at FI". rst Assislnt Secretary level.
Q. Prime Minister, could I ask you why it has taken so
long for us to make this decision to release the documents? 
PM: Q.
PM:
Q. PM: I am not prepared to answer that sort of a question
as to whether I have been informed or whether I have been
con~ sulted because if it so happens that the President would
be willing to give advance information to myself, and I make
it public, then it could cause great inconvenience to him and
in time I would be very certain I wouldn't be getting information.
I mention that as a philosophical matter rather than mention
specific details. Perhaps I can say this to you that since
Dr Kissinger's visit to Peking, I believe that I could not under
any circumstances feel that there was a ground on which the
Australian-Governivnt could complain because of our treatment
by the Ame~ rican Administration. But I will not in future, if I
am asked a question ' Were you consulted", I will not unless there
are special circumstances, give an answer because I don't want
to dry up our sources of information.
As our own forces are involved, I would think the public
would assume we would be consulted if our own forces are going
to be kept in Vietnam or
I thought it was done fairly quickly.
Well there has been considerable pressure, as you have
no doubt been aware, from various sources that these things
should be released
This is,' the first Cabinet that we have had in the New
Year and it was decided during the two days that the Gbinet
met. Could it not have been decided by you?
It could have been, yes, I prepared the paper for it
and put it up to Cabinet and it was accepted, but it was one
that needed to go to Cabinet, and in any event, the delay is
not that great. It would have at the most have been a week.
Can I switch on to the President Nixon annonncement?
What consultations have you had with the President on the
announcement he made?
Q. PM: LtI 11
106 
joB
8.
PM: Well, I think you can see mnere that I have actually
put in this statement that our own forces would be withdrawn
if the agreement is made, then it would cover our forces too.
Q. That is why I assumed the Australian Government would
tell the Presiden , t of the United States it agrees with that,
that is why I was getting at consultations
PM: Well I will go this far. I will assure you that our
forces will be withdrawn. And that is our decision. We don't
depend on the United States or anyone else to tell us what we
should or should not do. We make the decisions ourselves.
Q. One base point about President Nixon's speech today
was that Dr Kissinger originally provided this eight-point
plan way back in October 1969. 1 thi'nk the interest that Alan
was asking on, and certainly what I am interested in is whether
we were aware of the negotiating terms over that cDnsiderable
period or whether we have just learnt the negotiating terms
just now.
PM: I have told you I will go no further than I have gone.
Q. * I am not asking about consultations. I am just asking
about level of knowledge, if I can put it that way, Sir.
PM: And if I say that to you, then it becomes perfectly
obvious that I might have been one of the few who knew. Arnd
I can assure you if I were to give any further information
it could cause problems. And I think you know President Nixon
has great problems associated zith the problem of secrecy, and
I am sure of this that he trusts the Australian Government
impl ic it Iy.
Q. Sir, how would the decision that we have made that our
troops would be withdrawn affect our decision to train the
Cambodians and Vietnamese in this country?
PM: It wouldn't affect them. / 9 
9.
Q. That would still go on?
PM: It would only . all it would affect is any
decision that might be made about the training of South
Vietnamese in South Vietnam.
It wouldn't affect the decision that we have Mpade
to train Cambodians here in Australia?
PM: No, it would not. It is not within contemplation.
That is something to be thought of later.
Q. But that will continue?
PM: I won't say it will continue. It is something that
has to be considered at a later date.
Q. Is it likely to be continued?
PM" 1 It might or might not.
Q. . Does that also apply to our supply of equipment
, to Cambodia? Would that continue, too?
PM: I haven't given the question of-. supply of equipment
consideration, and to the best of my knowledge, it hasn't
received consideratim. What has received consideration
is what I have got in the document and that is the total
withdrawal of forces.
Q. Are you optimistic about any agreement from the
other side?
PM: If past experience is any criterion, and because
I have been pretty well informed from diplomatic sources
including my own Department, of initiatives that have been
taken, and because I also participated in this other conference
on Cambodia, I feel that the only statement that I could make
is that if the North Vietnamese live up to their past
practices and then the prospects are not what I would
regard as very glowing. I hope they will. I sincerely. 
hope they will, and on the conditions laid down by President
Nixon, because I think we all want to see an end to these
difficulties up there and we would like the South Vietnamese
to have the opportunity to determine.... to have a vote to
determine the kind of Government they want and to determine
their own future, and that is why I specifically referred in
this document to so:-Jething that has been very substance
of the Australian Government's attitude to participation
in Vietnam, when I referred in the fifth paragraph to various
points in the Nixon statement, that coincides exactly with
our own views. On the Army stataient, Prime Minister, just one
thing. YoiII mention here " military district headquarters 6
in ech State". Does this mean th~ t in places outside
Sydney and Melbourre, for instance, Adelaide and Perth....
in Sydney and Melbourne, too, there will
be a District Headquarters in each State.
How does this affect the overall organisation in
terms of real estate and existing organisation there...
in terms of property they hold
It won't affect them to any great extent other
than in Canberra and Melbournc. In Canberra, there will
be a substantial reduction in the demands for real estate.
In Melbourne there will be an increase in the demand for
real estate. Have you got any details as to what extent...?
No, but in Melbourne it will... . in Melbourne and
Canberra it will be quite substantial the demand. But I
want to emphasise to you thaLt so far as-units are consideredtraining
or operational units are cancer e aif ted
organisational matter dealing with the higher Command. And if
I can now remind you, when I was Minister for Air a few vears
ago, I carried out a similar kind of change in the Air Force
and changed it from a lines of communication geographical
system to a functional system, and as one who has had some ./ 11
Q. PM: Q. PM: 
some experience, too, in the war years of what we had to do to
move away from a geographical system to a functional command
and all the difficulties that persisted throughout the war,
I am sure this is right.
Q. Will the breakdown be such that one area becomes a
training area, or one area a logistic area, or will the State
Commands combine all of these things?
PM: The command only will be in t'ie Sttte and the disposition
of the units themselves will not be changed.
PM: Now, I have been trying to get one or two other documents
ready for you, but if I am not here tomorrow -and I hope I won't
be -but at least I will get an officer I will have to get you,
Peter, if you don't mind and you, Keith, if you are here, I will
get you to come down and give a briefing to let you know about it.
Q. Documents on what, Sir?
PM: I didn't say! Look, I hope this is what you want.
At least it is the way I cleared it with Dalr'd Solomon. I think
I. Iill be able to say this to you in future that I will be trying
to . when-a paper comes into Cabinet... I will be trying to
get some sort of press release for you when it comes in and it
can be suitably changed to meet the amendments that are made in
Cabinet discussions, and recorded in the final decision. But
at least this is a start. The second thing I want to do, and
again this is because-David Solomon came down on behalf of the
Gallery, is to see if we can , immediately after meetings of the
Party, if I can give you half an hour's briefing on what happened
there, certainly on those subjects that. are not too sensitive
and I don't think there are any. But I willfake it up with the
Party at its next meeting.
Q. That would be most useful. Mr Whitlam, as you apprecizte
does this, but not in things that are going into the Parliament
in the future. I would hope it wouldn't preclude press conferences
on general topics. ./ 12 
PM: No, but I don't want to mix the two up.
The last two days we have made handled 15 or 18 decisions
and you wouldn't be able to handle a press conference on
the whole lot of them, but in any event, I will do what
I can.
Q. When do you think it will be likely we couldhave
a full-scale press conference; I am thinking particularly
of economic matters and other things that are of interest
at this time...
PM: Well, I will give that some thought and I will
let the Secretarycf the Press Gallery know.
THANKS.
a 



PM No. 1 11/ 1972
ARMY RE-ORGANISAT ION
Statement by the Prime Minister the Right Honourable
William McMahon, CH, MP.
The Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon, announced today that
Cabinet had approved extensive changes in the command and
organisational structure of the Australian Army. The changes,
which will come into effect over the next three to five years,
follow consideration of the Report of the Army Review Committee
under the Chairmanship of Major-General F. G. Hassett.
The " Hassett Committee" was established by the
Minister for the Army, Mr. Peacock, in April 1970, and included
representatives of the Army and the Defence Departments.
The reorganisation of the Army is in keeping with the
Government's policy of modernising Australian Defence to meet
future contingencies. The experience the Army has gained from
Vietnam, the rapid advances in the field of communications and
changing strategic circumstances all indicate that reorganisation
will be necessary to meet defence tasks in the seventies and
eighties. The changes in organisation are designed to produce an
Army to meet these future needs.
They involve a reorganisat ion of the Australian
Army along functional lines in three broad areas:
* A change from a geographic system of command to a
functional system.
* A rationalization of logistic tasks.
A reorganization at Army Headquarters. 
It is by far the biggest peace time change since
Federation and will result in an Army better organized to fulfil
its essential role in national defence.
One aspect of the reorganization requires emphasis.
It does not, in itself, involve any reduction or re-location of
units. It is essentially concerned with command and control and
does not affect the number and location of the Australian Regular
SArmy or the Citizen Military Force units It has been designed
amongst other things to avoid morale problems or posting turbulence
in the Army. The field force and logistic elements of the Army will
be grouped into Commonwealth-wide functional commands instead of
the present geographical command system. Army schools and training
establishments will also be centrali'ed under one command to ensure
uniformity of standards and methods and to avoid duplication.
Under the new organization Army Headquarters will be
relieved of its present responsibility for direct command of a
large number of units.
The new command system will bring about a greater
compatability of functional organisation between the three
Services and will facilitate any future developments in
rationalization of these Services.
The basis of the reorganization will be three new
functional commands concerned with the three principal functions
of an Army. A functional headquarters will have responsibility 
3
on a Commonwealth wide basis as opposed to geographic headquarters
concerned with all functions within the area of the State in
which they are located. The three functional commands will be:
Field Force Command, with its headquarters in Sydney,
will consist of all Regular field force units and
initially all the CMF, HQ Ist Division as a part of
Field Force Command will be located in Brisbane to
command field force units in Queensland,
With this command in Sydney, the operational Headquarters
of the Army will be in the same areas as the operational
Headquarters of the Navy and the Air Force.
Logistic Command, with its headquarters in Melbourne,
will consist of Regular base units concerned with
transport, supply and repair.
Training Command, with its headquarters also in Sydney,
will consist of Army schools and training centres and
the Australian Cadet Corps. The headquarters will be
concerned with individual training and the development
of Army Headquarters.
As most CMF units are field force units, the whole of
the CMF will be placed initially under Field Force Command,
As the new system develops, CMF units will also take their
place in Logistic Command and Training Command to both of which
the CMF can bring a good deal of experience and knowledge in
specialist fields. 0 / 4 
h 4.
A military District Headquarters in each State will
replace the present geographic Command Headquarters to handle
those matters which Pre best dealt with on a. geographic
basis. Logistic functions within the Am7y will be rationalized.
The principal logistic tasks which, at present, are the
responsibility of seven corps will be re-allotted and carried out
by three corps concerned with transport, supply and repair.
Major changes will also take place at Army
Headquarters. Initially the present four main military branches
will be retained, with some re-allotment of responsibilities.
These branches will be renamed Operations, Personnel, Logistics
and Material Branches,. In time, when Logistic Command is
established,. the number of main branches will be reduced to
three by amalgamating the interim Material and Logistics
Branches into a final phase Logistics Branch.
Mr. McMahon emphasised that the reorganized Army
would be better prepared to carry out its role in the defence
of Australia and its Territories and said that there would be
a more efficient and economic use made of manpower and funds
available to the Army.
26 January 1972. 



FOR PRESS PM No. 12/ 1972
ACCESS TO WAR-TIME GOVERNMENT PAPERS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon, CH, MP
The Prime Minister said that, as he had undertaken
on 6 January, the: Government had now given further consideration
to the policy of access to government documents for the
war-time period. The. Government has decided that the 50-year access
rule should in future apply to Cabinet papers, as it has since
December 1970 to the generality of departmental documents.
In addition, the Government has decided that,
because of the special interest in them, the remainder of the
war Cabinet papers ( covering the years 1942 to 1945) should
also be released for public examination.
The war Cabinet papers include papers from the
War Cabinet itself, from the Advisory War Council, from the
full Cabinet and from the Production Executive.
Before the papers can be made available, it will
be necessary to examine them in order to withhold those which,
in accordance with normal archival practice and policy, should
not be released. The categories of papers which will not be released
will be those falling within the following groups
exceptionally sensitive papers, the disclosure of
which would be contrary to the public interest,
whether on security or other grounds ( including the
need to safeguard the revenue);
( ii) documents containing information supplied in
confidence, the disclosure of which would or 
-2
might constitute a breach of good faith; and
( iii) documents containing information about individuals,
the disclosure of which would cause distress or
embarrassment to living persons or their immediate
de~ cendants. Access to the Cabinet papers, when released,
will be arranged, as with other archival documents, through the
Commonwealth Archives Office.
When the documents are released, they will be
accompanied by an index to assist searchers to identify the
documents they wish to see. Because the main interest has been
in the war years, the first releases will be of the years 1939
to 1941 in one group. As quickly as possible, papers for the
remainder of the war years will then be released in further groups,
and a similar process will then be followed for such papers as
are available for the pre-war years, commencing in 1919.
The Prime Minister said that it will take some
time to prepare these papers for release. He expected that it
will be possible to make available the first group of those not
in the restricted categories ( covering the years 1939 to 1941)
by about the middle of the year. Further groups of war-time papers,
and later of pre-war papers, will become available as they are
processed. In addition, the Prime Minister said that the
Government had considered the departmental papers for the years
1942 to 1945 which are at present closed except for the preparation
of important works of scholarship. He said the Government
considered that these papers also should become available at the
same time as the Cabinet papers. Because of the vast number / S 
-3-
of papers involved, there will be a time lag in satisfying
requests for documents. However, the Government has asked that steps
should be taken to reduce the time required to meet requests.
It has authorised whatever increase in
establishment of the Archives Office is necessary to achieve
this and has asked that the matter be taken up urgently with
the Public Service Board. It has also agreed, as an immediate
step, that the Archives Office may use officers on loan from
other Departments, or seek to employ suitable temporary officers,
such as those recently retired.
The Prime Minister said he believed this step
by the Government to make available Cabinet and other papers
covering the war years, and later the pre-war Cabinet papers,
would be welcomed by the public and in particular by those
involved in work of scholarship and research.
26 January, 1972 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 9/ 1972.
ARMY JUNGLE TRAINING CENTRE CANUNGRA
Statement by the Prime Minister, The Rt. Hon. William McMahon
C. H. , M. P.
The Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon, announced today that
Cabinet had approved the construction of additional training
O facilities at the Army Jungle Training Centre, Canungra, 40 miles
south-west of Brisbane.
The project, to cost a total of $ 7 million, will include
a new tactics training wing, new lecture rooms, additional sleeping
accomodation, messing and recreational facilities, and stores
buildings. The first stage, the construction of the tactics wing
And sleeping and mess accommodation, is scheduled for 1972/ 73 and
will cost $ 2.5 million.
The Jungle Training Centre is responsible for training
all ranks in a wide range of subjects including tactics,
administration and battle efficiency tests.
Since the Jungle Training Centre was built the Regular
Army has doubled in size and the number and scope of courses has
increased enormously. It is now the Army school with the largest
staff and the highest student throughput.
CANBERRA, 27 January, 1972. 



A
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 12/ 1972.
REPLACEMENT OF RAN DESTROYERS
Statement by Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon, C. H., M. P.
The Prime Minister stated today that the Government
proposed to examine later this year the question of replacing W~ N
destroyers scheduled for retirement from front line service in the
late 70' s and early 80' s. The design and construction of these
ships was an exceedingly complex and time consuming process and
would have to be put in hand this year if ships were to be available
in 1980. In the meantime the Government had given consideration
to the preliminary measures necessary to keep essential options
open. The Government had authorised the preparation of designs for
the first stage modernisation of Williamstown Dockyard. The total
cost of this modernisation work, if implemented, would be $ 6m. The
uesign work would involve only a small expenditure. The modernisat~ on
of Williamstown Dockyard was necessary in any case for efficient
operation of the dockyard.
Further work on the preliminary design of an Australian
built destroyer is also proceeding. An amount of $ 670,000 had
recently been authorised to assist in collection of design and other
data necessary fcr the decision to be made on the overall programme
later in the year. The next stage would be the issue of invitations
for t1-enders for the detailed dcesign of the vessels. It had been
decided that it would be prudent not to take this st * ep until a firm
Oecision had been reached to proceed with an Australian designed
' destroyer. The Prime Minister emphasised the crucial importance of
this project to the Navy and to Australian defence. Destroyers are
the backbone of the RAN combatant fleet. Modern destroyers equipped
with essential missile attack and defence systems wherever they are
produced are very expensive and the total impact on the defence
programme would be considerable. As the new ships will have a life
extending beyond the year 2000 it was essential that a thorough
examination should be completed before the Government entered into
any commitment.
CANBERRA, 27 January, 1972. 



. J 3-3/ 1/ 72
PRIME MINISTER
2OR PRLE; S. Pi Ho-13/ 1972
STATE VISIT OF PIRZSIDENT SOEHARTO
OF' T1 aMEP UBLIC OF' INDO* aESIA
Statement : by taze Primie Minister, M~ r W,-illiam 1.4Mion
P r es; i ] en t _ Zo earto -of Indonesia will . be. accorded full, cerem. onial
welcome on arrival at 1' air. aairn 3AAkAF Ba~ e, Canberra, on the evening : of
SunL~ ay, ie~ aruary, 6, -for a State Visit to -Au-tralia..
Preji~ dent aLid Aada:. e Soenarto. and party, will. arrive. direct from
Indonesia a~ joard a DC8 aircraft of ; aruda Ind-" onesian Airways at 9 p. m.
Th. ey wuil]. stay in ATustralia until the morning.. of Th-ursday,
!'&amp; eruary 10, visiting CaM'Derra, keLourne and Sydney.
Tiie Inadonesian 1-iinister for Foreign-Af f airs, 114r, Adam M~ alik; . he
Ainister of -State for ' National Develotrient, Pro~ fessor W~ idjojo
Misiastro; tae Chie-f-of Staff of, tne. Indonesian Army, General Uniar
* iradaadixusummi~ a, -and tLie Secretary of St~ ate, -Major-Genera.. Sudaarnono,
A~ ll ampong tlie gru-p acompqany~ ing-tne-President.
At Fair! b. airn, tile President and ._!* adame Soeliarto will oe welcomaed
by tae Governor-General,.--Sir Paul Easluck, and Lady Hasluc'L, and the
Primte A4inister, Mr William i4cvia. ion,. and kirs Midxaaon. ' Cadets from tae
Royal Hiiitary College, juaitroan,-will1 provide a cer= r.. onial guard of
. ionour for tne Pra3i'dent. Army gunners Will.. fire-a 21--gun salute.
Pre-aident--Soe.. iarto main Canberra -engagements are to -attend a
Lunc'lcon at Par-iam~ ent-Hou--: and to officially open the newy chancery
b. uilding of the Lmjassy of Indonesia. Ile will also lay a wreathl atI
tic Australian War-liecrial,. . havo private talks. with. the-Prima i'inister,
noda ', csconfcrcncE,, meet rme rs--. of the Diplomatic Corps a3nd dine
formally at-Government._ ouse... ' adame Soedarto will attend. most
f unction... an4 will also vi sit -tae -iarymead-homes.-for-c~ iildren in
Narra.;: undah*. ' Pre. ient.. an.-* hadane SoehartLo will stay at-Govertument
house. Otlir mmem erL; of t. Ae part--will... stay.-at thieihote2., Can-oexrra---Rax.
Taie Preaidential p~ arty will.. Jeave Canberra-at. lO0. a. m.
on Tuesday-77bbruary 8, by RAAF BAC 1-11. aircraft for ielourne where
t.: ie Preaident's en-agemant3 include a civic welcome, lunc* heon with
-uinsrTatno-vai acia-tt tle 3tm-. and a S tate.. -' Government Rece-ption.
Tae-narty will leave id.-L~ ourne for Syd-ney at 9.45 a. m.. on Wedne: 3-
day, F-, Iruary 9. In Sydney the Pr-csident's engageinont-s will includec
a civ ic wol_ 3co.-e,--a mecting *' ith' tne Indoneszian community, ' businc~ smlon's
lunc. nioon., a visit. to a qlazs-making f actory, and a State Governmont
Receto.... 2 
TAi Prcsidont an. i-adamo Coe_-,'. iarto and p~ arty : Aill leavc Australia
at on TL*-urdayL. i'oaruary 13., for ZZa; il and.". cAft. Gr ' 1aa, Z ealand
ta iparty will vi~ Zit t. ic D1dcl~ tiae ils of t~ C~ cr
proqjraa arc-
SUNDAY 6 FEB UAR) Y
9.090 L ercpmo nial arrival at RX:,' AF Basc, iairi:) airp.
OADhAY 7 FEBRUARY
9.15 a. m.
9.55 a. m.
to
10.15 a. n.
10.20 a. rai.
to
11.20 a. m.
11.45 a. m.
to
12.15 p
to 3.30 . t
to 4.10 pm.
4.15 to
5.15 pm
5.45 p. m.
7.30 3. 111. The rrirmc lliinistor of Australia call3 ozn taco Pr-_ sid~ nt of
the1 MR) puolic of Indonasia at . aov.-r., mcnt I* OU110.
Tn_ Prc-side2nt vi~ 3it3 tIC-iustralian ry7ar M'emorial
-', iscussiof3 at Parlia-mcnt Kouse
T~ ie Prizient ancd So: e iarto mee-; t K*,: ad3 of Di 31omatic
issions and ivcs at Gov-.= rmant KOusea
Tao Prosidant and idadane Soo-arto att.--nd Lunciicon at
Parliament H-ouse.
Pr Confer nc;; at ' CLie Indonesian Em~ jassy Rsdne
16 :*' Onaro Crasca-: nt, . ad hill.
T. i-Prcesi1_ 1cnt officiallyv o-. cns Indonesias's new Caianc-ary
Luilding.
Courtesy Call on the.-ProsiJdont at Oover: nmient Efousc by
t'ue . Laad; er of the Om). orition.
ihe Proesicd:: nt and _! iadamL. 2 3oharto atte-_ nd a Dinner at
Gov_-rnrnnt liou: 3a.
SEPARATE ENGAGE~ E! NT FOR : 4iADI. IJ SOEHARTO
10.00 a. m. Visits tiic 1arynoad Homes3, Gjoyde! r Stree t, Narra! Dundaha.
Commronwt-alta~ Pr-_ ss Liaison Officu r for thie vi: sit is Mr Nail Smail of
t~ aie liuGtralian *~ 3and Informatin Bure au.
Plione; Offica 707415
H omeic 863405
NOTE D t a11-: of taa l':_-Aourn; and sydney _ rograrnma3 will . bz
rcleased by State A*" uthcrities.
CAAB*: jT,,
January 1) 72 I 



E 11 B A R GO : Not for releasa before 6 pmi on 30 January 1972.
-TAW I
FOR PRESS PM. No. 8/ 1972
PAYMENT OF PENSIO14S OVERSEAS
Statement by the Prime Minister, I4r William 74cMahon
My Government has decided to accept the principle
of payment of pensions overseas,
It had before it a submission from the Minister for
Social Services ( Mr Wentworth) and the report of an Interdepartmental
Committee which was completed late last year.
we decided that ago, invalidi and widows' pensions
3hould be pay. able in those overseascutiswihmk orsodn
arrangements for their own pensions to be payable in Australia.
in order to qualify for payment of his pension
overseas, the pens. ioner in Australia will be required to have livE~ d
here for at least 2-0 yoars after reaching the age of 16. However,
in the case of invali,! pensions, where invalidity arises from an
accident or cdisea; which occurred in Australia, there will be no
such resi-ential rcuir0TRrnt. Firailariy, where a husband has died
in Australia, the widow will. ab. to take her pension a1, road
irrespective of her period of residcnce in Austredia.
The Goviernment has thus accepteod the principle that
where. a pe rson has contribut-ed to thre life of the C'! uqtra'ian community,
his pension rights should be portable overseas.
Leqislation to give 7-ffect-to this decision will be
introduced into the Parliament early this year, and we shall
endeavour to have it passed as soon as possible. It will then
operate in any countrie~ s which have concluded the reciprocal arrangements
tD which T have referred.
Discussions relating to the possibility of appropriate
reciprocity in social security have at different times since 1967*
beien held with representatives of Yugoslavia, Italy, Malta, West
Oermany and Turkey. The subject has also ' ieen raised from time to
time in discussions ', 14th other countries. 
2-
In order to obviate unnecessary delay in concluding
arrangements, I have asked the DYiinister for Social Services to
begin forthwith his negotiations with representatives from
countries from whom our migrants have come. He will be in
consultation with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Minister for Immigration in these negotiations.
Arrangements to make Australian pensions payable
overseas will be made as soon as it is possible to reach agreement
with a particular country.
The policy which we have now approved is the result
of quite considerable investigations which took place last year,
and follows principles which are gaining international acceptance.
Australian development owes much to our migrants
intake in the decades since the War. Some of these will, of
course, wish to return home in the evening of their life, and they
should feel free to do so if they so choose. But I believe that
most of them now see Australia as their true home,. and will not
want to leave us.
The new privileges of pension portability are not,
of course, confined to migrants. They will be ope-n to all holders,
of Australian Social Service pensions, wherever they may have been
born, who go to countries which make the appropriate reciprocal
arrangements with Australia.
CAN.' BERRA,
January, 1972. 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS PM No 14/ 1972
MESSAGES FROM THE PRIME MINISTER, MR WILLIAM McMAHON
TO SIR KEITH HOLYOAKE AND THE RT HON. J. R. MARSHALL.
The Prime Minister, Mr William 14cMahon, today sent the
following messages to Sir Keith Holyoake and The Rt Hon. J. R.
Marshall The text of the message to Sir Keith Holyoake reads
We recall today with appreciation and admiration
your very great service to your country over many
years as Prime Minister and also your very great
contribution in that capacity to Austraian/ New
Zealand relations and I may add to Commonwealth
relations. I send you and Lady Holyoake warm good
wishes on my own behalf and on behalf of my
colleagues.
The text of the message to The Rt Hon. J. R. Marshall
reads I send you from myself and all my colleagues
warmest congratulations and good wishes as you take
up your high and responsible office of Prime Minister
of New Zealand.
I look forward to a continuation of the close
co-operation which has long exited between our two
governments and countries.
CANBERRA 2 February 1972 



FOR PRESS: PM! No. 15/ 1972.
GIFT TO THE PRESIDENT OF INDONESIA
Statement by the Primre Mlinister, Mr. William McMahon C. H., M. P.
At Parliament House today, the Prime3 Minister, the
Right Honourable William McMahon, presented an atomic
absorption spectrophotomieter to President Socharto of Indonesia
as a gift from the poole of Australia to the people of Indonesia.
In handing over the gift, Mr. McMahon said that
the spectrophotometer had been designed by Australian scientists
for making highly accurate and quick analyses of mineral samples
in ores and soils. Like Australia, Indonesia's economic
development was benefiting increasingly from mineral exploration
and production. He hoped that this example of Australian
scientific technology would be of considerable assistance to
Indonesian geologists, mining engineers and agricultural scientists
in their research programmes.
CANBERRA, 7 February, 1972. 
Visit of President Soeharto
SPEECH OF PRESENTATION BY THE PRIB MINISTER, MR. WILLIAM McVAHON
C. H. , M. P.
Your Excellency, On behalf of the people of Australia I would like to
present you with this special gift.
It is an instrument designed by Australian scientists
for quick and accurate analyses of mineral samples in ores and
soils. It is called an atomic absorption spectrophotomreter.
As both our countries are benefiting increasingly from
mineral exploration and production, I hope that this item of
Australian technology will assist the research prograunes of your
geologists, mining engineers and agricultural scientists.
Please accept, Your Excellency, with our warmest wishes,
this gift from the people of Australia to the people of Indonesia.
CANBERRA, 7 February, 1972. 
BACKGROUND SPECIAL AID PRESENTATION TO PRESIDENT SOEHARTO
The atomic absorption spectrophotometer was designed
by C. S. I. R. O. and is a unique example of Australian scientific
technology. Its purpose is to make a highly accurate and quick
analyses of mineral samples in ores and soils. The apparatus
which will be supplied complete with a selection of accessories
suitable for Indonesian conditions, will have a wide application
in Indonesia in the fields of mineral exploration and agricultural
research. The unit, which is manufactured by Varian Techtron Ltd.,
is modular in construction and when assembled measures 6 feet long,
16 inches high and 25 inches wide. It weighs 315 pounds.
The unit will be air freighted to Djakarta after the
presentation. 



* FOR PRESS: PM No 16/ 1972
INDONESIAN-AUSTRALIAN JOINT STATEMENT
At the conclusion of official discussions held at
Parliament House, Canberra, on 7 February, .1972, President Soeharto
of Indonesia and the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr McMahon, issued
the following joint statement.
" President Soeharto and Mr McMahon expressed their
satisfaction at the close relations which had developed
between the two countries.
They recorded their ' belief that strong and enduring
ties of friendship and co-operation between Australia and
Indonesia would be a major element for the future peace
and development of the region.
They reviewed developments in the Asian and Pacific
region. Their talks confirmed the basic similarity of the
two countries in their approach to developments in the
re g in. Their talk8 were very timely because of the rapid
developments taking place in the region, and they believed
that the two governments should keep closely in touch
through frequent and frank consultations. In future regular
aninual meetings of officials of t he two countries would be
held on foreign policy matters.
President Soeharto stated that in order to build stable
and developing societies, the countries of South-East Asia
needed political stability and tranquillity. Security and
calm were essential for the improvement of the economic
situation and the implementation of development.
He explained that Indonesia believed that the countries
of South-East Asia could meet and overcome subversive pressures
and threats to regional security through building up their
national self-reliance and national resilience.
Hb Said th~ it IndonesiA beli ! ved that theresbonsibility
rested on his country and the other countriesi of South-East
Asia to meet the challenges by using their material and
spiritual resources for more progress and more welfare for
their peoples.
Mr Mcfiahon said that security and tranquillity in-
South-East Asia were of the greatest national importance to
Australia. He said that under President Soeharto's leadership,
Indonesia had been able to create and maintain national
stability which contributed greately to the stability of the
South-East Asian region. / 12. 
2
" He went on to say that the Australian Government
and people were committed to the policy of sun-porting
the governments of South-East Asia in their efforts to 0
secure their freedom and independence, to build their
national institutions, and to create more welfare and
greater opportunities for their peoples.
Australia's economic aid and technical assistance
had been steadily increasing year by year in accordance
with the development of Australia's economy. This policy
would be maintained in the future. Mr McMahon referred to
the current three-year aid programme of A53.8 million
for Indonesia. He said that Australia would continue to
give high priority to Indonesia in its aid programme.
He agreed that security and stability went hand
in hand with economic improvement and development.
Australia's orogrammes of assistance would help strengthen
the capacity of the administrations, the networks of
communicetions and transportatbn, and the security of the
neighbouring countries.
President Sooharto said that Indonesia welcomed
Australia's growing interest in and contribution to regional
development, peace and modernisation in South-East Asia.
He expressed the appreciation of his government and people
for the aid provided by Australia which was given without
any obligation for repayment and was planned over a period
of years. He also welcomed the growing involvement of
Australian humanitarian and welfare bodies in rendering
assistance. His Government noted and encouraged the growth
of Australian business and investment activities in
Indonesia. He welcomed the opportunity which his present visit
would give him to meet with Australian business leaders.
His Government looked to a developing economic partnership
between Indonesia and Australia.
Mr McMahon explained to President Soeharto
Australia's policy of promoting the economic development
and political advancement of Paoua New Guinea. Australia
would accede to the wishes of the people of Papua New
Guinea, expressed through their elected representatives,
about their political future.
President Soeharto and Mr McMahon noted the
growing cultural, intellectual and professional links
between Australia and Indonesia. These were being stimulated
by the exchanges of artists and groups under the agreement
of cultural co-operation and by the programmes of sunnort
for Indonesian universities undertaken by the Vice-Chancellors
Committee of the Australian Universities. Mr McMahon drew
President Soeharto's attention to the increasing study of
the Indonesian language, culture and history in Australia,
which brings home to us the vitality and richness of
Indonesian civilisation. / 3 
3
" President Soeharto and Mr McMahon welcomed
the partial seabed boundary negotiated between the two
countries early last year. They agreed that all
outstanding seabed boundary questions should be negotiated
at an early date.
The President and the Prime Minister expressed
their faith in the future of the friendship of the two
countries based on wider understanding and deeper
co-operation. President and Madamo Soeharto extended an
invitation to the Prime Minister and Mrs Mcklahon to
visit Indonesia. The invitaton was accepted with pleasure.
The President said that he and Madame Soeharto
and members of their party expressed their deep appreciation
of the warm welcome and gracious hospitality accorded
to them by the people and Government of Australia."
CANBERRA, 7 February 1972 



VISIT OF PRESIDENT SOrEHARTO
OFFICIAL LUNCHEON, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
Speech~ by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
7 FEBRUARY 1972
Mr d aaeSoeharto, Presiding Officers, my
Minist-r and Parliamentary Colleagues, Members of the
Diplomatic Corps and Distinguished Guests:
Today, Mr President, we welcome you to Australia and
we do so with warmth and with sincerity, not only because you
have chosen to come here, but because you are the represk: ntative
of 130 million Indonesians, and our nearest ncighbours, and
people for whom we have the greatest friendship and the greatest
goodwill. Now, Sir, this afternoon I want to speak from three
different points of view about your visit to Australia today and
the few days that are in front of us.
First of all, I want to speak to you about the leader
Of Your country and yourself as a man. Then about our international
relationships, the relationships between two great countries, and
then the purposes of your visit here now, and in the days to come.
First of all then, as to you as a man. I know you
won't mind my saying that you were born to a farming family just
outside Jogjakarta, and if fate hadn't inte -oned, or if history
had moved along its normal course, then I haven't the slightest
doubt in the world that by now you would have been the head of
the Country Party of Indonesia, with probably a deep and permanent
influence on the mind and activities of my own Deputy Prime
Minister. But fortunateily for the world, fortunately for us
and fortunately for Indonesia, you decided at a favirly early
age that you would enter the Army at the time of the Dutch
administration. And from then on in successive movements, you went to
the leadership of the Arrmy and in a way that I would like to
stress at this moment. Not only did you move through the
brigades and the divisions, but at a very critical time in the
history of Indonesia, you became the Supreme-mmander of
Operational Command. And then later on, you went to a more
significant post and that was to the leadership of the Strategic
Command of your own country.
And again, I believe on this occasion that Providence
intervened and placed you in a deci4sive position and one in which
you were able to exercise your power and influence on the future
in a way that no other person in the history of Indonesia had been
able to do. And, Sir, because of those two actions your decision
to enter the Army, your progress to the supreme leadership, you
were, I think, and in fact did, make the decision that saved
Indonesia and I think has brought peace, order and goodwill to
your own country. / 2 
2--
And, Sir, I think I should emphasise that in each of
the posts that you have filled you have been in a position where
you could exert influence of a different kind as well, because
You did take part at the end of the Japanese Occupation. Later
on took piart in the decisions relating to the independence of
your own country. And then at the crucial moment, at the time
of the attempted takeover of Indonesia by elements that were
foreign to the wishes of ftie people of Indonesia, you took control
and you have accomplished in a brief space of time what few other
men would be capable of achieving.
Sir, vno ur talks to me this morning, you used the
phrase, or if it wasn't you, it was your interpreter viho used the
phrase " a new order". You were, I believe, and I know, not
only the architect bu1t the administrator of this programme.
And what has it brought to Indonesia?
Firs-t, I hl~ ave to go back again if I can to your history
as a farmer, because as you well pointed out to me this morning,
that not only do you look at Indonesia from the point of its
international politics and its -,-fence ministry, but you give
primary place in all your thinking to the social welfare and
social justice within Indonesia itself.
And, Sir, you have given emphasis to matters that
Perhaps other people could easily have forgotten. You have
stressed the necessity for the average man, woman and child in
your own country to have the basic necessities of life whetheF
it might be food, whether it might be clothing, whether it might
be shelter. And, Sir, I was glad to hear you say this morning
that these will remain your primary objectives during the time
that you remain the President of your great country.
So~, Sir, we compliment you not only for what you have
done, but the idealism you have brought to this very difficult
ta of yours. Then, Sir, if I look at the changes that have occurred
in the period of the new order, few of us could have thought
that in a period of what is but a few years, not many years
anyhow, few of us could have thought that order could have been
created out of chaos. Few of us could have thought that your
production would have been increasing as rapidly as it has,
and few of us could have thought that you would have brought
inflation under control as rapidly -and that your trade, Indonesia's
trade would be expanding, and gradually you would be placed in a
position of being able to pay your own way.
So, Sir, for all these reasons, I think we in Australia
appreciate what you have done and it adds warmth to the welcome
that I have just conveyed to you on behalf of the Australian
people. Now, Sir, may I turn to our international relationships,
the relationships between our two countries, and again on a much
wider canvas as you expressed to me this morning, the need for us
Jointly and co-operatively to play our part in the peace, freedom
and independence of all of the peoples of the Asian and Pacific / 3 
-3
region. First of all, Sir, in matters of defence, you know that
we are willing and anxious to play our part and to give you
assistance, not only in military aid but also where we can in
training your own people. And whilst we respect the fact that
you want to remain non-aligned and that you want,-as far as is
humanly practicable to be able to take an bttitude of complete
independence from the operations of others, nonetheless you do
4ccept the view that when it is in the interest of Indonesia,
Australia and the free world, then we can co-operate together
ia military area because here we know we are acting in the
* nterests of humanity rather than our own individual interest
Or own political decisions.
So Sir, we play our part and I believe we play our
part together, too, b) ecause we have the same objectives, the
same basic principles in our approach to a common solution of
our problems and those are and again I have an adaptation of
Your own words that you believe, Sir, not so much in establishing
a peace zone in a particular area that may perhaps be indefensible,
Out you do believe in making a maximum contribution to the peace,
to the prosperity, the independence and freedom of every country
in the region in which both ycu and I live.
So these, Sir, are the ideals that ptomote our
activities and determine what we should do. And if we look, too,
in terms of trade and aid, so far as we are concerned, our trade
is improving every day and I hope yours is too. And so far as
our aid programmes are concerned, leaving aside our own external
territories, there is no country to whom we give greater support
and greater assistance than we do to yours. And you very well
said to me, as you reminded me this morning, that not only do
we piake this contribution willingly and freely, but we do it
without expecting any repayment, without any prize of any kind at
all and there is no other country that gives quite as
generously or quite as freely as we do.
There is only one exception here and that is with
pev~ sa Kredi*. and of course with this we have agreed to your
recormmendations and we have ties associated with this kind of
aid, Similarly, too, if we look at other parts of our
programme, I think yn-u can find that there is a willingness in
our development programmes to be able to be of assistance.
And I well remember wheD. I was in Djaklarta probably two years ago,
or probably not quite thatlong ago, I was able to discuss the
development of the port of Tjilatjap in the South of Java, that
it could be done first of all by a feasibility survey then by
ddvelopment from Australian and other resources. And at that time
I was able to tell you and now I confirm what I said then, that
Australian manufacturers will be only too happy to go there and
are now ready to establish factories if they can find, as I am
sure they will, that the opportunities for development are there
and that the markets will be able to absorb their products. .4 
A And so, Sir, may I turn to the purposes of your visit
to my country today. The first one, as I think you will make
more than abundantly clear, is that you want to keep the process
of goodwill and keep the process of mutual co-operation going. I
am certain you will be successful.
The second one is that you want to look at Australian
industry to see whether parts of it are suitable to be created
and developed in your own country. Again I believe you will be
looking at a glass factory in .1elbourne, and if I can take notice
of one of tepeople who talked to me on Monday, he will be
anxiously looking to see whether he will have the opportunity to
develop in your country.
And finally, Sir, again if I can repeat what you said to
me this morning, you did refer to the doctrine of Pantjasila.
Here in other days, we always referred to it as " Panchsheel",
and that is the right of each country to independence and the
wish that each country should let its neighbour live in peace
and freedom from interference from bigger neighbours and bigger
people who have predatory desires against them.
So, Sir, here we are together, joining in common cause
wi~ th our hearts all set on a common destination and common
o ) jectives. I believe if . you look at it in this way, I can
complcte what I want to say to you and to an Australian audience
and to an Australian Parliament.
But you can well go home even now, Sir, not that I want you
to, and I wouldn't let you, but you could go home and you could
hava two words prominently in your mind and I think they would be
in the minds of most people here today, too; you can go home with
Madame Soeharto; you can go home with your friend, Adam Malik,
the three of you together can on the plane t'Lrip home say " Mission
accomplished. We have met with a lot of goodwill. We know they
are friends. We know that they will play t--heir part in the
devqlopment of the free world in that part of the region in whiich
we all have the good fortune to live". 



FOR PRESS: PM No 18/ 1972
FIRST ADVAN4CE ON WHEAT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon, M. P.
The Government is prepared to arrange the provision of
finance under the usual government guarantee to the Reserve Bank
to enable the Australian Wheat Board to pay a first advance at the
rate of $ 1.10 per bushel less freight on deliveries of wheat to the
Board up to 407 million bushels in the 1972/ 73 season.
This is the level of csuota deliveries recommended by the
Australian Wheat Growers' Federation and it has been accepted by
the Government on the understanding that if sales are below the
estimates adopted by the Federation and deliveries will be up to
or in excess of the quota, the Federation will accept responsibil-
* ity for a reduction in the 1973-1974 delivery . quotas.
The -Government's decision clears the way for the
Australian Agricultural Council, of which the Minister for Primary_
* Industry, Mr Sinclair, is a member, to take decisions in Perth
next week on the quotas for next season.
The Government has reached this position after taking
into account the present wheat stocks situation, which is
substantially lower than has been the case over the past two years
and the prospective export outlets for wheat in the present season.
The decision recognises the desirability of the industry
being in a position to provide continuity of supply to its markets.
Further details are available from the Minister for
Primary Industry.
CANBERRA 8 February 1972 



FOR PRESS, I LIBRARY
LOANS TO AUSTRALIAN WHEAT BOAR~ D PM' no 19/ 1972
Statement by the Prime Minister, mr William McMahon, M. P.
Cabinet has approved the introduction of legislation to
enable the Commonwealth to meet its guarantee to re-pay loans made
to the Australian Wheat Board by the Rural Credits Department of
the Reserve Bank.
Tile loans were obtained by the Wheat Board to finance the
first advance to growers on quota wheat of the 197C-71 season. The
Commonwealth will lond the Board the fundsnaeded to repay the Rural
Credits Department the amount outstanding on the due date, 31 March
1972. l.. t is.. expected that about $ 95 million will he involved.
As in the case of the similar loan made to the Board by
the Commonwealth last year, the funds will be advanced at an
interest rate of 511%.
Further details are available from the M~ inister for
Primary Industry.
CANBE RRA
8 February 1972 



YOUNG LIBERALS' CONVENTION
SURFERS' PARADISE, OLD.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon William McMahon CHMP
11 February,_ 1972
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I want to talk to you today about three thingsfirst
the economy second the role the Government has to playand
third the Liberal Party.
I realise you have dealt with these subjects in
one form or another during your Convention. However, I want to
give you the Government' s view because we are immediately concerned
with decision-making on these matters of direct concern to us all.
This is election year. And a year where we have
inherited problems from the past, many of them not directly within
our control, and also commu~ on to most industrialised countries
throughout the world. They are our problems, however, and we are
at grips with them. They are well-known to you all. There is inflation.
It continues to threaten us and, so far as it is in the Government's
power to do so, our measures to contain it must be constantly under
review and flexible in their application.
There is unemployment, which is the cause of
considerable public anxiety, though by world standards the level
is low, and it is by no means chronic.
No matter what a Government does its efforts will be
aborted unless there is confidence on the part of the public,
business and industry, and, I emphasise, the Trade Union movement.
I am well aware that there is some lack of confidence, we in the
Government are as sensitive to this as we are to the root causes
inflation and unemployment. We are doing everything in our power to correct this
and what we are doing is dictated entirely by the national interest
In other words, we are not looking at it from the point of view that
this is aA election year. We are not looking at it from the point
of view that there might be some very favourable signs and some that
are unfavourable. We are looking at it in order to ensure that
immediate and the long-term public interests receive paramount
concern. There are, with all this, a number of encouraging signs.
/ 2 
4 
In the long-term, of course, our prospects are
excellent. Even the Jeremiahs concede that. Our international
situation is very sound both in terms of trade and financial
resources. And we are showing strength and steady growth on the
domestic front. But it is the immediate problems that are commanding
public attention in Australia today, as you so well know. We have
to make sure that growth continues while we apply remedies to our
immediate problems. We must not throw the baby out with the bathwater.
This, therefore, is a time for carefully-considered
decisions, taking both the immediate and long-term situations into
account. There is absolutely no cause and no need to press the
panic button now. That, briefly, is the position in Australia today.
Now about the Government's role. We are tackling
the causes of inflation at every point we can. Inflation I want to
assure you, has been largely caused directly and indirectly by
excessive wage claims and wage rises in Australia. It is no good
putting blinkers on about this problem.
If you don't get a lift in productivity when you get
wage increases, then you are bound to got inflation no matter what
action the Government night take, and we haven't been getting a lift
sufficient to cushion the impact of those wage rises. On top of
that, industrial disputes and lawlessness, and political strikes, are
making the problem a great deal worse. But I can illustrate this
in a few sentences. The total man days lost was 2,877,000 compared
to 2,283,000 last year. To give another example of what disputes are
costing the wage earner himself, the total loss in wages for the
first eleven months of 1971 was $ 43 million, compared with $ 29 million
for the corresponding period of the previous year.
Look at the trouble in the Post Office, look at the
trouble we now have with the S. E. C. in Victoria. Having said this,
I think you are entitled to ask: What is the Government doing about
it? What can the Government do? And what sort of leadership is it
providing. most people don't rea~ lise and I want to stress this to
Young Liberals that one of the impediments we have is that, under
our own constitution, the Government is very limited constitutionally
in the action it can take.
Nevertheless, time and time again, we have sounded
the warning thiat excessive wage increases must be resisted by
Governments, by wage-fixing tribunals and Private employers and
that the Arbitration Court must take into account the national
interest and ability to pay. We have intervened in the national wage
cases and will continue to do so. This is a positive contribution to
the task of getting all the facts, the most important facts, on a
national scale before the Arbitration Commission. And we are
determined that a $ tate of full employment will be achieved and
maintained. ./ 3 
I 
The Government undertook at Budget time last year
to keep the economy constantly under review, to be flexible and act
promptly in response to trends and movements. This we have done.
We made a review in October/ November. In December we decided to
review the economy again in January. This we have done and Cabinet
has discussed the results fully in recent days.
We have made and announced various decisions, as you
know, particularly on monetary matters, as a result of which interest
rates on Government Bonds have been substantially reduced, and, of
course, the maximum overdraft rate his also been reduced.
There are now some indications that some interest
rates in the private sector are starting to fall. Just two other
examples of action we have taken
We made a special interest free capital grant of
million to the States for the building of primary
and secondary Schools and
We limited the -migrant inflow during the period when
school-leavers would be coming on to the labour
market. In recent months we have also intervened in other
significant cases before the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission,
with some effect, as in the annual leave case. These interventions
included the carpDenters, bank officers and the Victorian Electricity
Commission cases. Much of this has largely escaped public notice but
I believe these actions show decisiveness and leadership on our part.
We have always insisted that the Arbitration system must be preserved.
Generally it has served us well since Federation. If it is
weakened or destroyed by pressure tactics from anyone, then both the
boss and the working man will really be in trouble. We insist that
industrial disputes must be settled by Conciliation and arbitration.
You will understand that I cannot go into details of
our latest review as I am to meet the State Premiers next week and
we will takre a number of decisions which will. be important for the
future. But I want to say this. The Government has acted
deliberately, and I believe sensibly, to demonstrate flexibility in
its management of the economy. It will continue to do so.
My Governm1ent is concerned to see that a State of
full employment is maintained. I am confident that the immediate
pressures can be eased off if there is a concerted community effort
to face up squarely to the problems of the day. The employment
position, no matter what the underlying trends are, can be seriously
compromised by prolonged and unnecessary industrial stoppages, of
the kind which is being experienced in Victoria and which is
forcing employers to stand down a large part of the work force. The
current level of registered unemployment in Australia is 1.6 per
cen~ t of the labour force, after adjusting for normal seasonal
influences. 
This is a little higher than the average level of
1.4 per cent achieved over the last fifteen years but it is still
very low by world standards. Australians have come to expect very
high rates of employment and my Government is determined that this
expectation will be fulfilled. There is no reason at all why anyone
should join the " disaster lobby" and become crepe-hangers and
mourners about something that hasn't happened.
We are determined to continue to give leadership
in economic management. And are confident that the inherent
strength of the economy will show itself increasingly as the year
goes by. We will continue to take prompt action to anticipate and
deal with specific conditions as trends develop.
There is good news today as well as bad. The bad
news must not be swept under the carpet. It must not be concealed.
But neither should the good news. When the number of days lost by
strikes goes down, when productivity -goes up then let the story
be told. When wool goes up as it has. When the stock market liftsas
it has when companies show better trading and increased profits
as many are then let that story be told too. This is the way to
sustain confidence, encourage develop ment, create more employment
and take us forward to better days.
Despite all the difficulties we have had in the past
year the Government has made a great deal of progress on a wide
front. Time doesn't permit me to give you a list of many of the
things we've done, but I leave with you a paper which records in somie
detail our decisions and achievements from March of last year to date.
There are pages of it.
And in the first month of this year we have already
announced An important decision on bond and interest rates.
A new deal for our aboriginal citizens.
A major re-organisation of the Army and other
defence developments.
A decision to make Australian pensions payable
overseas. A decision to make Government papers and Cabinet
records available sooner to the public.
And there's more to come.
Now about the Liberal Party. First of all your
Conference. I am delighted to hear from those who have been here
throughout the Convention that you have really been getting down
to things. 
You have:-demonstrated in the most vigorous way your
loyalty to the Party, your concern for the future of Australia,
your interest in the well-being of the Australian people and your
determination to help us win the election. I congratulate you and
I thank you. For my part let me assure you the Parliamentary
Party is in good shape and so is the Government. We are a good
team pulling well together and we are going to win the next
election. I have had talks with the Liberal Party's Federal
Policy Committee in Canberra this week, and I think you'll find
we'll have a first-class, forward looking, refreshing election
policy for the Electorate. A number of Party Committees have been
busy for several months overhauling all aspects of Party pclicy and
they've done a good job. I am sure that relations between the
Parliamentary Party and the Liberal Party Organisation have never
been better. One can look at an election two ways. You can
mention the risk of losing, to prod the faint hearts into action,
or you can make up your mind you are going to win and get that
message across loud and clear. That's the way I prefer to do it.
In the months -that remain before the Poll we have
to make a concerted effort to strip the mask off the Lebor Policy
and its pretensions, so that our policies can be judged on their
merits against theirs. We can best do this by putting our whole
effort into our own performance as a Party and a partner in
Government. Don't believe the rubbish you hear ." that we've been
on the Government Benches a long time and that's good enough reason
for a change." It's good enough reason to stay. The record of
achievement during our 22 years of office has-been remarkably good
and the Australian people like the way we do it. But again, don't
be complacent. We mustn't take it easy. There's too much that's
new going on all around the world and yesterday's iiet isn't always
the best for tomorrow. I belive Liberalism has its greatest opportunities
-ahead of it in this decade of the seventies.
I 
3\-I) 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 20/ 1972
RESEARCH CENTRE FOR COMMONWEALTH/ S TATE
FINANCIAL RELATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, tn e Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, CHI. 14P
The Commonwealth Government favours the establishment,
within the Australian-National University in Canberra, of an
independent Research Centre to pursue studies in the general field
of Commonwealth/ State financial relations.
Iis in mind that the research should embrace all
aspects of Comnmonwealth/ State financial relationships, should
provide for post-graduate study in this field and that the resuilts
of the research be published. The Centre will, however, act on
its own initiative in relation to these matters.
We are in touch with the ANU regarding the establishment
of the Centre and provision for the project in the ANU's submission
to the Australian Universities Commission on the understanding that
the Commonwealth will allocate special funds for the purpose.
CANBERRA, 14 February, 1972. 



1I 6
~ KzK FOR PRESS: Pe N, 2 1/ 197 2
TF17) 1 7 LPPEM1ERS_' ON!! F-F2NN qL
S'tatemtent by the Prime D-in ste-, The Rt Hon. Willl)* a-. MCidon
In my opening stateme(-nt to the Conference ( copie-S of wh-ich
have been circulated) I outlined. the Coutmornwea2th's a., sessmezmc
of the economic sit-oation arid orosP,_ c-L and indlicatcd in boroad
terms the programme of action which the Government Ilad developedt
on the basis of its det'ailed review of the_. eCcomty. This review
Was, of course, consi ~ tent with our commitment tc keep the
economy under review but it was also undertakon, ! having in m~ ind
the opportunity today c Conference presented, to -take into
account the views of the Premiers on our assessm~ ent and oi.. our
programme. The proqramnxe I outlined to-,  he Premiers this morniLno
was to increase unemployment-" benefits and associated short
term sickness and special benefit. for adult males -froin
per week -to $ 17 per week with commensurate increases
for juniors;
-to i4ncrease the amtount of the qr-r a nts T intro_' uceO last
Decermber for emplo) ent-cxeatinq activities in nonmetropolitan
areaas from $ 2 .25 mill ion per montCh to e. 4
million per morith a rate' of $ 48 million per yea~ c;
t~ o restore the special investment allowance on investment
in new manu,_ acturing-. plant and, equipment as from this day
in tef rm n vWhich it previd6usly existed.
to seek agreement to increases in the States' works and
housing and seni -, qovernment borrowing prognrammnes.
In discussion with the Treasurer and myself the Premiers
indicated that they welcomed the proposals, both for theirbeneficial
effect-oil the ecoainy and particularly on unemp'loyment_,
but also for their impact on the social hardship of some indivic~ uals
in the community. 
Tiv rf. 2srudcc( OcVttttec shoal,' be art--
i d. o t Aie ir iicreascd amount couid re,'. U Li' -Z
allocated to o-genc'L a:. U cs ei I . h the Cono-~ a
nc: aethe,-inoithly ax, ounL. n oft I, c rmtr t. 14-o 4.5 o n, tu.
I. ifting the anrnual r,-, te cof t he grJa;. t to $ 54 illion. The increaced
-rants effectCive r hcbe(;:-ill 4ng of this month, wi 1 be isiuted
on the s~ u os'sas iinc~ er the existing arranmz-Mnts. hc
W" r.. 1 be subs ec to rcoy. e, L n June.
ThlIe P3: ri rr ; i. nan. T_ x rorusly7 veico0.. ne d th1ie C ommrnC . A1tI ; s
decu4sion to : soette r. c a in'veStTRncnt a-llosance and reecgnise-d
this irnitiai-ve as IL.~ yto provide~ a major bocst -to confidence
across a . ucumof Austrcalian1 iridascry. 7 r'rea~ urer is
maIKing a statemcient t-oday i~ n mtoro detail on thi! subject.
In P. y openii n, statement thi s morrrig i had sai. 1 tbal--A* 1n
the light of the Government's overall objectives, includ ncr
maintaining t-he momentum of economnic growth an' henc e of emp-loyrient
we believe there is a case ." or an increase both in the States, works
arid housing and! semi-governrient prograinxnes, anid I noted that an
in~ crease in the works and housing programme i. whIrich miglit be agreed
would involve the Commonwealth in taking up pa: rt of-" such an increas3
in the form of interest-free capital grant. Ifl reaching this view
whad noted that within the overall picture of rather stronger
growth in public sector expenditure this year than last year,
total public authority capital. expenditure is growing more Slowly
than current expenditure. Moreover, despite considerable spf: cial
assistance from the Common: weaith, rapidly escalating wage costs
had meant that in 1970-71 a number of intportanit State works had
had to be deferred. Similarly, the works activities of certain
of the State semi-governmental and local autriorities have also
had to be curtailed and the Prcmiers had indicated in discussion
that they welcomed some increase in this'area. Additionally,
of course, the loan raising programmes have been very successful
in this financial year to date.
After the fullest considtraton of the evidence and
arguments : produced by thc States full agreem~ ent has been reaichod
by the Loan Council on the amo~ nts of the increases of these
programmes. The amounts now agreed are
for the works and housing programmes an increase of
$ 32 million;
for the semi= governmental programme an increase of $, 0m~ lon.
It has been agreed that the works and housing programmes
of the' States for 1971-72 will be increased by $ 32 million,
bringing the total to $ 892 million. This increase is made up of
mili! lion on the same basi-s as the existing programme that
is, approximately one-quarter is -interest-free capital grant
and the remainder loan money with the ramaining $ 2 million
being entirely interest-free grant.
The additional $ 2 million interest-free capital grant has
been provided by the Commonwealth having regard to the continuing
costs in which the States will be involved in administering the 
convarsion to mrcL) yj. C i v tc.-~ CC'&amp; 2. clL
With thi3 ho ib &gt; e~ cc ir
and hceu inq craTL in ruue~ y~ 2__
those costcs their-own res,; urces.
Viese I'msdloonl -f-nds wil~ l be ditrr: te . tween the
S tLe s i n limi c t: h t L. ex gpr o g7t , -iaV Dt a ils of the a,, iio u r! ts
. id 3str -own nr attached-tab2o Th--y willI ha~ ve
c1j . Y~ c 11A~ ~ r eM1) L( oVME and i I certainy1Y -ermi t
the carl-yirig ou-. ij.. OI c _ w io rtb wi1 1 1e IDI , b c w o rkJ s p r Cjec 4,
jar~~ u r. b~ ri ara as including hosp; i-tais, sjhoolfs anid
water supply. The Co'cnwa. his prepared to cgive an undertaking th~ at
the level of tnc' wrj c;-s b: ind h.,, us Lng anid the scii-qoverri..-it borro winq
prog.. ramne s it rreparzed to support for 1972-73 will not L'e
lesthan the -total of such programie in 1971-7 2 as decidod! at this
m.~ eeting. In agreeing to the Commonwealth proposa~ l to -incr2-ase
the borrowi-ng pro:-rarmmes, the Premiers have given their
assurance that the additional funds rwill, sC) far as is practicable
without loss of efficiency and ef-fectiveness, be untilised auic,: 1iy.
having in mind the desirability of procucinq-an early impact on
emnployment. In my opening statement I said that Premier5 -might also
wish to consid: er riot only their loan programm~ nes bt~ t also their
prospective revenue buadgets for-1971-72, and 1 assured t hem that
we would listen carefully -to anything that they might care to
put on this aspect. I did poirnt out, howeve) r that revisions
to elements of the formula determining the financ4* al assistance
grants to be paid to the States-in-1l07l-72 indicate that the
amount the States will . recqeive by way of ge neral revenue assistance
this financial year presently cald'ulated to increase 1) y the
order of $ 20 million.
In the event, we have today had a very frank disd'ijssion. of
this aspect of the States, finances.
All the Premiers indicated their budgetary position.
Followi. 7ng a very full discussion, a special general revenue
grant of $ 15 million will be made by the Commonwealth to the
_ ri 1971 This will De distributed between the States on the
S?. l9basis as the financial assistai~ ce jgrants.-( The figurec for
individual States are shown in the-attached Tabl~ e.
New South Wales cJearly has a much greater budgetary problem
in 1971/ 72 than any of th,-other States. The Commnonwealth has
therefore agreed to extend additional assistancc to that State in
ordE--r ; to enable it to avoid taking extreme nmeasures to improve its
budgetary position. A lcai of $ 17.5 million will be provid'sd hy the
Commonwealth to New South Wales this financial year on terms anm'.
condi tions similar to the loan made available to Victoria for t-he
same purpose at the cndI of 1969-70. The loan will be made on the
basis set out in the Attachmepnt.
CANBERRA 14 February 1972 
. A. XwItiorn _ Fndry4s to S3ae A dC-at Febmarv lq' 72
PreDmirs' Confern) cej: r. Meeting MielitoC
we:-istoitu. ozs between States aire approximate oi: ly in some cases.
Warfts r
z0
2 3 Ad-cvr~ tIce to
ileSot Additioriai Works and Housin
P rFaL13 raqs
LTc an
Tora-mI r 3S ntres -free Total
Ca-taE3T -rants
.50 5.80 2.86 3.. 12
2., 12
1 58
I
1' r,) I
3 22.70 2.37 1.18 1.27 0.. 37 10.13 8 .17
4.04 14.39 2.99 2.23
32.00 Additioinal Semi-Government
3. 31
3048 1 .9.7
0.45 0.31
1C. CO Additional Non-Netrop
OlLitaa
Unem-D1o ieat
Wantts 253 2.25 0.68 0.84 0.* 62
11.25
? hie a : re to be distributed betseen the States in the sam'e proportions as
the fin r oPai assisance grants payable in 1971-72 but before making the &amp; edections
fncm th~ osei Framts which are accompanying the transfer ofT pay-roll tax.
To be paid for the purpose of reducing the State's revenue budget deficit and
on the term sez out in an attached note0
Vic Ild.. Graad3.
Total
TotalS5.8 ~ I~
I I 
( 1 1' 3. b
p e~ r. t
it o l po7-p .9 5 J n
ifIi;. atr , ou t~ h NeNc: South
ity ocl Te
0 dl psition in o er mcl.' u
not ior. 11( t j0 oaJfto " be mtade v; i" thout
ar-' Tc!* t die : euirflt htthe w'). ole oet Thll
I) e : repaid ' by 30 Jwia 1972.
Tphe loan_ OcarriCS intereu:: t at tho czhort;-terin
C o L ir% 1 ~ ltb bownJ r ate-o J. 5 5 re2-en t-o ffcr e d
in, the February 197-2 caslh loaon,
No interest is payable in. the finst year.
After interest is payable -annually
on -31 Decembher and 30 June each year on the
redAucing bualance of the loan. 



" THIS DAY TONIGHT"
INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP ON ABC NATIONAL TELEVISION 14 FEBRUARY 1972
Interviewer : Richard Carleton
Q. Mr McMahon, the Premiers' Conferenc&amp; today-. one
cannot help but feel is something of a char-ade. It has all-:
happened before. The Premiers come to Canberra on Sunday
night, breathing fire and brim stone. They come and meet
you in the cordiality of the Cabinet Room and it's all over.
The Commonwealth makes a concession. There is no long-term
solution that has come out of any of these Premiers'
Conferences. Is there one in the future?
PM: I don't think there is. And certainly there
couldn't be one under present circumstances when wages are
rising so rapidly and the'States are unable to tax to the
extent necessary to recoup the moneys. In other words
Q. Would the....
PM: Look, please don't interrupt when I am trying
to give an answer to what is a tremendously important
natimhal problem. This is important. In cases like this,
it is not a charade. In fact, I have done my best to
ensure that they are listened to with attention, we take
notice of what they have said and we adapt our policies as
far as we practicalaly can and as far as we think it is wise
to'meet their wishes.
Q. But you called it a pilgrimage yourself, this
evening.
PM: I did call it a pilgrimage but that does not
necessarily mean to say it is a charade. There is a totally
different meaning of the two words. What I do believe is
that they played a contribution, a marked contribution towards
an understanding of the problem and towards the solution
of it. Far from being a charade, it was a valuable exercise
and one that will be of benefit for the nation.
Q. They will be back in June and apparently the
same thing will be played out again. They will be back in
February next year. There is no solution to the States' 
long-term problems of finance.
PM: PM: Q. PM: There is no solution to this if present
conditions continue.. But what I have done in order
that we can get the most detailed and careful analysis
of this, I have asked the Australian National University
to establish a small school of the top-thinking economist
we have got in the country and I hope two of. the most
important and capable civil servants we have had
Sir John Crawford and the former Secretary to the
Treasury, Sir Richard Randall. A school will be
established so that we will know the facts associated
with CommonwealthStt rltin and see if they can
come up with a better answer.
Mr McMahon, forgive me, but the problem has
been with Australia virtually since the lastwar when
the States gave up their income taxing power8. Now in
1972, you are proposing an investigation which will
produce a possible solution in years to come. In the
next three or four years
I don't think so at all, with great respect
to you. These men know the dangers and the difficulties
and they have been specifically charged with the objective
of getting an answ6r as soon as they can, and as and when
they are able to give us solutiorsor recommendations, they
will do it. You are not seeing this in twelve months'
time, or anything, though?
I don't know how long it will take, but so
long as we get an answer and I must impress this upon
you that while wages go up the way they are, between
11 and 13 per cent per annum, or averaqe earnings go up
at that rate, it is not going to be an easy solution, and
the solution has not been found in any other country of
the world. 
Well, I will come to wages in just one
moment, but can I raise a point that you made in your
opening address to the Premiers today where you spoke
of " excessively gloomy views being put about" and this
giving rise to lack of confidence in the community.
Would you name for me the people you claim are putting
about " excessively gloomy views"?
PM: Q. PM: Q. No, of course I won't but it is commonly
practised and why should I enter into an argument with
a particular individual. In fact I don't like speaking
about individuals. There is too much discussion about
them already. I believe in policies. I believe in saying
" Here is a problem. This is the way we are going to solve
it" but I do have-to stress that people don't quit4
understand, for example, the problem of unemployment;
because I pointed out if you look at it in what is
called and now I am using academic language
" seasonally adjusted figures for unemployment", you
will find that the figures are not far different from
the long-term average, and our figures are better than
any other country in the world. These are points that
have to be made. The talk of seasonal arguments and the
like has gone on for some time
But what you have got to do about them,
you've got to understand them. And I would like even,
to try and give you, if I Could, an explanation of why
the seasonal figures are the ones that you lookza+, But
go on, you ask me further questions now.
Well, Sir, I won't go into the seasonal
points because I don't want to bring up the matters you
brought up in the House yourself last year not
looking at the seasonal figures but rather at the
absolute figures. 
4.
PM: Well I said that one was the one that was
emotive in quality and that created the greatest public
interest and could be used for political purposes.
But if you want to look at it for economic and national
purposes, the figures that you should look at are the
seasonally adjusted figures.
Q. Well, now just to go back to the excessively
gloomy views, one of the problems that you ' have said
you are facing yourself is that these views are being
put about, So I don't understand why you won't name the
persons who are responsible for it.
PM: Because it is not my practice to be naming
persons. I believe in fighting the issues, as I said
before, and every time you get a Prime Minister naming
people, irritating them, then it has a counter-reaction 0
and the ones that suffer are people like myself,-and you
get into a kind of a bra~ 4l that does nobody any good.
We are here to solve national problems and that is what
we will do.
Q. Let's come now to the spiral
of which you spoke a moment ago. The argument of the
ACTU through Mr Hawke is that the Unions cannot be
expected to hold back on their wage demands whilst the
Federal Government makes no constructive policy towards
price control.
PM: The problem here is to understand causes
and effects, and Mr Hawke knows the answer just as well
as I do. And the cause of our problems today is that
average earnings are rising so substantially between
11 and 13 per cent. Now the simple fact is that if wages
rise, earnings rise greater than productivity increases
which are about 2 per cent, you must get-built into that
a cost inflationay factor of the difference between the
two. It is inevitable that it will happen. So if Mr
Hawke cares to get on the platform or on television and
talk about the realities of life, he will be driven to
the con~ lusion that the primary cause is wages and this is
one that we have to find the answer to, if possible, through
the Arbitration system. 
Q. Implicit in Mr Hawke's argument seems to be
PM: I did ask you a few minutes ago if you would
let me finish...
Q. Sorry, I thought you had finished.
PM No, I hadn't quite finished. . But what I
wanted to end, therefore, is this question of prices.
Naturally enough, we are giving a great deal of
consideration to this problem of prices, but it is not
a problem that you want to go creating the impression
" Well we are having conferences about it to see what we
can do" because if you did, then I think you would find
quite a number of people in the community would be
bumping up their prices in anticipation of what-is likely
to happen in the days to come. But nonetheless we don't
within the Cabinet, of course we discuss the whole of the
national economy and every single aspect of it and we will
continue to do so.
Q. Sir,' the Government's last Budget, the Budget
you supervised as Prime Minister was styled as an
" anti-inflationary" Budget.
PM: Who styled it that?
Q. Well, it has been styled that way not only
by the commentators, of course, but by your own Ministers,
and by your own Treasurer.
PM: Well let me correct you, please, because
Mr Snedden is my Treasurer, and I, too, have said it
was a Budget that was designed for several purposes,
not one. The first one was that w( should ens ure growth
and that we should keep unemployment down. They are
two objectives. The second of them is enormously
important to me personally, and I have wanted to keep
unemployment to a low rate ever since I have been in
the Government, over 21 years. And the third, the major 
problem we face today, a long-term problem, is how do
we handle the problem of wage increases and, consequently,
of inflation. So when you say it was singularly or
solely an anti-inflationary policy, that isn't accurate.
There were three objectives in our policy.
well insofar as inflation has continued since the
Budget for the seven months since the Budget, plus the
concessions you made today to boost employment, do you
then acknowledge that the strategy, the third point of the
strategy of the Budget to control inflation has failed?
No, I don't because again I think you must
try and understand the difference between the powers that
we can exercise and what we try to do. Now there are
two different types of inflation one is what you call
demand inflation*-and that is the old classical fotm of
inflation too much demand chasing too few goods.
There is a second kind that is quite new to us, and that
is the rapid increase in wages that has been occurring
in recent months Which you are hoping to control?
Which we hope to slow down and finally control.
But we in the Commonwealth have very little powers because
other than in our Territories, the ACT and the Northern
Territory, we have no power whatsoever to control.
other than through the Arbitration system.
If the problem is really serious, Sir, why
don't you seek those powers?
Go to a referendum?
Yes. Yes, we could probably do that-but that is a
process that would take about nine months at least to
become effective. It is seven months since the last Budget and
in that time you haven't been able to control inflation.
No, but we did feel frankly, when I want
away, up to Queensland at the end of December, I was fairly
certain we had got it where we had seen the glimmerings of
PM: Q. PM. Q.
PM: Q. PM:
Q. PM: 
7.
a prospect of bringing it under control because the
Arbitration Commission in what is called the Carpenters'
Case had acted with sweet reason and had shown that
wage increases were beyond the capacity of the community
to sustain or to pay. To my horror, we then found that the
Electricity Commission of Victoria went and gave a 9 per cent
increase beyong our capacity to control. And. then the
Municipal Officers got an increase. And-. then the claim
was made by the Electricity Commission for an extra week's
leave. Now all these things have happened since December,
at a time, as I have said, and subsequent to the time when
I felt that at long last we had got this problem under
control.
Q. Well if that glimmer, Sir, just to conclude
with on this point, if that glimmer of hope that you
have is dimmed for the rest of this year, could you
now give a pointer that'you might .466k powers for the
Commonwealth to control wage increage?
PM: Well what we are trying to do first of all
is to look at the problem of containment, or isolation-
I used the word today of isolating these three cases
to Victoria. If we can do that, and we will try to the
maximum of our capacity, then we can see another glimmer
of light in the difficulties in front of us. But now I
must confess I will be looking at this question of
greater Constitutional powers for the Commonwealth.
, In my view, the one area where, if we are to exercisip
ouerall economic management, the one area where &amp; should
try and get greater powers is to see what we can do in
terms of this control of the wage structure. But we
couldn't do it directly and we would never want to do
it directly. We would want to do L~ t through the
Arbitration Commission.
Q. Mr McMahon, thank you for speaking on
" This Day Tonight". 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
/ 4x~ n Oeni' g Statement by the Prime Minister 14 FEBRUARY 1972
IT IS OPPORTUNE THAT WE SHOULD MEET HERE TODAY FOR A
WIDE-RANGING DISCUSSION ABOUT THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY AND YOUR STATE
FINANCES. THE TIMING HAS NOT COME ABOUT BY CHANCE. WHEN THE
COMMIONWEALTH ACTED-IN A NUMBER OF WAYS LAST NOVEMBER TO ASSIST DEMAND
AND MAINTAIN GROWTH IN THE ECONOMY, WE HAD IN MIND THAT IT WOULD BE
APPROPRIATE TO REVIEW THE POSITION AGAIN ABOUT THIS TIME TO STAND
OFF FOR A LITTLE AND THEN HAVE ANOTHER LOOK AT THE TRENDS.
THE DATE WHICH WE THEN SUGGESTED WAS CHOSEN WITH THAT
CONSIDERATION VERY MUCH IN MIND. THE APPROPRIATE TIMING OF THESE
DISCUSSIONS THUS RESULTS RATHER FROM POSITIVE FORETHOUGHT, CONSISTENT
WITH THE ASSURANCES OF THE TREASURER AND MYSELF TO KEEP THE ECONOMY
UNDER REVIEW, AND AS PART OF THAT PROCESS.
WITH THIS TIMETABLE IN MIND, WE IN THE COMMONWEALTH
UNDERTOOK LAST WEEK A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF THE ECONOMY.
AS A CONSEQUENCE OF THAT REVIEW WE HAVE COME TO CERTAIN
BROAD CONCLUSIONS. BEFORE FINALLY MAKING OUR DECISIONS OR SOME
OF THEM WE WANT TO HAVE THE BENEFIT OF YOUR VIEWS IN PREMIERS'
CONFERENCE. WE SHALL, NO DOUBT, FIND OURSELVES IN BROAD AGREEMENT
WITH SOME OF THE VIEWS THAT SOME OF YOU WILL PUT TO US AND IN
DISAGREEMENT WITH OTHERS. THAT IS IN THE NATURE OF CONFERENCES
AND NONE OF US SHOULD FIND IT IN ANY WAY SURPRISING. .0 ./ 2 
-2
OVER THE PAST FEW MCNTHS THE GOVERNMENT HAS MADE
SEVERAL CONSIDERED ADJUSTMENTS TO POLICY TO MAINTAIN AS FAR AS
POSSIBLE OUR OBJECTIVES: THE MAINTENANCE OF ECONOMIC GROWTH WHICH
IS ESSENTIAL AMONG OTHER THINGS TO OUR PURPOSE OF MAINTAINING A
HIGH LEVEL OF EMPLOYMENT; AND THE CONTROL OF INFLATION,
IN THE LIGHT OF OUR DELIBERATIONS I WILL ANNOUNCE SOME
FURTHER ADJUSTMENTS WITHIN THIS BROAD POLICY FRAMEWORK.
I WANT, AS AN INTRODUCTION,, TO SAY SOMETHING ABOUT THE
CURRENT AND PROSPECTIVE ECONOMIC SITUATION AS WE SEE ITol
WE HAVE BEEN DISTURBED BY WHAT WE BELIEVE TO BE THE
EXCESSIVELY GLOOMY VIEWS BEING PUT ABOUT RECENTLY REGARDING
CURRENT AND PROSPECTIVE ECONOMIC CONDITIONS0 ACCORDINGLY9 WE HAVE
GIVEN THOSE VIEWS THE MOST CLOSE AND CAREFUL EXAMINATION. WE HAVE
COME TO THE CONCLUSION THAT THESE EXTREME VIEWS ARE SIMPLY NOT
SUPPORTED BY THE FACTS. I SAY THAT BECAUSE WE MUST GUARD AGAINST
BEING OVER-INFLUENCED BY SUCH VIEWS.
REASONED CRITICISM IS ALWAYS WELCOME,-AND IT IS
IMPORTANT THAT WE SHOULD BE AWARE OF AND UNDERSTAND SUCH
CRITICISMS. BUT THE MORE OMINOUS OF THESE STATEMENTS CAN HAVE;
IN SOME DEGRIE., A SELF-FULFILLING CHARACTER IF THE COMMUNITY
TAKES THEM SERIOUSLYA
PUBLIC CONFIDENCE CAN BE VERY SENSITIVE, FOR THAT
REASON. IT IS I THINK THE DUTY OF ALL OF US TO EXAMINE THOSE
AREAS OF THE ECONOMY WHICH COME WITHIN OUR RESPECTIVE
JURISDICTION AND TO ASK OURSELVES ARE THINGS REALLY AS BAD
AS SOME ARE CLAIMING THEM TO BE? 0 0 0 0. 
-3
WE THINK THAT THE ANSWER TO THAT QUESTION IS CLEARLY IN
THE NEGATIVE. THAT BEING SO, THOSE WHO SO SHRILLY VOICE THlE OPPOSITE
OPINION BEAR A HEAVY RESPONSIBILITY TO THEIR FELLO CITIZElNS.
THE ECONOMY HAS BEEN GROWING STEADILY. THE GOVERNMENT
IS RESOLVED TO SEE GROWTH CONTINUE. WE HAVE NOT THE SLIGHTEST
INTENTION OF COUNTENANCING ANY OTHER OUTCOME. IT IS A TRAVESTY OF
OUR VIEWS TO SUGGEST OTHERWISE.
THERE ARE, IN FACT, CLEAR ELEMENTS OF STRENGTH IN THE
ECONOMY WHICH WOULD, EVEN IF NO FURTHER ACTION WERE TAKEN NOW,
ENSURE CONTINUED GROWTH IN THE MONTHS AHEAD.
IT FOLLOWS THAT ANY MEASURES NOW TO BE TAKEN AN]) I
HAVE ALREADY SAID THAT WE PROPOSE SOME WILL BE DESIGNED TO
STIMULATE THAT GROWTH.
CERTAINLY THE ECONOMY IS NO LONGER IN THE STRAINED
CONDITION OF A YEAR OR MORE AGO. LT WAS, IN'DEED, A BASIC AIM OF
OUR ECONOMIC POLICY THEN TO MODERATE THAT CONDITION. IF WE WERE
TO AVERT THE THREAT OFA SELF-PERPETUATING WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL, THAT
WAS A NECESSARY PRE-CONDITION AND~ OF COURSE IT REMAINS SO. FOR IT
REMAINS TRUE THAT THE MOST DIFFICULT TASK, AND ONE WHICH IS STILL
BEFORE US, IS TO QUELL INFLATION.
BUT THAT IS NOT TO SAY THAT WE CAN TURN AWAY FROM OUR
OTHER HIGH OBJECTIVE, NAMELY, TO MAINTAIN THE MOMENTUM OF ECONOMIC
GROWTH, WITH ALL THAT MEANS FOR EMPLOYMENT. o/ 4 
-4
HERE ALSO WE HAVE PROBLEMS, INCLUDhING THE RURAL RECESSION
AND RESULTING RURAL UNEMPLOYMENT, WHICH WE HAVE ALREADY TAKEN STEPS
TO MEET AND WHICH WE SHALL DO MORE ABOUT IN ACCORDANCE WITH DECISIONS
WHICH I WILL MENTION LATER.
THESE FURTHER STEPS ARE IN LINE WITH THE FLEXIBLE APPROACH
THE GOVERNMENT HAD ADOPTED IN DEALING WITH PARTICULAR TRENDJS AS
THEY EMERGE. THEY REPRESENT A FURTHER MEASURED RESPONSE DESIGNED
TO MEET PARTICULAR PROBLEMS, WHILST MAINTAINING OUR COUNTERINFLATI
ONARY STANCE.
HERE I PAUSE TO LOOK MORE CLOSELY AT THE PROBLEM OF COST
AND PRICE ESCALATION. ONE DOES NOT HAVE TO SEARCH FAR TO FIND THE MAJOR FACTOR
PUSHING COSTS AND PRICES ALONG AT THE PRESENT UNACCEPTABLE AND INDEED
DANGEROUS RATE. IT MUST SURELY NOW BE CLEAR TO EVERYONE THAT THE
VERY RAPID INCREASE IN WAGE AND SALARY COSTS IS THE MOST IMPORTANT
FORCE WHICH HAS CHARACTERISED RECENT PERIODS OF~ COST AND PRICE INCREASES.
WE ARE, OF COURSE, AWARE THAT THERE ARE OTHER FACTORS; BUT WE SHOULD
NOT ALLOW THEIR EXISTENCE TO DIVERT OUR ATTENTION FROM WHAT IS CLEARLY
FAR AND AWAY THE MOST IMPORTANT CAUSE.
IN THIS FIELD, THE COMMONYEALTH HAS VIGOROUSLY PUT TO THE
ARBITRATION COMMISSION ITS VIEW THAT EXCESSIVE WAGE INCREASES IN THES
CURRENT CIRCUMSTANCES ARE VERY MUCH AGAINST THE COMMUNITY'S BEST
INTEREST. IN SOME DECISIONS TOWARDS THE END OF 1971 IT APPEARED THAT
THE COMMISSION HAD TAKEN COGNIZANCE OF THE EFFECTS OF ITS DETERMINATIONS
ON THE ECONOMY IN GENERAL. THERE HAS ALSO BEEN SOME WELCOME REDUCTION
IN THE RATE OF INCREASE IN OVER-AWARD PAYMENTS. 
5
NOTWITHSTANDING THESE MODERATELY HOPEFUL SIGNS.. THERE
ARE STILL EXTREMELY SERIOUS UPWARD PRESSURES ON THE WAGES FRONT
PARTICULARLY ON AWARD. WAGES, I WILL HAVE MORE TO SAY ABOUT THIS
MATTER LATER115 REDUCING THE IMPACT OF INFLATION IS~, AS I SAID, ONLY
PART OF OUR TOTAL OBJECTIVE,.
IN RELATION TO OUR GROWTH OBJECTIVE-THERE ARE SOME
FLAT ELEMENTS IN THE ECONOMY. THERE IS THE DEPRESSED SITUATION
IN SOME OF OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES AND THERE IS THE SUBDUED GROWTH
OF CONSUMER EXPENDITURE,-THERE IS ALSO EVIDENCE TO SUGGEST SOME
PROSPECTIVE LEVELLING OFF IN CERTAIN AREAS OF PRIVATE INVESTMENT
EXPENDITURE,. FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE FIELD OF NON-DWELLING CONSTRUCTION!
AS THE ECONOMY HAS COME OFF THE BOIL THERE HAS TOO,.
BEEN A RISE IN UNEMPLOYMENT -A RISE WHICH SHOULD NOT BE JUDGED,~
HOWEVER BY COMPARISON WITH THE VERY LOW LEVEL OF UNEMPLOYMENT
WHICH HAD BEEN REACHED IN 1970.
A GOOD DEAL HAS BEEN SAID IN RECENT MONTHS ABOUT THIS
LATTER ASPECT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND I THINK IT IMPORTANT
THEREFORE THAT I SHOULD SAY SOMETHING ABOUT IT.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT THE CURRENT ( END-JANUARY)
LEVEL OF UNEMPLOYMENT, AT 1. 62 PER CENT OF THE WORK-FORCE IN
SEASONALLY-ADJUSTED TERMS, IS LITTLE DIFFERENT FROM THE LONG -TERM
AVERAGE OF 1.4 PER CENT EXPERIENCED IN THIS COUYNTRY; AN]) THAT
LONG-TERM AVERAGE IS REMARKABLY LOW COMPARED WITH THE EXPERIENCE
OF MOST ADVANCED WESTERN NATIONS, 
-6
CERTAINLY, THE UNEMPLOYMENT SITUATION IS MUCH CLOSER TO THE
LONG-TERM NORM THAN IS THE CASE WITH PRICES, WHERE THE CURRENT RATE
OF PRICE INCREASE ABOVE 7 PER CENT PER YEAR CONTRASTS WITH OUR
EXPERIENCE THROUGH THE 1960' s OF SOME 2--3 PER CENT PER YEAR.
SECONDLY, I POINT OUT THAT THE TREND OF UNEMPLOYMENT HAS
VIRTUALLY FLATTENED OUT IN RECENT MONTHS. IN SEASONALLY-ADJUSTED
TERMS, IT HAS-INCHED UPWARDS DURING THE PAST FEW MONTHS FROM ITS
LEVEL OF 1 .53 PER CENT AT END-SEPTEMBER TO 1 .62 PER CENT AT ENDJANUARY
THAT IS, A RISE OF LESS THAN 0.1 PER CENT OVER FOUR MONTHS.
ANY BALANCED APPRAISAL OF OUR PRESENT ECONOMIC CONDITION
AND PROSPECTS MUST HAVE REGARD TO THESE POINTS. WHAT I WANT TO
STRESS IS THAT IT IS WHOLLY CONSISTENT WITH OUR OBJECTIVE OF
MAINTAINING STEADY GROWTH IN THE ECONOMY THAT WE SHOULD MAINTAIN A
HIGH LEVEL OF EMPLOYMENT.
IT WAS, INDEED, WITH THAT IN MIND THAT THE GOVERNMENT
LAST NOVEMBER AND DECEMBER TOOK A NUMBER OF STEPS STEPS WHICH
I SHALL NOT DETAIL AT THIS POINT BUT WHICH, AS YOU KNOW, INCLUDhED THE
ARRANGEMENT FOR-GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR THE RELIEF OF UNEMPLOYMENT
AS WELL AS A NUMBER OF OTHER ACTIONS.
SUBSEQUENTLY, AS PART OF THE THOROUGHGOING REVIEW OF THE
ECONOMY WHICH HAS BEEN PROCEEDING SINCE ABOUT MID-JANUARY, WE MOVED,
WITH YOUR APPROVAL, TO EFFECT FURTHER SHARP REDUCTIONS IN INTEREST
RATES ON GOVERNMENT SECURITIES. AT THE SAME TIME, AND IN PART AS
A CONSEQIJENCE, WE MOVED ALSO TO HAVE SIGNIFICANT REDUCTIONS MADE IN
TRADING BANK LENDING AND DEPOSIT RATES. THESE LATTER MOVES WERE,
IN EFFECT, FRUITS OF THE REVIEW WHICH COMMENCED SOME WEEKS AGO. 
7
BEFORE ANNOUNCING WHAT WE NOW HAVE IN MIND AS A FOLLOWUP
TO THOSE RECENT AND EARLIER ACTIONS; IT MAY BE WORTHWHILE FIRST
TO LOOK BRIEFLY AT SOME PARTICULhAR ASPECTS OF THE CURRENT ECONOMIC
SITUATION AND THE REASONS FOR THE CHANGES WE INTEND TO MAKE,
NON-METROPOLITAN UNEMPLOYMENT
ONE IMPORTANT ASPECT OF THE CURRENT LABOUR MARKET
RESULTS FROM THE EXTRAORDINARILY DIFFICULT SITUATION WHICH IS
CONFRONTING SOME OF OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES. THE GRANTS WHICH WE
INTRODUCED LAST DECEMBER FOR RELIEF OF NON-METROPOLITAN
UNEMPLOYMENT HAVE. IT IS TRUE, ALREADY HAD A USEFUL IMPACT ON
THIS ELEMENT IN THE SITUATION.
THESE GRANTS ARE DESIGNED) TO FINANCE ADDITIONAL LABOURINTENSIVE
ACTIVITIES OF A PRODUCTIVE KIND BY STATE, SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES IN ORDER TO PROVIDE EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES IN NON-METROPOLITAN AREAS, AS SUCH,-THEY HAVE
ALREADY PERMITTED MUCH URGENT AND USEFUL WORK TO BE UNDERTAKEN
AND HAVE MADE A SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS THE STRUCTURAL
PROBLEM OF NON-METROPOLITAN UNEMPLOYMENT THAT [ S INVOLVED,,
IN THE LIGHT OF EXPERIENCE WITH THIS SCHEME, THE
GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT MORE COULD NOW BE DONE IN THIS AREA.
WE THEREFORE PROPOSE9 SUBJECT TO YOUR AGREEMENT, THAT THE MONTHLY
RATE OF EXPENDITURES.. UNDER THE SCHEME BE*' TNCREASED,
AT PRESENT2~ THE GRANTS ARE SET AT $ 2,25 MILLION PER
MONTH,, WE BELIEVE THAT THIS AMOUNT COULD BE INCREASED; EFFECTIVE
AS FROM TODAY,. TO A RATE OF $ 4 MILLION PER MONTH. IN THE BALANCE
OF THIS FINANCIAL YEAR AND SUBJECT TO REVIEW IN JUNE THE
ADDITIONAL FUNDS INVOLVED WOULD AMOUNT TO $ 7.75 MILLION. v/ 
8-
IN TERMS OF IMPACT ON THE ECONOMY, A CLEARER IMPRESSION
IS CREATED IF WE THINK IN TERMS OF AN ANNUAL RATE OF INCREASED
SPENDING OF $ 21 MILLION PER ANNUM' BRINGING THE ANNUAL RATE OF
SPENDING UNDER THE SCHEME, AS REVISED, TO $ 48 MILLION PER ANNUM IN ALL,
IN REACHING OUR DECISION, LA ST DECEMBER, TO OFFER THESE
FUNDS FOR NON -METROPOLITAN EMPLOYMENT PURPOSES, WE WERE OF COURSE
VERY CONSCIOUS OF THE PARTICULAR PROBLEMS AND SOCIAL COSTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT
IN RURAL AREAS, WHERE AVENUES FOR NEW EMPLOYMENT ARE OFTEN VERY
LIMITED. UNEMPLOYMENT, HOWEVER, CAN AND DOES BRING HARDSHIP WHEREVER
IT OCCURS. THIS IS THE REASON WHY THE GOVERNMENT HAS, OVER THE YEARS,
PAID BENEFITS TO ELIGIBLE UNEMPLOYED. IT IS SOME TIME SINCE THE RATE
OF THIS BENEFIT WAS INCREASED. FOR THAT AND OTHER REASONS WE THINK
THE TIME OPPORTUNE TO CHANGE THE RATE. WE HAVE DECIDED TO INCREASE
THE ADULT* RATE FOR UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT, AND ASSOCIATED SHORT TERM
SICKNESS AND SPECIAL BENEFITS, FROM $ 10 PER WEEK TO $ 17 PER WEEK.
JUNIOR RATES FOR 16-17 YEAR OLDS AND FOR 18-20 YEAR OLDS WILL BE
INCREASED RESPECTIVELY BY $ 3 AND $ 5 PER WEEK.
WE WILL BRING FORWARD LEGISLATION TO THE PARLIAMENT To GIVE
EFFECT TO THESE INCREASES AS A MATTER OF URGENCY.
SOME MEASURES, SUCH AS THE NON-METROPOLITAN EMPLOYMENT
GRANTS, HAVE A DIRECT INFLUENCE UPON DEMAND FOR GOODS AND SERVICES,
INCLUDING LABOUR. BUT BROADER MEASURES WHICH SHOULD INFLUENCE CONFIDENCE
AND ACTIVITY WILL ALSO BE OF BENEFIT. THE GOVERNM4ENT HAS ACCORDINGLY
DECIDED THAT ADDITIONAL MEASURES OF THIS BROADER KIND ARE NOW
DESIRABLE. 
9-
INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE
WE HAVE HAD IT PUT TO US FROM MANY QUARTERS IN RECENT
WEEKS THAT THE SINGLE MEASURE MOST LIKELY TO BOOST CONFIDENCE AND
ACTIVITY ON THE PART OF INDUSTRY, AND MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY IN
PARTICULAR, IS THE RESTORATION OF THE SPECIAL IN-VESTMENT ALLOWANCE
FOR MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY.
THIS WAS, YOU WILL RECALL, SUSPENDED TWELVE MONTHS AGO.
ALTHOUGH THE MAJOR DETERMINANT OF IN-VESTMENT EXPENDITURE MUST, OF
COURSE, BE THE EXPECTED GROWTH OF DEMAND RELATIVE TO EXISTING
PRODUCTIVE CAPACITY, WE ARE PERSUADED OF THE FORCE OF THE VIEW I HAVE
STATED ABOUT THE INFLUENCE OF THE INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE IN BOOSTING
CONFIDENCE. ACCORDINGLY, THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED TO RESTORE THE
SPECIAL INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE ON NEW INVESTMENT IN MANUFACTURING
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT AS FROM THIS DAY, IN THE FORM IN WHICH IT
PREVIOUSLY EXISTED. ON THE BASIS OF THE VIEWS THAT HAVE BEEN PUT
TO US, THIS STEP CAN BE EXPECTED TO STIMULATE ACTIVITY ACROSS A WIDE
SPECTRUM OF AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY.
THE TREASURER WILL MAKE A FURTHER STATEMENT ON THIS SUBJECT,
IN A MORE DETAILED FORM LATER TODAY.
THE MEASURES WHICH I HAVE JUST ANNOUNCED, TAKEN TOGETHER
WITH THE MONETARY MEASURES WE ANNOUNCED LAST WEEK AND THE ACTIONS
WE-TOOK LATE LAST YEAR, WILL WORK BOTH DIRECTLY AND INDIRECTLY TO
ENCOURAGE ACTIVITY IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
PUBLIC SECTOR FOR OUR PART, WE THINK THIS IS APPROPRIATE. BUT THERE
IS CLEARLY ALSO A CASE FOR SOME MEASURED ADJUSTMENT TO DEVELOPING
CIRCUMS'" ANCES IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR. 
10
PUBLIC AUTHORITY EXPENDITURE OVERALL IS PRESENTLY ONE OF
THE STRONG POINTS IN THE ECONOMY. IN REAL TERMS, THE OVERALL POSITION
IS ONE OF STRONGER GROWTH THAN LAST YEAR. WITHIN THIS OVERALL PICTURE,
TOTAL PUBLIC AUTHORITY CAPITAL EXPENDITURE IS GROWING MORE SLOWLY
THAN CURRENT EXPENDITURE. THIS FOLLOWS A PERIOD WHEN, IN 1970-71 THlE
IMPACT OF RAPIDLY-ESCALATING WAGE COSTS ON STATE BUDGETS WAS SUCH
THAT, DESPITE CONSIDERABLE SPECIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE COMMONWEALTH,
A NUMBER OF IMPORTANT STATE WORKS HAD TO BE DEFERRED.
SIMILARLY, THE WORKS ACTIVITIES OF CERTAIN OF THE STATE
SEMI-GOVERNMENTAL AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES HAVE ALSO HAD TO BE CURTAILED
AND WE ARE AWARE, FROM THE DIRECT REPRESENTATIONS COMING FORWARD TO
U31IN THAT FIELD, THAT SOME RELAXATION THERE WOULD BE WIDELY
WELCOMED. IN THIS RESPECT I MENTION THAT THE SEMI-GOVERNMENTAL
AUTHORITIES HAVE BEEN VERY SUCCESSFUL IN THEIR LOAN-RAISING ACTIVITIES
IN THIS FINANCIAL YEAR TO DATE.
WORKS AND HOUSING AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT BORROWING PROGRAMMES
IN THE LIGHT OF OUR OVERALL OBJECTIVES, WE BELIEVE THERE
IS NOW A CASE FOR SUITABLE INCREASES BOTH IN THE STATES' WORKS AND
HOUSING AND THE SEMI-GOVERNMENT BORROWING PROGRAMMES. ANY INCREASE
IN THE WORKS AND HOUSING PROGRAMME TO WHICH WE MIGHT AGREE WOULD,,
OF COURSE,* INVOLVE THE COMMONWEALTH IN TAKING UP PART OF SUCH
INCREASE, 24.4 PER CENT TO BE PRECISE, IN THE FORM OF INTERESTFREE
CAPITAL GRANTS.
IN PROPOSING TO INCREASE THESE BORROWING PROGRAMMES, WE
SEEK YOUR ASSURANCE THAT THE ADDITIONAL FUNDS SHOULD, SO FAR AS
IS PRACTICABLE WITHOUT LOSS OF EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS, BE
UTILISED QUICKLY, HAVING IN MIND WHAT I BELIEVE TO BE OUR COMMON
OBJECTIVES RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT. / 11 
11
AS WE UNDERSTAND IT, YOU HAVE NO LACK OF TASKS TO BE
DONE, PARTICULARLY IN YOUR URBAN AREAS. HOUSING, SCHOOLS, WATER
SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE ALL THESE, WE KNOW, AND OTHERS, PROVIDE
OP'OORTUNITIES FOR EXPENDITURES OF THE KIND WE HAVE IN MIND.
STATE REVENUE BUDGETS PROSPECTIVE POSITIONS
SOME PREMIERS MAY WISH TO REFER NOT ONLY TO THEIR LOAN
PROGRAMMES BUT ALSO TO THEIR PROSPECTIVE REVENUE BUDGETS FOR
1971-72. I TAKE THE OPPORTUNITY OF INFORMING YOU THAT, SINCE THE
COMMONWEALTH BUDGET ESTIMATES WERE FRAMED, THERE HAVE BEEN REVISIONS
TO ELEMENTS OF THE FORMULA DETERMINING THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
GRANTS TO BE PAID TO THE STATES IN 1971-72.
THESE REVISIONS WILL RESULT, ON PRESENT FIGURING, IN AN
INCREASE IN THE AMOUNT STATES WILL RECEIVE BY WAY OF GENERAL REVENUE
ASSISTANCE IN THIS FINANCIAL YEAR. WHILE THESE ESTIMATES, LIKE
OTHERS MADE AT THIS TIME OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR, CAN ONLY BE BEST
GUESSES, WE PRESENTLY CALCULATE THE INCREASE IN-VOLVED AS OF THE
ORDER OF $ 20 MILLION.
IN THINKING ABOUT THIS MATTER MORE GENERALLY, WE HAVE
IN MIND THE UNCERTAINTIES WHICH SURROUND OUR OWN BUDGET-ESTIMATING
PROCEDURES EVEN AT THIS TIME OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR. WE EXPECT THAT
SIMILAR UNCERTAINTIES ALSO EXIST IN THE CASE OF STATE BUDGETS.
FOR THAT REASON, OUR OWN VIEW HAS NORMALLY BEEN THAT THESE
MATTERS ARE MORE APPROPRIATELY SUBJECTS FOR DISCUSSION AT THE
REGULAR JUNE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE THAN AT A CONFERENCE SUCH AS THIS
TODAY, CONVENED AS IT HAS BEEN PRINCIPALLY TO DISCUSS THE ECONOMIC
SITUATION. / 12 
12
THIS IS NOT TO BE TAKEN AS IMPLYING THAT THERE CANNOT
BE DISCUSSION. WE SHALL LISTEN CAREFULLY TO ANYTHING THAT YOU
MAY'CARE TO PUT ON THIS POINT JUST AS YOU WILL, I AM SURE,
CONSIDER THE VIEWS WE HAVE AS TO WHETHER ACTION IN THIS AREA IS
NOW APPROPRIATE. THE MEASURES I HAVE ANNOUNCED AND THOSE THE GOVERNMENT
HAD PREVIOSLY TAKEN IN RECENT MONTHS ARE DESIGNED TO DE~ AL WITH
SPECIFIC PROBLEMS WHILE AT THE SAME TIME PROVIDING A STIMULUS TO
THE ECONOMY IN LINE WITH OUR CONTINUING OBJECTIVE OF MAINTAINING
ITS GROWTH ' MOMENTUM.
BUT I MUST EMPHASISE THAT THERE IS A FINE LINE BETWEEN
ACTION DESIGNED TO THAT END AND ACTION WHICH WILL TILT THE BALANCE
TOO FAR, RESULTING IN THE LOSS OF SUCH HARD-WON SUCCESS AS HAS SO
FAR BEEN ACHIEVED IN CONTAINING INFLATION.
THE MEASURES WE HAVE CHOSEN, AND THEIR EXTENT, ARE
DESIGNED TO MAINTAIN THE BALANCE. IN THIS RESPECT WE HAVE A
NARROW PATH TO TREAD: WE MUST TREAD IT.
INFLATI ON HAVING ACTED TO STIMUIATE ACTIVITY AND EMPLOYMENT, WE
MUST CONTINUE TO SEEK ANOTHER OBJECTIVE THE CONTROL OF
INFLATION. FOR THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION ARE INSIDIOUS. IT IS
NOT MERELY AN ECONOMIC PROBLEM, BUT ALSO A SOCIAL ONE. o / 13 
13
I HAVE ALREADY MENTI ONED) THE COMMONWEALTH'S
INTERVENTION IN ARBITRATION COMMISSION AWARD HEARINGS. IN RECENT
TIMES THAT INTERVENTION HAS. IN RECOGNITION OF THE INCREASING
GRAVITY OF THE PROBLEM OF WAGE-INDUCED INFLATION,; BEEN MORE
FREQUENT AND MORE VIGOROUS THAN FOR MANY YEARS PAST,
I INSTANCE AS EXAMPLES THE'CARPENTERS CASE, THE ANNUAL
LEAVE CASE AND THE BANK OFFICIALS' CASE. I ADD THAT WE WILL; OF
COURSE,. BE MAKING VERY STRONG REPRESENTATIONS TO THE COMMISSION
IN THE NATIONAL WAGE CASE WHICH HAS BEEN LISTED TO RESUME NEXT
WEEK. IT HARDLY NEEDS SAYING THAT THE OUTCOME OF THAT CASE WILL
BE OF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO YOUR OWN BUDGETS AND WILL HAVE A CRUCIAL
IMPACT ON COSTS AND PRICES IN THE FUTURE.,
WE HAVE BEEN URGING PIVATE EMPLOYERS TO RESIST
EXTRAVAGANT CLAIMS FOR INCREASED WAGES AND IMPROVED CONDITIONS
MADE UPON THEM,. AND WHICH CAN CIY RESULT IN FURTHER PRESSURE
UPON THEM TO RAISE PRICES IN ORDER TO CARRY THEIR INCREASED COST
STRUCTURE, WE RECOGNISE, HOWEVER, THAT VE CANNOT HOPE TO EXERCISE
A SIGNIFICANT INFLUENCE IN THAT WAY IF THERE IS ANY WIDESPREAD
FEELING AMONG BUSINESSMEN THAT WE ARE NOT; IN FACT, EXERCISING
RESTRAINT WITHIN TH-E AREAS OPEN TO OUR DIRECT INFLUENCE THE PUBLIC
SERVICE AND THE VARIOUS COMMONWEALTH STATUTORY BODIES.
THE COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD HAS, IN FACT:, A
FIRM POLICY OF NEITHER LEADING THE WAY IN ITS DETERMINATIONS ON
WAGES AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE NOR LAGGING SO FAR BEHIND THAT
RECRUITMENT TO AND THE EFFICIENCY OF THE SERVICE BEGINS TO SUFFER,. 
14
I WISH TO UNDERLINE THAT POLICY.
AT THIS TIME, HOWEVER, WE HAVE A PARTICULAR SITUATION
REL; ATING TO THE WHITE COLLAR AREA WHICH GIVES CAUSE FOR VERY
SERI'OUS CONCERN NOT MERELY TO THE COMMONWEALTH BUT I THINK TO ALL
OF US HERE TODAY.
IN ONE STATE, ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL OFFICERS WITHIN
THE PUBLIC SERVICE AN]) THE STATUTORY AUTHORITIES HAVE BEEN GRANTED
AN INCREASE OF 9 PER CENT IN WAGE RATES.
I AM NOT CONCERNED TO-CANVASS THE CIRCUMSTANCES IN WHICH
THAT INCREASE CAME ABOUT, ALTHOUGH I NOTE AND WELCOME THE SUBSEQUENT
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE PREMIER OF VICTORIA THAT HE PROPOSES A RADICAL
OVERHAUL OF THE WAGE-FIXING MACHINERY IN HIS STATE DESIGNED TO
ENSUR~ E THAT SUCH A CHAIN OF CIRCUMSTANCES COULD NOT OCCUR IN
FUTURE. WE SHOULD BE GLAD TO HEAR FURTHER FROM HIM ON THAT MATTER
SHOULD HE SO DESIRE.
WHAT I AM CONCERNED ABOUT NOW IS TO ENSURE THAT THE
INCREASE IS " QUARANTINED" TO THAT PARTICULAR STATE, AS FAR AS OUR
OWN ACTIONS AN]) POLICIES MAY MAKE THAT POSSIBLE AND THAT THIS
INCREASE DOES NOT SPREAD GENERALLY TO WHITE COLLAR WORKERS THROUGHOUT
-TH1E ECONOMY. SHOULD WE FAIL IN THAT RESPECT, THE CONSEQUENCES ARE
CLEAR. STATE BUDGETS WILL ONCE AGAIN BE UNHINGED, PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
AT ALL LEVELS WILL BE FORCED ONCE AGAIN TO CONSIDER RAISING THEIR
CHARGES TO MPEET THEIR INCREASED COSTS, AND THE INFLATIONARY SPIRAL
WILL BE GIVEN A NEW AND SERIOUS TWIST. SUCH AN OUTCOME WILL OBVIOUSLY
BE DAMAGING TO THE BEST INTERESTS OF THIS COUNTRY. 
15
I THEREFORE TELL YOU NOW THAT THE COMMONWEALTH PROPOSES TO
TAKE WHATEVER ACTION IT CAN TO CONTAIN THE FLOW-ON OF THE 9 PER
CENT INCREASE TO WHICH I HAVE REFERRED IN THE AREA OF THE COMMONWEALTH
PUBLIC SERVICE OR COMMONWEALTH INSTRUMENTALITIES. WITHIN THE
PROVISIONS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE ARBITRATION ACT, WE WILL PUT OUR
CASE RELATING TO SUCH INCREASES AT APPROPRIATE STAGES OF THE ARBITRAL
PROCESS. WE WILL ALSO INTERVENE, WHENEVER THE OPPORTUNITY IS OPEN
TO US, AGAINST CLAIMS OF A LIKE KIND IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
THIS IS A SERIOUS DECISION, AN) NOT ONE THAT WE HAVE
TAKEN LIGHTLY. NEVERTHELESS, WE BELIEVE IT TO BE NECESSARY IF THE
UPWARD THRUST TO THE GENERAL LEVEL OF WAGl COSTS IS TO BE BLUNTED AND
IF ANY REAL PROGRESS IS TO BE MADE IN THE BATTLE AGAINST COSTINFLATION.
IT IS CLEAR, HOWEVER, THAT THE PROSPECT OF ACHIEVING THOSE
OBJECTIVES WILL BE VERY MUCH ENHANCED IF A UNITED FRONT IS TAKEN
TOWARDS THEM BY THE PUBLIC SECTOR AS A WHOLE. TO ACHIEVE THIS
OBJECTIVE, I INVITE THE PREMIERS TO JOIN WITH THE COMMONWEALTH HERE
TODAY IN EXPRESSING THEIR DETERMINATION ALSO TO RESIST THESE " NEW ROUND"
CLAIMS WITHIN THE AREAS OF THEIR OWN PUBLIC SERVICES AND STATUTORY BODIES.
WE REGARD THIS AS A MATTER OF HIGH NATIONAL IMPORTANCE.
WE SIMPLY CANNOT STAND ASIDE AND PASSIVELY ALLOW THE
EVENTS THAT HAVE ALREADY OCCURRED IN VICTORIA ( AND WHICH OF COURSE
CANNOT NOW BE UNDONE) TO BE MULTIPLIED ELSEWHERE WITHIN THE ECONOMY.
THIS, GENTLEMEN, IS THE PROGRAMME WHICH WE PUT TO YOU
TODAY FOR* DISCUSSION AND ON WHIChf WE INVITE YOUR VIEWS. 



FOR PR~ ESS: PM No. 22/ 1972.
COLOUR TELEVISION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon CHMP.
Colour Television services will be inaugurated in
Australia as from 1st M-arch 1975, with transmission commencing
at any time after that date provided the Broadcasting Control
Board's technical standards are met. The date of 1st March 1975
is in accordance with the undertaking to give three years' notice
of the date of inauguration,-The National service will be
developed on a phased basis in the light of the availability of
funds and the work load devolving on the Post Office and the
Australian Broadcasting Commission.
CANBERRA, February, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: PH No. 23/ 1972
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. lion. William
McMahon, CH, 1-P
Australia will continue its participation in the
South Pacific Forum.
Arrangements are now in hand for a meeting of the Forum
in Canberra on February 23 to 25 which is expected to be attended
by the President of Nauru, the Prime ministers of Fiji, Tonga and
Western Samoa, the Premier of the Cook Islands and delegations
from Australia and New Zealand.
The meeting's essential purpose is to provide an inform4l,
private and intimate opportunity for island leaders and Australia
and New Zealand together to compare notes on problems of concern
to them. It is envisaged that the discussions will cover such
matters as trading arrangements, economic co-operation, transport
and communications and the impact of the Forum upon the separate
but related activities of the South Pacific Commission.
CANBERRA, February, 1972. 



FOR PNE. So. S : P2M4 / 1972.
A. C. T. EVIDENCE BILL
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, M. P.
Legislation will be introduced as soon as possible
in the new Session to replace the A. C. T. Evidence Ordinance 1971.
This legislation will replace the Australian Capital
Territory Evidence Temporary Provision A~ ct 1971 which was passed
last year as a special measure to give effect to the Ordinance in
statutory form until the 31 March this year.
CANBERRA, February, 1972.
FOR PRESS: 



FOR PRESS; PM. No. 25/ 1972.
CYCLONE AL~ THEA COMMON4WEALTH FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon, CH, MP.
Cyclone Althea struck the Townsville region on
24 December last. I informed the then acting Premier of Queensland
on Christmas Day that the Commonwealth Government was ready to join
with the State in providing finance for the relief of personal
hardship and distress and informed him that the co-operation of
Commonwealth facilities was being made available.
The Army and R. A. A. F. rendered sterling service, as
did other Commonwealth authorities.
While relief and restoration measures other than the
relief of personal hardship and distress resulting from na-tural
disasters are regarded as a State responsibility, the Commonwealth
nevertheless recognises that the States have limited financial
resources to draw upon in an emergency and is prepared to assist in
Jinancing measures other than the relief of personal hardship and
distress where the States are involved in substantial expenditu~ re
of an abnormal nature.
Furthermore, when a State incurs expenditure on sugh
additional agreed measures in excess of an initial base amount ip a
financial year, the Commonwealth is prepared to meet in full the.
remaining expenditure which would have been incurred by the State
on eligible relief and restoration measures. As Queensland haf in
1971-72 already incurred expenditure before Cyclone Althea struick
amounting to $ 2 million the " base"~ amount for that State the
Commonwealth has agreed to provide the following financial asststance
to the State, in addition to sharing on a dollar-for-dollar basis
expenditure for the immediate relief of personal hardship and
distress: State Government eligible expenditure in 1971/ 72
on the restoration of Government assets will be
fully reimbursed by the Commonwealth in keeping with
its undertaking to meet all eligible natural
disaster expenditure this year in excess of $ 2
million. ./ 2 
b The Queensland Government normally requires
semi-Government and local authorities to meet
one third of restoration costs in situations
such as this. In view of the large amounts
involved with this cyclone, the Commonwealth has
agreed with a request by the State that such
authorities be required to bear one-third of the
cost of restoration of their assets up to a
maximum of $ 100,000 in any one financial year.
In addition, special consideration will be given
where a figure approaching $ 100,000 would be
unduly onerous for a smaller authority to bear.
The Commonwealth will accordingly meet these
excess costs.
The State's scheme of grants to necessitous
persons for repairing and rebuilding private
dwellings damaged by the cyclone would normally
fall within the category of relief of " personal
hardship and distress" which is shard on a
dollar-for-dollar basis with the State concerned.
In view of the exceptional circumstances of the
disaster and the widespread damage to private
property, particularly that of pensioners, I
have informed the Premier that the State's share
of the cost of this scheme may be included with
its expenditure on the restoration of
Government assets, for the purpose of assessing
the amount of State natural disaster expenditure
reimbursable by the Commonwealth in 1971-72.
On the basis of preliminary estimates, the cost to the
Commonwealth of financial assistance to the Queensland Government in
respect of damage caused by Cyclone Althea will be between $ 5h and
$ 6-oillion this financial year. To the extent that some of the
repairs may not be completed before 30 June 1972, the carry-over
costs would be a charge against the State's base expenditure for
1972--73 and Commonwealth expenditure in 1971-72 would be that much
the less.
CANBERRA, 16 February, 1972. 



-AUSTRALIA,-
PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PM No. 26/ 1972
NAVAL SUPPORT FACILITY COCKBURN SOUND, W. A.
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon, C. H., M. P.
The Government considered today revised
estimates of cost for the construction of the Naval Support Facility
at Cockburn Scund, Western Australia. When the announcement was
made in October 1970 of the decision to proceed with the second
stage of the project the actual facilities on Garden Island the
total estimated cost was $ 38 million. The first stage, construction
of the causeway linking Garden Island with the mainland, is well
in hand. The latest estimate is $ 48.5 million. The
increase is attributable mainly to escalation in construction costs,
design changes found necessary as a result of more detailed site
investigations and some variations in actual requirements.
The Government decided, subject to examination of
the second stage of the project by the Parliamentary Public Works
Committee, that the proposal should proceed and to the previously
planned completion date of the end of 1975.
The facility, when completed, will provide
support for up to four escort vessels and three submarines for
periods up to a year without drydocking. The proposed works include
wharves, workshops, stores, administrative offices, barracks for
personnel, an armament depot and armament jetty, training facilitics
and an operational headquarters.
In confirming the decision to proceed with the
second stage of the Naval facility at Cockburn Sound, the Government
took into consideration the strategic changes occurring in the
Indian Ocean area, including the increasing Soviet Naval activity.
The Naval Sunoort Facility at Cockburn Sound will
provide a base for our ships to operate in the Indian Ocean for
extensive periods and may be seen as a demonstration of our interest
in contributing to the security of ocean areas adjacent to Australia.
The facility would be available to the United
States and Britain and will thus assist their nrerations in the
Indian Ocean. 
0 2.
These two countries have expressed interest
in the Cockburn Sound facilities in connection with the
deployment of their ships in this area.
Further details are available from the Minister
for Defence.
CANBERRA, 21 February, 1972. 



C . JJ AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER
OLYIIC APPEAL FUIOD
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon, C. H. , M. P.
21 February, 1972
Good Evening;
Nineteen hundred and seventy-two is another
Olympic Games Year and the Australian Olympic Federation, of
which I happen to be the President, wants to send about 200 of
our top athletes to iZunich, Germany, to compete in the Games.
Now you know as well as I do that the Australian
is a great sportsman, and that he can compete and win in world
company. So we plan to be able to announce the team in May of
this year and to get them to Munich as soon as we can so that they
can compete in the Games in late August and early September.
In order to do that we have to raise something
like $ 400,000 to permit the mission to take place. My Government,
the Australian Government, has provided $ 80,000 to permit this to
happen and we have to collect the balance from people like you,
from companies and corporations, from associations and from the
trade unions as well.
We have to do this if the mission is to be
successful. So I ask you tonight to contribute to the maximum
of your capacity, and to make this trip a success.
Please do so, and give our athletes the opportunity
to compete and to beat the best from other parts of the world.
Good ni-ht and thank you. 



EMBARGO: Until 10.00 am 23/ 2/ 1972 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
PRIME MINISTER
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM 23 February 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon, M. P.
On behalf of the Australian Government I welcome you to
Canberra for the Second Session of the South Pacific: Most
of you have been he-re before, but this is the first ti; we meet
together in Australia as neighbours and friends to discuss matters of
bommon interest. During my period of office as Foreign Minister, I wholeheartedly
supported the concept so I have a direct personal interest
in the Forum. Obviously there was a need for a forum for political
discussions as well as discussions about other matters of common
interest. In short we need -a forum such as this. And I recommended
to my colleagues we should identify ourselves with the Forum when it
was set up. I assure you we will co-operate in every way we can. We
share a common purpose for peace, . security and progress in the South
Pacific Region and our destinies are permanently linked in many ways.
Historically, the first links were forged when Captain Cook
explored the Pacific two hundred years ago. He then established links
between Australia, New Zealand and the Islands which have increasingly
brought us closer together in friendship and trade. And, we share the
conviction that independence, freedom and security are the rights of
our peoples. We are all involved in the hectic movement of political
and economic change that marks our time. This helps to strengthen our
relationships and gives us a regional identity in the wider world beyond
the South Pacific. And like you, we are busy with the adventure of
nation building, economic development and social progress. We possess
in common the tradition of parliamentary democracy and a community of
interest in the ties and institutional patterns of the British
Commonwealth. But we recognise, too, a wider Pacific community with
which each of us is already linked in the South Pacific Commission.
This Forum has, in a sense, other and wider political interests
to pursue. Equally it is able to build on our experience of co-operation
and adaptation to change which has marked the twenty-five years of the
Commission. We live in an era of aroused expectations, stimulated by
the ease of travel and the soread of communications If a world where
every Government has to chart a course and navigate according to its
assessment of its own best interests. But none of us can be wholly
self-sufficient, or live in isolation. Neither can we afford to neglect
opportunities to widen our duderstanding of the environment in which we
live, or to make known our interests to those who share that environment
with us. We must continually develop our capacity in self-reliance
against the background that the formal protection by other powers which
was previously part of our colonial experience, is no longer wholly
valid. For these reasons I welcome you to this meeting. 
S 2.
There are many practical issucs and questions of immediate
concern on the agenda, and we look forwafdto the opportunity to learn
about your problems and the solutions which you favour. In fact and
substance this is a meeting where we are all equal and where the
importance of regional co-operation is uppermost in our minds.
our first meeting in Wellington was a natural success.
It showed that despite our diverse histories, we had 1problems in
common and the will to solve them. I am confident that this meeting
will be as successful and my Government will spare no effort to make
it so. It is my hope that from this meeting will develop a stronger
friendship to reinforce our sense of regional identity and common
pu. rpose, harnessed to the welfare arnd prosperity of all the peoples
of the South Pacific.
We are glad so many of you have found it possible, in spite
of your many and urgent responsibilities, to spare the time to see at
first hand a little of our country and our Australian community which
shares to the full in the welcome I give you today.
I declare the Forum open.
CAN) ERRA
23 February 1972 
N 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 27/ 1972
VISIT OF PRESIDENT NIXON TO CHINA
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon.
William McMahon, CH, MP
When President Nixon last July announced his intention
of visiting China, I wi-. comed it without reservation and wished him
good fortune in an initiative which had the full support of Australia.
Now that the visit is successfully concluded and a
joint communique has been released, we can take stock of what was
accomplished and just as importantly what still remains to be
achieved.. The first point I make is that the fact of the visit
itself -quite apart from what was discussed and agreed during it
was a gain for all of us. For the isit unprecedented in itself
and in its bold disregard of established practice marked in a
dramatic fashion the importance each side attaches to having both
a clearer idea of the other's preoccupations and a more normal
relationship. Secondly, it is clear from the co-mmunique itself that
this first high-level contact has not resulted in any fundamental
reversals of foreign policies by either side.
Indeed, that was not to be expected for, as the
communique notes, " there are essential differenccs between China
and the United States in their social systems and foreign policies"
Thus on issues such as Indo-China and Korea, the two sides were
apparently able to do no more than to restate, and no doubt to
elaborate, their established positions.
It is worthwhile noting that both sides by their
attitudes during the talks made it clear that neither is about to
abandon old friends.
The two sides were able to agree on some general
principles of conduct which should govern relations between states
and which the two sides wqere themselves prepared to apply to their
mutual relations. These princi les, though couchel in the language of the
Bandung Declaration, arfequally the principles of the United 
-2
Nations Charter, to which China now subscribes; and they are
principles which have long underlain in practice Australia's own
foreign policy. With these principles of international relations in
mind, the two sides went on to state a number of agreed points.
* I draw Particular attention to three of these:
" Neither should seek hegemony in the Asia Pacific region
and each is opposed to the effort by any other country
or group of countries to establish such hegemony."'
" Both wish to reduce the danger of international military
conflict."
" Progress towards the normalisation of relations between
China and the United States is in the interests of all
countries." The first two of these points augur well for the peace
Of the region of which Australia is part. But it would be wrong to
suppose that their mere assertion, even coupled with the reiteration
of the Bandung Principles, is all that is required.
For as the US side stated in the talks, " Peace in Asia
and peace in the world require efforts"~ and I emphasise " efforts",
which are more than words " to reduce immediate tensions and to
eliminate the basic causes of conflict."
The reduction of tensions is thus not enough in itself;
what is also needed is the elimination of basic causes of conflict.
In this respect, it would be foolish to ignore that the Chinese
side reiterated its support for what it describes as " the struggles
of all the oppressed people and nations for freedom and liberation".
How do these words square with the Bandung Principles?
What do they mean in practice, and how will they be understood by
our friends and neighbours in Asia who are ' Laced with subversive
threats to their independence?
As to the third of the points to which I have drawn
attention Progress toward the normalisation of Sino/ American
relations the Australian Government sees great advantages in that
process, and notes with satisfaction that a beginning is to be
made with " people to people contacts the development of bilateral
trade, and the maintenance of official contacts through various
channels. As long ago as May 13,1971, I said " That we want normal
bilateral relations with the People's Republic of China."
So the US approach is in fact entirely in line with
what we ourselves have been trying to do, in accordance with our
long-standing objective announced well before President Nixon's
statement last July ofL the progressive normalisation of relations
with China. es/ 3 
3
Unfortunately, we have not been able to make much progress
towards that objective. The prime reason has been the difficult
question of the Republic of China with its government on Taiwan.
As with President Nixon, so with us the Chinese side has
taken the position that this is the crucial question obstructing the
normalisation of relations.
Recognising the difficulty of resolving that question, we
had wished to move first in other areas of our bilateral relations,
such as trade and scientific and cultural relations.
I note that in respect of the United States, the PRC is
prepared not to make Taiwan the stumbling-block in the way of
normalising relations.
It may be that Peking will now be prepared to do the same
in our case; we shall certainly test out the Chinese on this.
But it equally may be that the PRC has one policy in respectof
the USA, which is a super power, and another in respect of middle
powers such as Australia even though in the joint communique the
Chinese side stated that " All nations, big or small, should be
equal." We shall hope that the PRC will live up to its own words and
will follow a consistent policy, but not being surprised if in
the event the PRC has one policy for the big and another for the
not so big. Finally, I make again the point that I made last July:
President Nixon's initiative in visiting Peking is a beginning,
an exploration, not a settlement of matters at issue even between
these two powers, let alone of wider issues.
But there is no doubt in the mind of the Australian
Government that the visit has turned out, as we expected, to be
a good beginning, one which opens up new prospects not only for the
two participants but ultimately for a just and secure peace in
Asia and beyond.
CANBERRA, 28 February 1972 
C' 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
LONG TERM AID TO BANGLA DESH
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 29 February 1972]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)-
by leave-Honourable members will
recall that on 31st January the Australian
Government announced formal recognition
of the Government of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman as the Government of the new
state of Bangla Desh. In announcing recognition,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs
( Mr N. H. Bowen) said that, as a nation
of 75 million people bordering the Indian
Ocean, Bangla Desh was likely to play an
increasingly important role in the affairs of
South and South East Asia. He also said
we looked forward to co-operating with
Bangla Desh in various regional organisations,
including the Colombo Plan and the
Economic Commission for Asia and the
Far East. In taking this action, Australia
was among the first of the Western and
Commonwealth nations to accord recognition,
and, I think we can claim, gave the
lead to many of our neighbours. We have
since followed up this initiative with positive
steps in the field of aid to Bangla
Desh. On 16th February, less than 3 weeks
after we had recognised the new nation,
my colleague, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, announced the imminent departure
of the first sea-cargo of emergency relief
aid to be shipped direct to Bangla Desh.
During the same weekend, the first trainee
under the Colombo Plan to ' be nominated
by Bangia Desh arrived in Australia. He
will be followed by many others, as our
long term plans to assist Bangla Desh with
technical training come to fruition. At the time the announcement of the
direct cargo of relief aid was made, the
Minister said that the Government had the
long-term needs of Bangla Desh under
active consideration. Bangla Desh is one of
the most overpopulated and impoverished
regions in the world. Its natural resources
are few, its secondary industry barely
developed and much of what had been
established was destroyed during the fighting
there. International aid will be required
on a large scale, not only to provide
immediate relief and repair the damage
caused during the war, but also to help in
building up this young nation as a viable
economic unit. We have also borne in
mind the words of the Bangla Desh Minister
for Rehabilitation, who said recently in
welcoming Australian emergency relief aid:
' He gives twice who gives quickly.'
So the Government has been looking to
what aid Australia can best provide, to
accord with . the future long-term needs of
Bangla Desh. We have been looking ahead
to the next stage, and to longer-term aid
programmes. For the next financial year,
beginning in just a few months, Australia
will provide aid for Bangla Desh totalling
$ 4m. This will be in addition to the $ 2m
of aid already in the pipeline. This new
amount of S4m will be for special rehabilitation
assistance, for -regular aid, including
projects and experts, training, and for food
aid. It is a special amount which we shall
make available to assist Bangla Desh in
coping with the extraordinary problems 
which will confront it in its early stages of
nationhood. We have been having continuous discussions
through our mission in Dacca with
the Government of Bangla Desh. Details
of the precise forms in which we intend to
provide this longer-term aid are being
worked out on the basis of the planning
priorities of the Bangla Desh Government.
These will be announced at appropriate
times by my colleague, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. I would, however, like to
make it clear to the House that the plans
for new aid to Bangla Desh which I have
just announced are the first stage of Australia's
long-term assistance. The ways and
means in which this programme is to be
and will be developed shall be kept under
regular review. Earlier I said that Australia had taken a further initiative. It is, I point
out to the House, that, apart from India,
which is Bangla Desh's closest neighbour,
Australia is one of the first of those
nations which have recognised Bangla
Desh to come forward with a commitment
of longer-term aid, other than emergency
relief. I believe that, as we gave the lead
to many nations in recognising Bangla
Desh, this action, of announcing plans for
longer-term aid may also give a lead to
other nations to act similarly. For it is
only with the concerted help of friendly
countries that Bangla Desh will be enabled
to emerge from the problems of her birth
in war. Our aim is to help Bangla Desh to
take her place as a stable and developing
economy which will make a constructive
contribution to the South Asian region.
22384/ 71W. G. MUMaY. Government Printer. Canberra 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 10.40 PM ON 5/ 2/ 72
PRIME MINISTER
" THIS WKET6"
Transcrip-of Interview with the Prime Minister,
the Rt Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP, on Channel 7
Melbourne 5 MARCH 1972
Interviewers John Boland
Max Grant
Q. Prime Minister, this week you will celebrate
your first full year as Prime Minister, on Monday,
tomorrow, and I want to ask you two things. First of all,
has this been the hardest period of your p litical career,
this twelve months? With hindsight, would you have taken
the job, knowing what you do know now?
PM: I think it has been the hardest and most
unpredictable year I've known since I've been in politics,
or for that miatter, anywhere else. And even if I'd known
of the difficulties I would have still wanted to take the
job when it was offered to me by my Party.
Q. Well, now, before we discuss as many areas as
we possibly can, the question exercising the minds of most
Australians is " Where is the nation going in the
PM: It's all up to us. But the prospects are good,
providing only we stop looking over our shoulder or looking
down at our feet and look at the distant horizons. Because
no country has the same kind of opportunity as we have.
And if we've got the energy, if we've got the willpower to
go forward, of cou~ rse we will. I can give you all the
reasons if you want them. But the simple answer to your
questions is forward, certainly not backward, or marking
time.
Q. Now Prime Minister, the Gallup Poll and I'm
sure you're very conscious of 4, is last week showed that the
Government's popularity was down to something like 40 per
cent, and that your own personal popularity was down to
28 par cent, and M4r ' Whitiam's, of course, was not on a
crescendo either. But how do you feel with these Gallup
Pol. ls, and the situation as you see it with the polls as
they are at the moment?
PM: It couldn't have been taken at a more unfortunate
time for me or for my P-arty. Because we've had so many crises
of a kind over which we've had no control, that people would / 2 
IPM ( Contd.) naturally bc disappointed and theyr would reflect their
disarppointmcnt in the bia-llotfz. For examnle, we had all the
troubles with the rural industries, which we are slowly
overcoming. We had the trouL'le in the international
exchanges. We had the trouble with inflation. We had a
dozen and one other kinds of trouble of an unpredictable kind.
But I believe we can solve t1-hem all and I think when we see,
f or example, the next figures relating to unemployment,
I think they will show we've turned the corner and that we're
going forward again. In other words, the ballot was taken
at a bad time for us and I think for the future, we'll look
forward.
Q. Would you be temptted to add to your answer
there " given time" " solve the problems, given time".
And perhaps go further and say, " Well, there's no chance of
an early election now"?
PM: It depends what you mean by an early election. What
I'i~* Cdve~ n done is fix a date until I've made up my mind
what the date is likely to be. But you could say in the
immediate future, say, the next one or two months, it's out
of the question.
01. But if you mention the number of crises, as you did,
wouldn't you need until November, the normally thought of
time for an election?
PM: Maybe. But I don't want to announce a time
prematurely. Prime Minister has ever done it and I don't
want to break the rules. Because conditions can change and
can change so rapidly. Why commit yourself when it isn't
necessary?
Q. But you wolildn't like to go to the polls tomorrow?
PM: No, I would not. You're right there.
Q. When you see a Gallup Poll like that, how does
it affect a man personally, and I'm talking about you, the
man, rather than the Prime Minister?
PM: At the beginning it worried me, yes, but on this
occasion I felt that it would turn out much the Way as it has
done, so it didn't worry me greatly. Witat has preoccupied my
thinking all the way through is knowing what the conditions
were, what I had tQ do as the Prime Minister in order to
change the conditions and in order to make certain that by the
time we had held an election they had so much changed, the
people would have changed their minds too.
Q. Would you agree that the state of the economy
will be the crucial election issue?
PM: Not necessarily the crucial one, but it will
be one of the mnost important of them. And that's why, at the
recent Premiers' Conference, we took the very strong measures
we did, primarily to reduce unem~ ployment, and two, to ensure
that there was strong growth in the economy. 1 / 3 
-3
Q. Prime minister, on the questions of the economy
and inflation, is it clearer to the Government now, that last
year's Budget strategy was wrong, particularly in view of the
large hand-outs that you've just mentioned, at the Premiers'
Conference, to stimulate the economy and create employment
opportunities, and twi~ ce, the lowering of the,.-bond rate as we've
seen in recent months?
PM-. If you look at the Budget strategy as such, I don't
think you could say it was wrong. In fact it was right.
But it was predicated on the assumption that demand would grow,
particularly in the consumption area, and that assumption didn't
turn out to be corrrect. And hasn't turned out to be correct
unless you can look at certain special areas. So you'vye got to
look at it in that way. We are worried that consumption demand
hasn't increased sufficiently, butthe potential for this kind
of demand to increase is pretty great and if it grew too fast,
then, of course, we could be in difficulties, particularly if
it superimposed itself on what we call cost inflation. So the
real nroblem that we face today and Sir Henry Bolte made this
clear on Thursday that if people could get a little more
confidonce and stop worrying, if they could spend their money
sensibly, ( and they have the money to spendj, then we'd have ahealthy
economy. And we'd get it much quicker than any measures
the Governmcnt could take. I think it Would be better for the
country toc.
0. I'm just wondering, though YOu've partly
answered that question inasmuch as ynu've said that " Well,
tie did need to backtrack on our original thoughts with the
Budget". Is that a fair assumption, so that there must have
been some areas there wher-e you felt you were right, but you've
been subsequently proved to be incorrect?
PM: On the basis of the assumption that demand would
grow, yes, we have been incorrect. It hasn't gorwn to the extent
that we wanted it to, or we eXpected it to grow. That is why
ever since, well, November/ December of last year, we've
progressively taken measures in order to give the econcmy the
ability to expanC and then to provide funds through which the
States could increase their works and local government expenditures,
provide more money for the unemployment benefits. Also in the
case of rural unemployment, we've provided specific grants
there. As well, on the private level, we've now taken three
different sets of measures to give an increasing amount of
confidence to the manufacturing industries the investment
allowance, research and development allowance, and now we're
just about to establish a training school for industry that we
hope will give them a little more confidence and a little more
reason to believe that the Governme~ nt is interested in them,
and wants to hElp them overcome their problems.
Q. But can you get that figure of 130,000 unemployed
down, and down quickly, because that is really what the voter,
the average voter, looks at sometimes irrationally, perhaps?
PM: I think you're right, and this is something I've
believed all my political life. I've lived for full employment
and I'll do evarything in my power to ensure it. And that's
the approach I will take no matter what the troubles might be
or who might differ with me. That's the approach I took during
the discussions with the Premiers. I regarded it as a conference
relating to uneriplcyment more than anything else. 
Ccimtx?. r( Ed with overseas, some developing countries,
we're still high?
PM: No we are not. Thcere is no country of a
comparable kind that has a rate of unemployment that is as
low as ours.
Q. West Germany, JaPan?
PM: Well, West Germany may be a little different,
but you look at the United Kingdom
Q. Point seven in West Germany that's a growth
country.
PM: Yes, but every country wants to be a growth
country. There are very very few countries that have a record
comnarable tco ours. West Germany is an exceptica;-lcase.
Q. Also Japan, I believe 1.3 is the latest figure
th e r.
PM: Well, I can't argue with you there. But what I
can argue with you is that the United States, the United
Kingdom, Canada, and comparable types of countries, and if you
look at the comparable figures then undoubtedly ours are ever
so much better. But where-we have been good, and where the
economic management of the Government has obviously been good,
is that over the long period since Sir Robert Menzies first
came into office, our record has been exceptionally good.
Q. Prime " Ministei you must have been shocked in
your pleas for wages restraints and price increase restraints
when BHP increased their steel prices by 5 per cent, and now
the docto~ rs want to nut their fees up to as high as
for a night visit. Now, there must be something wrong somewhere
in your whole concept when these things can go on and you still
ask the unions to hold fas!' I think that was one of your owvn
expressions.
PM1: ' Show moderation". But could I put it in two ways.
First of all, we don't restrict the unions. We plead with the
Arbitration authorities to show modera.-ti-on in the increase and
the rate of increase in wages. But it is not the Arbitration
Commission alone that determines salaries and wages. In fact
they can have conciliation and arrangements outside the
Coramission. Or they can have a wages drift by direct negotiation.
So there isn't a real limit on wage increases in this country,
and the figures show that completely. insofar as prices are
concerned, usually they're the end result. They're the effect
rather than the cause. But of course we're worried about both.
But the critically important issue that you must understand
and everyone must understand, however difficult it mi,. ht be, is
that if you get wages and salary increases in excess of the
increases in production, or what they call Productivity, then
without any doubt at all., you're going to get inflation, as to
the difference be2tween the two figures. And as we have production
rising at the rate of 2 per cent, average earnings at
11 per cent, the~ n you've got an inbuilt inflationary factor.
Now we can take inflation at the rate of 2 per cent but when
it gets to 7 and 8 par cent, it really works against the best
interests of this country. 
-6
PM: I am not sure whnether we have power to fix
prices. I doubt whether we have po'wer to fix wages. But Crown
Law officers are looking at this problem for me and they'll
advise me on it later on. But I'm one of -those who doesn't
believe in fixing prices, at least over the long haul. You
can do it momentarily and then give it up. Because if you try
to fix prices, then, without any doubt at all, you create
greater inflationary pressures because you divert resources
into the wrong areas of production, you create bcttienecks, and
we all know what happened in the immediate post-war years.
Twice Governments4 tried, by referendum to get power to control
prices, and twice, rightly, the people decided that they would
reject them. I've asked for a paper Qn this, and I want to
produce a White Paper in the House, to see what can be done.
But that doesn't end the matter be-. ause I believe that what we
have to do, even though there are price rises, is to show the
people that they are justified or are not Jistified. In other
words, a public Vclations exercise is needed in the interests of
convincing the people themselves. This bthe problem we face,
and how we overcome it is still in the lap of the gods.
But at least I am making the most detailed investigations and
enquiries I can make and I want to have this fuilly debated
in the House.
Q. But all the public relations in the world won't
cover up a bad economic mistake, if we could put the BHP
price rise in that category, polittally, from BHP's point of
view you stated your attitude on it you can't overcome
it can you?
PM: No, you've done rightly when you've said there's
a political and an economic problem here. Economically,
I think that the BHP Company could have justified their rise,
though no-t at the time they made their decision and announced
it. But politically, it could not have been worse, and even
if I can put it worse, more foolish. What is needed, as I've
said in cases like this, is some kind of method by which we
can show that i~ t was justified both in a political and in an
economic sensQ. In the case of BN-P, I understand the South
Australian Prices Commissioner is looking into this problem, and
we'll see what decision he makes about it. But I agree with
you. This was a major political decision, it was a major
political mistake, and it did greet harm to me personally and
I believe to my Government, particularly as the decision was
made known immediately after a triumph at the Premier's
Conference.
Q. Prime Minister, I wonder if we could turn to
foreign affairs and this is a subject which you've had a
lot of personal experience with, having been Foreign Affairs
Minister prior to the Prime Ministership now, co~ ming on top
of the Kibel affair last week, and the suqcess Mr Nixon has had
from his visit to China last week, when is Aqstralia going to
seriously get down to the recognition of China problem? / 7 
7..
PM: We have been looking at the problem seriously
for a long time. In fact, I think we were early in the field.
And we took action of a kind to liberalise our trade with them,
and we've got no trade restrictions other than on security
grounds. We will l. et our people go there freely, and we let the
Chinese come here as freely as they want to, ajain subject only
to security grounds. We want missions to come and missions to
go from the two countries. There's little more that we have
to offer But I stated in the early clays of being the
Foreign Minister that I wanted a dialogue with the Chinese
in order to normalise our relationship our total relationship,
with them, whether in trade and cultural relationships or
whatever else it might happen to be. Axnd we appeared tobe
going pretty successfully just prior to the tiMe when China,
became a member of the United Nations. So we've done a lotr
but we've not got very much response podtive and effective
response from them. But we're still pursuing it, and in
order to try and get greater access and greater ability to
communicate with them, we are establishing a diplomatic mission
in Hong Kong, staffed by pretty senior men in the Foreign
Office. We think this is a major step forward in trying to
achieve our objectives. If I could go further. While I wa-gs
not prepared to nermit Mr Peacock as Minister for the Army to
make a orivate visit, neither i nor anyone else in the Ca inet
would, if they were invited, object to a Minister making a
Ministerial visit to Peking and to other parts of the state.
Q. Isn't the real key to the whole question you,
the Prime Minister, seeking to go to China? Isn't this the real
key to it?
PM: Well, they have never put it to me that it ould
be the real key to it.
Q. But could you Put the initiative to them?
PM: I don't know, but I could certainly let it be
known to them, as I'm letting it be known to them now. They
appeared to be willing, but they ap~ peared to be willing to
have a track delegation as well, and when they got into the
United Nations they let us know that the time was not propitious.
But if they gave an indication that they would like a
Ministerial visit, of course we would permit a Minister to go.
And I would choose one who could. properly reopresent this
country, nne who would be able, over a very broad spectrum,
be able to discuss bilateral rel. ationships between the twc
countries, and our position in the Asian theatre.
Q. But if they'd like to see you, would you go?
PM: NoW, look, don't let's get too hypothetical about
these things because I think that when you are dealing with the
Chinese in particular, you must deal with them, as I've said,
with quiet and cautious diplomacy. Don't give all your cards
away at once. We gave all our trade advantages away in one
go, and we haven't got a resoonse from them. We don't want
to put all the advantages their way. We must play this game
as anyone plays the game in diplomatic relationships, by
doing it sensibly, wisely, step by step, and knowing that
it's going to be to our advantage when we make a decision. / 8 
-8-
Q. Bt. . if Premier Chou En Lai contacted you
tomorrow and said. " Weld like you to come on a visit to
China", you'd go?
PM: I'd give it the most careful consideration. The
moment the invitation arrived, of course, I would discuss it
with my colleag4es, and I'd discuss it without any hard and
fast decisions in my mind.
Q. What's your stand on Taiwan at the moment,
Prime Minister?
PM: Our stand on Taiwan remains the same as it was
at the United Nations. We would like this country to have
the right to be independent, but we also take the view that
the resolution of the problems between Mainland China and
Taiwan is one for those two parts of China to be decided by
them. In ether words, we have tgo along with a view, and the
view that has been expressed/ CSi~ Fg Kai Shek on Taiwan claims
the Mainland. Peking claims Taiwan. In other words, both
parts on either side of the Taiwan Strait recognise that they
belong to one China, and we cap't deny that, and the Americans
haven't denied it either. But nonetheless we do feel that in
what is called a de facto way, and according to into: national
law, we feel that Taiwan has a right to be regarded, to be
treated, at international law as having jurisdiction over
Taiwan. But we can't be hard and fast on this. We've got to
be flexible in cur approaches to it, and so far as I'm concerned,
I'm determined to : e flexible too.
Q. Do you feel we have a need to take a more independent
line in Asia, and ha-e a more independent foreign policy,
independent from the United States that is?
PM: I believe we've got to take an independent line
based upon our own national interests. If they fit in with the
views or the declared policy of the United States, well and
good. If they don't, then we'll make up our own mind as
to'what we should do.
Q. Prime Minister, I'm wondering if I could put to
you you know, the Kibel affair exercised a lot of publicity
during the week throughout Australia. Do you feel that this
whole exercise did the naticn a lot of harm in its approach
to trying to get to know China better?
PM: Not a bit of harm. The Chinese are businessmen
from start to finish, and I don't think they'll take very much
notice of this kind of problem although they would make
political capital out of it if they could. But they're hard
dealers. If they feel that they will have some advantage
because of a rapprochement with us, then of course they'd
have the rapprochement. But they will be dealing with it in
the same way as we want to deal with it carefully, methodically,
and knowing step by step where their best interests lie. / 9 
9-
Q. Now, it has been said that the Federal Liberals
are bowing to the wishes at the moment unti-I I think uou
took the firm stand with the DLP last week to the wishes
of two minority parties,* namely, the Country Party and the
DLP. Now this criticism has come strongly from financial areas,
sharebroking areas, particularly on the devaluation of the
dollar Australia, one of the strongest curren, 7i'es in the
world devalued and there's been a lot of criticism in the
financial world on that. And the time that Cabinet took to
come to that decision, and the opportunity lost to revalue the
Australian dollar to parity with sterling. Now I'xp wondering
whether ycu'd like to put this down in clear terms.
PM: I can put it down in very clear terms. When
You have a major decision like this, time doesn't matter.
TAhned acgraiitniscta lltyh e imdpoolrltaarn tfwteL ~ dhgi dnis' t tod emvaakleu e. t he Wer igahptp redceicaitseiodn . o'r
revalued upwards by, I think, 6.32 per cent, So, against one
of the major currencies in the world, we went upwards and not
downwards. And the second important thing is that....
Q. But you were already up, in layman's language.
Excuse me for interrupting, but in layman's language you
were already up above that dollar anyhow,
PM: No, no, we were not at the time. At the time the
decisions were made there was a little movement yes, but not of
the order of 6.32 per cent. So what we have done officially,
is we have anpreciated against the dollar although we h-ave
depreciated against certain other currencies.
Q. But overseas countries are casting eyes on us
because of the cheapness of the dollar. Takeovers bec,-Do.
more
PM: Now that may be so, and if that is so, then it's
up to us to find other measures to control the inflow of capital.
But if you felt as I dij, after hearing all the arguments,
and I made this decision personally that 6.32 per cent was the
right place to go, and I did~ n't change my mind, and it was my
decision at the finish, my decision. it was accepted by
the rest of Cabinet....
Q. Not Mr anthony's?
PM: No, well, Mr Anthony agreed with it, yes. He did
agree with it. Everyone in Cabinet agreed with it. But I was
the person who decided on the 6.32 per cent.
Q. In terms of collective responsibility?
PM:. In terms of collective responsibility, yes.
Q. Individually they may have differed? 
10
PM: Well, I wouldn't say differences at the
finish, but in a Cabinet as. rigorous and healthy and with
different kindsof interests to represent, of course there
were differences of views expressed. But when it came to the
actual decision itself, after listening to all the arguments
by Country Party colleagues, and from others around the table,
and then at the finish when I said it's 6.32 per cent, it was
accepted. And I can give you the reasons why.
Q. Have the takeovers since then worried you,
including this latest one by Great Universal Stores of UK for
Pattersons, where you've got 80 stores throughout Australia.
It's a sizable one. And the Jaoanese investment houses
interest in Australia.
PM: Well, that is an interest, the last one is an
interest with'out any precise decision or definite decision as
to a takeover. The other, frankly, I have not had enough time
in the first two weeks of the House to interest myself in it.
But what I have done is this. I've told the Reserve Bank that
I want a complete analysis, in depth, of the problem of capital
inflow. I believe this is the right way to look at it, and I'm
getting a paper on it, and I hope to be able to introduce a
paper in the House, or if I don't the Treasurer will do it,
over the course of the next three to four weeks.
Q. But you may have to take strong action to stop
some of this capital inflow.
PM: It wouldn't be strong action. I believe some
other countries do it. Japan, for example, is doing it now.
mnd I can see no reason why we shouldn't do it. But I'm
not committing myself. I've said, and I've made it clear in
the House, I want an analysis of the pros and cons. And when
we have that, then we can make up cur mind what to do. But
what I do want to impress on you is this. We will act in our
interests as I've said before. The money that is coming in
now is fundamentally investment funds going into the development
of this country. In other words, it's building up our resources,
building up our capacity for increased development, building
up our capacity for increased employment. We've got to be
careful here, but above all, we've got to make certain that
we act in Australia's interests, and we don't let others get
too big a hold on Australian assets.
Q. Prime Minister, still on the point of the two
minor parties in the Parliament, will Australia now press on
with its " get tough" industrial policy in view of the DLP's
decision to knock back this legislation in the Senate?
PM: I'd like to explain my position about the DLP
because I think that many or most of their major objectives
such as their deep dislike of Communism it's the same as
my own, particularly when it reacts against the interest of
this country. Secondly, they want a stronger defence effort,
and so do we, and others of their policies are the same as
ours. But it is ours, and particularly my responsibility
to ensure that when a decision is made, we in the Liberal/
Country Party make it. As to the recent decisions relating to
amalgamation, I long felt and the DLP knows that I long felt,
that we would not stop this amalgamation. We had good reasons / 11 
PM ( Contrl.)
for not doing so. We had no justification for doing it.
But that doesn't mean to say that we give up taking action
where we think there are improper practices, or where the
will of the majority of the members in a trade union is being
thwarted, that we won't take action. In fact, if we find the
facts show that there has been malpractice, then of course we
will tzkc action, and I will be introducing, or the Government
will be introducirig, measures soon. And that will clearly
indicate where we stand.
Q. Even though the DLP may not let them get through
the Senate? You are prepared to face that?
PM: Well, it doesn't necessarily mean that there are
some measures that the DLP doesn't like. As for example, it
might be compuiscrv unionism. we can think about those, of
course, but -the measures that we regard as fundan~ ental we will
push on with.
Q. isuIt sounds as though you're backing down on that
PM: No. Well, you can put it that way if you want
to. But you've got to live in a world of commonsense. And
the issues that really matter, and I bE'Lieve we will make
our position on them more than abundantly clear in the next
few weeks, we'll push ahead with them.
Q. Did it worry you when the Federal President of
the Liberal Pa'rty, Mr Southey, said recently that the Liberal
Party. he virtually said that the Liberal Party couldn't be
sure of going into the next election and winning it. They
would'nt know as they went into the election what the result
would be.
PM: I thought his last statement was a good one.
P. nd as you've put it, I couldn't object to it. As you know,
we in the Liberal Party are liberal in the true sense in that
we don't try and compel people to stick to a rigid party line.
Q. I didn't really ask you whether you objected to
it, Sir, but whether it worried you.
PM: No, it didn't worry me because I know him well
enough and I've been there long enough to be able to listen to
something that's said. And even though I might think, " Oh,
I wish he'd put it a Little bit differently" or I wish he
hadn't said -it, in a few moments' time you've forgotten it,
and you might even ring and say, " Well, now look, Bob, I'd
never put it this way again. Bless your heart and soul, see if
you can put it a little more felicitously in the future".
Q. You talked earlier about thn need for public
relations. W-hat have you got planned to improve your image both
with the Party and with the electorate between now and the
elections, whenever that may be? / 12 
12
PM: Well, I think my image with the Party is pretty
good. Not only within my own Party, the political Party, butbetween
the political and the administrative wings. And we are
doing all we can. But as to the publio image public image
will depend upon performance and results. We' tarted off in
last November as you know, because you asked ' e the question
about it but we started off last November in ' asing up on
bank control. We've given them more or less complete liberty.
For example, they can lend money for housing in a way that has
never before been practicable. At the Premiers' Conference,
we took the measures that I've mentioned a few moments ago.
And if we found that they were not enough, particularly so far
as employment was concerned, which I've told you is an article
of faith with me, of course I would make a decision personally
that we have to do more.
Q. Can you just be a little more specilic and say
what figure or what percentage you want to get unemployment
down to?
PMi No, I won't.. I won't be specific there. But I'd
want to get it don to a figure that I regard as acceptable to
the Australian people and particularly acceptable to me.
Q: Which would be below 100,000?
PM: Well, don't pin me to a ficure. I think my mind
and their mind would be identical on this problem. I'd want
it down to a figure where people wouldn't be worrying and I
wouldn't be worrying either.
Q. Prime Minister, time is running out on us and
there are two very important subjects which I would like just
to discuss with you as quickly as possible. There's tremendous
criticism within the Parliament on both sides of the House on
who controls Australia's off-shore and continental shelf
what distance Australia can rightly control and where the States
can fit into this picture. NOw Mr Gorton has threatened to vote
on the other side Of the House this Session if you don't do
something about offshore legislation. There" is the question
of oil, there is the question of fishing rights. Now how
seriously do you view something being done abut this particular
area?
PM: Well, in the course of the last two weeks, I have
been discussing with the Leader of the House, and particularly
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the combined effects of
all these problems that you've mentioned. Soon there is to be
an international conference on the law of the sea and associated
problems, and he will be stating his position before he leaves
Australia to discuss them at the international conferences.
I believe, too, although I'm not perfectly certain about this
because it's a little outside my jurisdiction, and I haven't had
the time to cross-examine him ccmpletely on this, that he will
be discussing it with the States and will then be taking it into
my own Party Room. I'm just sorry that I Cant give you the
answer to this, but I'm not u, to date on it. If I'd had the
glimmer of a feeling that you might raise this, I would have
discussed it with him this morning, but I didn't do so. ./ 13 
13
Q. Are-you consc ious, though, that there is need for
something-to be done, and are you conscious of Mr Gorton's
threat? This-is the point.
PM: Yes, conscious of both and I know the Foreign
Minister and the Leader of the House are both conscious of it,
too, and they believe that i~ t can be overcome.
Q. So that all things being equal, we're likely to
see legislation in this Session?
PM: I don't know about legislation, but I believe the
way in which we are operating, or the way in which they are
operating, which they will recommend to Cabinet, will to a
considerable extent overcome our problems. But you've got
me here, and I have to say this, in an area where I'm not
fully briefed, but I hope to become briefed as soon as a
submission is presented to us.
Q. The other p~ oint I'd like to put to you is the
Constitution. The States met last week to discuss at Attorneys-
General level, a new Constitution. The present one was
described as a horse and buggy Constitution, I think, by the
State Attorney-General, Mr Reid, in Victoria. Now does the
Commonwealth see a need for a change in the present set-up-r
PM: I certainly do. The only trouble I've got is as
to the changes that m'ight be made, and the kind of Commission
we need or Parliamentary group we need in order to come to a
common view about what changes are necessary. But more and
more as I've been in the off ice of the Prime Minister, I've
wrung my hands feeling, " Heaven if ever there's an occasion
when we ought to get a change in the Constitution, this is it."
For examinle, in industrial relations, a control of associations
and organisations, control of interest rates and overall control
of the economy. I believe that we ought to have increased
powers, and I think we ought to be able to t~ Jk to the States
about it. But equally, too, do I believe that there ought to
be greater power for the States to administer, to have the
funds through which they could administer matters that could
be more satisfactorily handlad by them than by us. For
example, hospitals, schooling, roads and matters of that kind,
matters that are very close to the people, because I think they
are closer to the people than we are.
Q. You're almr-st saying taxing powers of some
description?
PM: my own view is that we really want some sort of
a commission on this before we make up our minds. I think you
should know, too, that because there hasn't been quite enough
detailed analysis of the problems of State and Commonwealth
relationships, I have agreed' to the provision of fundIs so that
a school can be established at the National University in order
to give us guidance on this problem. It will give us guidance
from an objective source rather than keep it in the political
area, the political arena, and one that will be a no1kical
football. 
14
Q. Mr Prime M~ inister, wh-. at hope do you see for the
recovery of the motor car ind1ustry?
PM: I couldn't g~ ive an immediate forecast, but if
people would have a little more confidence, then I think you
would find the motor car industry would quickly revive. Above
all, I do hope that because of the recent measures we took
to ensure that the -manufacture of small vehicles took place in
Australia we want a large Australian content in small
vehicles then I think you'll find that the production cf
motor vehicles in Australia would increase pretty quickly, and
we'll have. a very Australian content, and we'll have much
increased employmnent by Australians that's the goal I want.
Q. Prime Minister, for " This Week". thank v,-u
very much. I 



" A CURRENT AFFAIR"
Interview given by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon.
William McMahon, CH, MP, on Channel 9 television
network 8 MARCH 1972
Interviewer Michael Schildberger
Q. Good morning, Prime Minister. Firstly, * congratulations
on one year in office.
PM: Thank you.
Q. Have you found being Prime Minister very different
from the way you expected?
PM: Yes I have. It has been far more unpredictable,
and I believe, far more difficult than. I expected it to be.
But you learn to live with it and that is what I have to do.
Q. In what ways more difficult?
PM: Because you are always on the job. You can't ease
up for a moment.... . over the weekends, the holidays, when you
come back to The Lodge, when you go to bed at night, the
problems are still with you. You have to try and solve them.
Q. Prime Minister, twek~ e months ago when you became
Leader, there were-considerable divis-ions in the Party.
PM: Yes.
Q. Now it appears from the Outside that there also
divisions, perhaps even worse.
PM: No, I differ with you about " ev en worse".
I don't think that's a proper way to put it. In fact it is
not. Butcf course ybu will find differences of opinion within
a Party like mine where you have got people of a very high
order of intelligence, people of great vigour and independence
of mind, and they want to express their' views and you can' t
object to them doing it. But on the whole, I think, we are
much better off than we were a year ago.
Q. Does it concern you, though, that there are these
* possible divisions and that the public hears about them? 
PM: Yes, it concerns me, bu~ t I don't think it can be
stopped, and I think the public are wise enough to realise
that in a big Party like ours, with a large number of people
of the kind I've mentioned, I think they understand, because
they understand Australian political life.
Q. Prime Minister, now that you are heading. for another
day's work, what-is foremost in your mind at the moment?
PM: Well, we have a Party meeting this morning, and the
House meets this afternoon. And there are half a dozen motions
on the business paper of the Party, and I am thinking about
those at the moment. The most important of them is that we
will be considering some industrial legislation relating to
the civil service today. That is important and we will give
notice of a bill in the House this afternoon or tonight.
Q. Do you keep thinking about China, the economy". the
doctors at the moment?
PM: Yes, I must think of the lot of them. For the time
being I will eliminate China. because I insisted that the
Minister for Foreign Affairs takes over responsibility for the
China problem. The others I will have to watch carefully
myself, particularly the doctors.
Q. Back to your own Party at the moment, PM, do you
feel there is any feeling of despair among Parliamentarians
about the recent poll result?
PM: I think there is disappointment, yes. But not despair.
I don't think you could go that far, and in any event, I
believe when the next unemployment figures come out and
I think they will be pretty good then I think you will
see a change of mind, because you can get affected by momentary
influences.
Q. You have often been criticised for not making enough
decisions
PM: No, I don't. What I would like to have done is for
a record of all the decisions we have made over the last year
* to be published, and I am sure when they are published the
public themselves and they are the judges wnild come to the
concli~ sion E has been a remarkably good performance over the
period of a year, and a more remarkably good performance when 
you realise the difficulties we have had to face.
They are pretty good and I am proud of them.
Q. There are many who say, particularly Labor supporters,
but even strong Liberal supporters, that perhaps it
would be time for a change of Government, that you have
had a pretty good innings. Could you agree with this?
PM: No, I don't because what the people must remember,
and I believe what ever person asking questions must
remember, is that the Labor Party don't know where they
are going. If you look at.-the major issues, do they
know where they are going on induatrial lawlessness?
Mr Whitlam says, yes, they would impose fines he is
overruled' by his own Party. Do they know where they
are going on the problem of inflation? No, Mr Whitlam
says they won't, have general pricecontrol. HisoParty
overrules him. Do they know where they are going on
defence, and our wish in the Liberal Party/ Country
Party to be able to play our part in the defence of
South-East Asia? No, they would abolish National
Service and destroy our defence system and withdraw
troops from Singapore/ Malaysia. So a very wide spectrum
they are guilty of both evasion, and-1; I believe, of deceit.
But with us, our policies are positive, we've made them
kn~ own and we will keep on emphasising them. So I believe
it would be disastrous for this country. If I could
put one other aspect to you, if you look at all the
promises they are making, it must be obvious they couldn't
be fulfilled without even worse inflation thah-, we have
got today and without punishing the Australian people.
Q. Do you worry about the pressures of the DLP and the
Country ' Party?
PM: I don't think there are many pressures from the
Country Party. In fact 1.'. am sure it is exaggerated.
And in truth I get on very well with Doug Anthony and with
the rest of the Country Party members of Cabinet. So far
as the DLP is concerned, until the moment, they have been
very good friends of min'e, and the only great difficulty
I have had with them is over the amalgamation. What must 
What must be remembered is that we must make the decisions
and we make them in the nation's interest, and if we think
we are right, then of course for the moment we have to
disagree with them, and we have done so on this occasion.
But gerEally speaking, I think I could say that I am on
very good terms-wikk certainly with Vince Gair, Mr Gair,
and also with Jabk Kane.
Q. When you arrive at work, now, Mr Prime Minister, do
you worry about the crises that you might face today?
PM: No, you can't worry about them because you have got
to be-reading the papers and reading the minutes you get
from the Department and signing the letters, and you haven't
got enough time to worry.
Q. Prime Minister do you feel and I don't mean to~ be
nasty with this question that Mr Gorton is still looking
over your shoulder?
PM: I don't give it very much thought. You have got so
much to do in this business-of being a Prime Minister,
so many difficult decisions to make that you have to
concentrate on the business of Government and try and
forget the personalities. So I don't give that muich!
thought, I have to confess.
Q. Do you think Mr Gorton has become somewhatcf a
folk hero now to the public?
PM: I don't know about being a folk hero, and in fact
I won't comment on him at all. I believe that it is better
to keep personalities out of these problems and get on with
the business of government and that is exactly what I intend
to do.'
Q. Prime Miniister, on that subject, what do you believe has
been yotr great achievement during the first twelve months?
PM: I-think there have been a number. The first one that.
I had to face was the problem of the Premiers and Commonwealth/
State relationships. That was a pretty difficult problem
and I believe we have solved it. And if I could put it to
you this way as frankly as I ' can, had it not been for the 
BHP issue on price rises, the last Premiers' Conference
would have been a triumph, the only one I can remember.
Secondly, overseas we had to repair a few bridges between
the United States and ourselves and I am sure we have done it.
Third, we had the problem of trying to control industrial
lawlessness, and I think this is one of the major issues
that will face the people at the next election. Ihave said
to you that today we will be giving notice of a bill that
I think will indicate clearly where we stand., But on such
matters, other matters as education, as immigration and
a dozen and one other, if we.-can only get our message to the
public, I am sure they will realise that we have done a
tremendous amount in a year and we have done it und~ r
difficult conditions.
Any failures?
Yes, of course there have been. Nbt so much failures but
we haven't been able to achieve all our purposes. It is
best to admit that and to admit it clearly. But on the whole,
and pretty substantially our way, what we have done has been
in the interests of the nation,
You must have a particular goal for the next twe-lve
months? Yes, first of all-to get economicconditions running
along well so thiat we can cut unemployment down to an
acceptable number, so ~ aat we can give people reaso ! n to
believe that they have confidence in the future and we can
do all those things in health and in education and in -public
works and services of the kind they want and they should
get, and if we can control inflation and get control of
industrial lawlessness, we will ensure they do get it.
Prime Minister, do you have any fears for th2 next twelve
month Not fears, exactly, no. I believe our main problem is
of communication with the people, and if we can go on the
way we have been going on and putting up the performances and
* getting them recognised, then I believe the people will have
their confidence restored an~ d they will have complete
confidence in the Liberal/ Country Party and make certain
we win the next election.
Th ank you very much indeed, Prime Minister.
PM: PM: PM: 



INTERVIEW
With Laurie Oakes, Melbourne Sun News-Pictorial, Canberra.
9 March 1972
Q The first thing I would like to ask is how do you sum up
your first year as Prime Minister
PM I've found it a very difficult year, mainly because so
many events have occurred beyond the control of myself and
the Government, and they've been of such an unpredictable
kind that we have found great difficulty in achieving the
objectives we've wanted to achieve., As an example, I felt
in December that we had the problem of wage increases just
about under control. And then, to my horror there was an
increase in the State Electricity Commission wages in
Victoria, followed by other changes Which could very easily
spread to other parts of Victoria and the rest of Australia.
If this happened, and we were unable to-isolate the increasesl
it could be of great damage to the community. THis is but
one example. I could give you many others. Now we are taking
strong action to ensure that the flow-on is reduced to a
minimum, and we ask all sections of the community to exercise
moderation. In this we're giving the leadership.
Nonetheless, I feel that this is a strong economy,,
soundly based, and providing only we can reduce increases
in wages and industrial lawlessness to manageable proportions,
I think we can look forward to the future with a great deal
of satisfaction. As to the way it's affected me personally, of course I
worry about what is happening, and I happen to be in very
good physical condition and I can take the knocks pretty
well, absorb them easily, and get on with the job as best
I can.
Q Sir, You've always had a reputation for hard work;
What sort of hours do you find-you've had to work over theyears
PM I've always been a hard worker, that's true; never
as hard as I work now because I have very little time either
for myself or for that matter for my family. And all too
, frequently I have to get in touch with my Wife when she's
in Sydney with the kids, and ask her to come up as I'd
rather she was with me than at home. I work even in the car
when I' going back to The Lodge or I'm going : home in
Sydney, and I get along with probably four and a half to
five hours sleep a night.
Q You've been the centre of controversy since you took
over the job. Does that affect your family life or you
personally
PM It affects my family life to this extent that I don't
see a great deal of my children other than at weekends. As
I've said, unless I persuade my wife to come to Canberra, 
PM can'It. I don't see her anywhere as much as I should. She
thinks it's a big responsibility to be with the kids,
particularly as they're now going to school.
Q Does criticism worry you or Mrs McMahon
PM I doesn't worry her so much she's the philosophical
person, and she usually tries to calm me down by saying
' Look, you know you've had a lot of experience, and you're
doing your best. Keep going because, in time, the Australian
people will recognise the honesty of purpose, and the
effectiveness with which you are carrying out your policies.'
I think too, that I'm able to take the knocks much better now
than I was able to take them three or five years ago.
Q Do you worry about personal popularity? Is that
important Has it become so in the years
PM When I first read the reviews, it does worry me, but
I recognise that if I continue to worry about them, it will
prevent me working in a most effective way. So I'WL able
after a night's sleep to forget them, and then ask wh ' at can
I do, or what is theproper course to follow in order to-:
get the economy going again properly, particula. rly to reduce
unemployment, and to handle the problems of industrial
lawlessness.
Q What do you regard as your mistakes. Is there anything
you'd do differently if you had the year over again
PM If I had the year over again, on the economic front,
I would have taken action somewhat more quickly to increase
the prospects of the growth of demand. Too, I would like
the Parliamentary Council to have been able to give us
legislation relating jfo conciliation and arbitration and
arbitration in the Public Service field. We've been
working on the changes for a long time, but regrettably,
we are not able to get the legislation as quickly as we
want it. The next most important point is, of course, that
we want growth to go on because through growth we reduce
unemployment, and I'm sure we'll see in the February
figures to be reduced soon that there has been a quite
substantial drop in registrant for employment, but above
all, I want to be put in a position where so many of
our social policies can be carried into effect. UNTIL
we get growth, and we get control of inflation, it's
difficult to do all we want to do0 Whether it happens to be
in education, medical health and hospitals, better life,
better quality of living, and the assistance we'd want to
give the States so that they can improve the life of the
urban dweller all these things we believe in and we live
for, but regrettably we have to consider them against the
background that unless we bring inflation and industrial
lawlessness under control, then we can create gjreater
difficulties in the future, and off-set many of the things
we've already done0
But I think if you look at our record of performance,
and one day I'd like to see this published in the media,
0 0/ 3 
PM con't I think you just admit that the record has been unbelievably
good, against the background of the difficulties we've
faced.
Q What would you regard as the major achievement, on that
subject Which one is most important to you
PM I think the first major achievement was that we have
created a better feeling between the Commonwealth and the
States, and'the best example: I can give is at the last
Premiers' Conference when they went home satisfied, and
I believe it was a personal attribute to the Government.
But secondly, you should look at a large range of policy
issues that we have introduced, as for example, the
the changes we've made on education, capital assistance
to the State schools, per capita assistance to the independent
schools. THe assistance we've given in order to assist
nursing home accommodation, and the aboroigines all of
these matters, and I've said T've documented them, and
I'll give you a copy of the document that we've got where
you can isolate these issues. What we've tried to do
is get a realisation that we're one people, one group of
Australians, all trying to pull together, in the interests
of each and every one of us, rather than think that we have
conflicting groups who are fighting one another, each one
trying to get an advantage for itself, rather than to act
in common interest. THis is the sort of ideal I've set
myself and I only hope that we'll be able to do more to
restore confidence, and if we can restore confidence and
reduce the rate of wage increases, I KNOW that first we'll
get a healthy economy, and based on a economy, we'll do
so many of the thi ' ngs that the public want us to do,
and which will then be easy to do.
Q Overall then, was the year frustrating or satisfying
obviously, there's a bit ofboth
PM In many ways it's been satisfying, but in far too
many ways it's been frustrating for the reasons I gave
you when I answered the first question.
May I again, if I may, emphasise the point, it might
have been made sufficiently already, that we have an
economy that is basically sound. If there was some increase
in consumption expenditure, we would really be running along
at a pace that I can regard as satisfactory, and we wouldn't
have to worry about unemployment, and we'd be able to do
much more in order to meet the needs of the people and
the true aspirations of Australians.
Q And so you obviously blame the economy largely for the
bad problems or the low patch at the moment
PM T~ e low patch at the moment; I believe, it is the lack
on consumption demand and the impact it has had on employment
which has become an emotional issue. Associa~ elhe
with that we had other troubles such as, for example, rise
in prices of BHP which swamped the praise we received for
the Premiers' Conference, and, I must emphasise again, that
industrial lawlessness does create doubts in the minds of
people and indecision. So there is a combination of circumstances
and I wouldn't like to just isolate one and say
that the difficultiies can be related to that single item. 
There are some ' critics who say that your personal
performance has got something to do with it. Does this
worry you are you tackling that
Firstly I don't belive it because whenever a decision
has to be made, I think I'll MAKE IT. And I've had a record
of decision making and on too many occasions I've been accused
not a question of being indecisive, but a question of being
too decisive as for example when I handled the waterside
workers as the Minister for Labour with all -the changes
that were made when I was the Treasurer Somebody's got
to tell ME where I'm indecisive. But I've got to make one
comment that I do believe in teamwork, and I do believe
in permitting the Ministers to administer effectively their
own portfolio. But when the decision has to be made, I can
assure you I will make it. To give you a current example,
there has been criticism, and I believe understandable
criticism about our failure to intervene in the postal workers'
problem. I would have taken action, but I was advised by
all of the technical advisers I could collect together
there was no effective action we could take. So, we are
amending, we are putting down a Bill to amend the Act today.
THis has been our problem. And it's been with us since
Federation. '* BUt if ever there was a case of decisiveness
THIS IS ITo Similarly too, you could take the case if you
like, of the amalgamation of the three metal unions. Here
again is decisive action by us. People have to tell me in t
pretty plain terms_. if they will, where-tY17s Government has
acked decisiveness. If I could go on to another onae, dd
I matae-tThSclear not so long ago, that on the changes in
the exchange rate, it was said that we delayed, and we got
unfavourable publicity. We did delay and we did get unfavourable
publicity, but I was more concerned in making the right
decision and after I had heard the arguments from all members
of Cabinet, I came down strongly in favour of appreciating
against the US$ by 6.32%. I stuck to tha. t decision until the
end and that decision was accepted by CAbinet. AND it was the
right decision 0 So I'd like people to tell me where I haven't
made decisions, then I'd be able to argue with them and
naturally enough if theywere right, of course I'd accept the
fact that they're right, and I think that you can take it fr T
my answers in the House, and my answers on television, that
I never hesitate to say what I think is the truth even though
I believe frequently it can lead to criticism of myself. But
I believe the truth is of paramount importance.
THe GAllup Poll shows the Government down to 40% of the
vote. How do you plan to reverse this between now and the
election We started in November to stimulate the economy by easing
up on bank control to permit relative freedom on the part of
the banks to be able to lend. o At the Pr'emiers' Conference
we gave a big stimulus to the economy, to try to give confidence
to the manufacturers by restoring the investment allowance and
then subsequently giving them a renewal of the research and
development allowance. In other words, trying to prove to
them that they were not forgotten We recognise that manufacturers
have to play a very big part not only in increasing opportunities
for employment, but I believe, in creating conditions of
confidence as well. We have started, and I make it more than
9 9 9) 
clear that if we found that more had to be done, we wouldn't
hesitate to take further action, and this is the view of the
Treasurer and my own view.
Q What about the DLPO THey've been making increasingly
hostile sta~ tements. Are you doing anything ' to get them back
on side?
PM The DLP has view which are largely the same as the
Governments on many aspe-cts of policy , particularly defence,
Our hostility to communism, the way in which our left-wing
unions can create problems for industry and have caused more
strikes than is tolerable. And my relationship with them until
recently have been particularly good . There was one difference
of opinion and that is the amalgamation of the three unions.
Mr Lynch has explained the Government position which is shared
by the great mass of my own Party, and I hope of course to be
able to indicate to them where we stand on this one issue that
really divides us because we are just as worried as they are
about the power of the-left= wing unions and we are considering
changes to the Act which will be announced by the -Minister for
Labour and National Service which should show the DLP that
our feelings about the problems are much the same as theirs
are Where we differ is not in objectives, but in means of
achieving those objectives.
Q I notice somewhere this morning that you met Senator
Gair last night0 Was that part of this arrangement?
PM No, I had to see him over the Bill that is to be introduced
today0 And we did discuss, but not in a profound nor in-depth
way the difference of opinion between the two of us on the
matter of amalgamation, and the way we looked at the future0
Q If you'd known a year ago what you know now, would you
still have wanted the job
PM Yes I would0 I believe that everyone, particOdlarly
a person in a position like my own, should be prepared to
dedicate himself to the interests of the nation. I think I've
done that, and even though it's difficult, frustrating, and
deprives you of the ability to have a proper family life, I
still would want to accept the position, and do the best I
could.
Q Prime Minister, what do you predict for the next year
PM For the whole of this year
Q For ihe next twelve months
PM I think the biggest problem we face is one of cominunicatin,
in trying to show the people what we have done, and to be able
to answer the various kinds of criticism0 So I'm looking at
ways and means of getting a better communication. I was able
to go on television on Sunday night, and I believe that had a
good impact over a very wide area0 I'~ m now considering the
quesiton of radio interviews once a fortnight or once every 
three weeks, I haverit made up my mind yet, so that I can go
to the people with sort of armchair talks and to be able to
explain in--depth policy, and to be able to answer publicly
why we've taken certain action and answer any criticism that
there might be. I think that if the people know the reasons
they would be satisfied, and quickly our popularity will be'
restored. And I want all my colleagues in the Ministry, in
the Cabinet and in ' the Party room to join with me in this
massive effort because I'm sure we can provide the right sort
of Government I believe, that the Labor Party, dominated as
it is by a Federal Executive and an ALC Conference, will be
dangerous for us and deprive the Australian people
of the freedoms that they treasure and that we in the Liberal/
Country Party treasure too. 



FOR PRESSW P-IAs No 12f/ 1972
COMMONWEULTH FINAUC TAL ASSISTANCE
FOR WEST ATYSTRALIAN STATE SHIPPI-N( SEIRVICP TO DARWIN
Statement by the Prime 14Minister, the-Rt Hon. William lIcMahon, CPS 1PP
The Comiionwealth has agreed to provide an interest-free
non-re payable canita3. grant of r milion to the Western Australian
Government for the purchase of a shin to service the D) arwin trade.
T7he romronileath accepts this nrovision of assistance
as a special case justified by tb-: imortance of the Darwin trade to
lWestern Australia, and by the importance to the Northern Territory of
tra4 3 arrangements 1ith Western Australian sunpliers. The trade has
been built up over sorme yiars and encouraged byv the former Wcqtern
Australian Coverrnment. If this trarie were to cease, it would be
replaced in the n-orth by imnorts, and erplryment in VTeTstern Australian
industries, suchi as the ti~ mber Aidustry of the qouth--West, would
suffer. The orovision of the grant w3ill enisure the continuance
of' the regular eekly srip! inq service to Darorj. n. Te new ship will
permriit -more efficient ope: ations and the continuation of the service
will holn to restrain increases in transoortation costs to the
N~ cthern Territory which might oth. erwise occur.
CANBERR 9 March 1P72 



FOR PRESS: P. J' 11. No. 29/ 1972
VISIT OF MR. MARSHALL GREEN
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon William McMahon, CH, MP
The visit to Australia by Mr. Marshall Green has
provided the opportunity to discuss in a very full and frank way
the results of President Nixon's visit to the People' Republic of
China. Mr. Green emphasised that United States policy in
Asia remained the same today as it had been prior to thie President's
visit, and that United States support for its treaty allies in the
region remained as firm as previously.
No secret commitments had been enteredl into in Peking
and there were no negotiations which compromised the basic
interests of United States allies in the Pacific.
The Australian Government welcomos these assurances.
After hearing Dt. Marshall Green, there could be no
doubt that the President's visit has opened up new prospects
for a just and secure peace in our region.
CANBERRA, March, 1972. 



PRIME MINISTER
REGIONAL DAILIES ASSOCIATION DIVINER
CANBERRA, A. C. T. IIARCH, 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon CHMP.
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I feel a little like Daniel as the guest of the
regional lions. Mostly, I come face to face with the papers in
the morning an hour or so before breakfast. On this occasion,
it is a pleasure to meet you at the end of the day, and in pretty
distinguished company. I know you have no intention of spoiling
m y dinner as you sometimes spoil my breakfast.
As I see it, 11r. President, the reqional dailies are
to the Metropolitan press what local Government is to State
Government. They are closest to the people. And like their
Metropolitan brothers, they are free and independently minded, very
independently minded.
We in Canberra respect the regional papers for the
qualities they have. But please don't misunderstand me, I don't
agree with everything you print, far from it.
Over the years, experience has tempered my judgemient
and I am now a fatalist where newspapers are concerned. Frc'm my
experience, a reply to a newspaper article resermbles the t Dnt of
Hercules to crop the Hydra. There isn't t"-he slightest chance of
ultimate success. But I am an optimist too, and tonight I want to
talk a little about why we are going to win the next election.
We have been through a difficult economic period. There
are still plenty of difficulties around. But I can see daylight
and so can many of the people around me. Not only in the Government,
but in large sections of business and industry where the man who
spots the trend early qets the advantage as the recovery gathers
momentum. II
believe that as we generate more
confidence, Lnd we in Australia have greater reason for confidence
and future prospects than most other countries I know, if we can
have less industrial trouble and less wage and price movements, we
can get smoothly into ton gear again. Here the press ha-r a vital,
indeed critical, role. / 2 
You are professional newspaper people, and you have
every right to say you are the best judges of what is news.
What I can do is to make an appeal for a place for good news
alongside the bad to make an appeal for some priority for
matters of substance over trivia.
Confidence has a psychological basis and you cannot
beat this by Government edict and action alone. It needs to be
attacked on a broad front with the intelligent understanding and
support of the Press. People do believe what they read in
newspapers and that is why those of you who belong to the
honourable profession of journalism have a great trust to keep.
You are a spur to governments and a voice for the people.
It is a year since I became Prime Minister and I
confess it has been a tough year, tougher than I thought it would
be. We have faced up to taking unpopular measures. We have
accepted our responsibility to hold firm. We have set ourselves
unmistakably against the social and economic evil of excessive
inflation. And now we are finding some satisfaction in seeing
the right trends beginning to emerge.
That is not my opinion alone. Remember what Mr
Gibbs, the Managing Director of GMH said only this week about the
upturn in the economy. His company is going to put on about as
many men as it laid off in recent months. Two thousand are going
back on the payroll. Mr Gibbs anticipates more people will be
buying cars in the next few months as the stimulus measures
announced at the Premiers' Conference work through. It is a
hardheaded business assessment based on experience, facts and
estimates. We support it.
Then there are signs, too, that the rate of increase
in savings bank deposits is starting to slow down. As people get
more confidence, they will be spending more. These are facts,
not wishful thinking. We heard nothing, I note, from the Leader of the
Opposition this week about his famous prediction in January that
we were going to see a further 50,000 people out of work in
three months' time. Well, all I can say is that two months ha-e
gone by and in the first of those months, unemployment fell by
15,000. Unemployment is on the way down. And we can be sure that
in this month of March there will be a further improvement.
Mr Whitlam now seems to be whispering his predictions.
There has been a similar deafening silence on this
subject from Mr Clyde Cameron who went even further out on a
limb. He forecast 200,000 out of work. I ' now it is hard to
believe. It was a completely irresponsible fear-promoting
exercise that got about as far as Mr Cameron's other short-lived
attempt at getting the Labor Party to agree on its industrial
policy. His efforts as sha-low Minister for La -ur have not
exactly been crowned with success.
The Labor Party is very fond of substituting wishes
for predictions and speculations for certainties. We are going
to see a lot more of it this year. When you do, take a moment
to remember those predictions of theirs about unemployment. / 3 
3
But let us turn from their wishful predictions to
more of the facts as we know them today.
The economy is healthy and growing
Look at the country. What a depressing outlook it was
a year ago! The bottom had fallen out of wool, it
seemed, and rural unemployment was high. Now wool and
other commo . r-ity prices have got better and the rural
depression is lifting.
tany companies are showing better results and the stock
market is more buoyant, without the previous unhealthy
sneculative elements.
Overseas trade is healthy. Our reserves position is
strong.
Interest rates are down. Money is available for
investment. These are ingredients for success. But the fight
against inflation must go on. As we have said often, the remedy
lies in wage restraint together with increased productivity.
Before the year is out, we will be going to the polls.
I will say I believe we will win, and win on our mcrits. We will
fight and win on the vital issues of the day on the economy
defence social welfare national development.
I do not yet want to nominate a priority of issues.
They are all very important. We will show how wide the gulf is
between the Government Parties and Labor on issues like imnigration,
industrial lawlessness and thE-ANZUS Treaty.
Only yesterday, the Presidential envoy, Mr Marshall
Green, re-emphasised the closeness of the trust which has been
renewed between ourselves and the United States. Australia is
a close friend with whom we share our confidences to a degree we
do with no-one else, uas how Mr Green put it, on arrival in Sydney.
We will also show how fundamentally cur -hilosophies
differ ours the philosephy of individual rights and free
enterprise theirs Labor's the dominance and supervision of
the state. Who governs this country? The elected representatives?
Or a small band largely nominated and dominated by the Left Wing
Unions? That is another major issue.
We all know industrial lawlessness took the edge off
the reduction in actual unemployment last month. And it remains a
constant threat to the pick-up in the economy to whieh I have just
referred. / 4 
A
I note what Mr Hawke has had to say about industrial
action in an election year. He wont-hold off to help his political
friends, as the Labor Executive meeting showed. He is a law unto
himself in these matters. He has encouraged certain unions to go
in for non-industrial strikes.
We have already had enough industrial strikes for
non-industrial reasons. The public is sick of them. Only the
noisy minority with motives of their own support them. They
climb on any lawless bandwaggon that comes along. Some of the
Left-Wing unions go beyond the bounds of all reason and commonsense.
There are other issues. We will show we are real
federalists with true respect for the rights of the States. We
will remind Australians that our commitment to the sanctity of
our foreign relations is firm, and that we will not, like Labor,
brush aside the arrangements we have in Asia and the Pacific.
At the same time, we will show that we can progress
step by step towards more normal arrangements with foreign
powers having political philosophies alien to ours.
These are some of tho issues to be argued this year.
We will do so against a background of an impressive record of
constructive legislation.
We have done a lot in a year despite economic
difficulties difficulties of a type which hc-V taxed the best
economic managers in the Western world. The list is available.
I want to mention just three examples which show conclusively
I have not hesitated to grasp the nettle.
First; Trade union amalgamations. We are determined
to stick to our policy not to interfere, despite apparent political
advantages. Second The doctors. We did not hesitate to aopoint
the Arbitrator once it became clear that negotiation was not going
to settle the common fee issue in New South Wales.
And third The Public Service unions. I was accused
of political cowardice for not acting in the postal workers disputes.
For the first time since Federation, we have now introduced
reasonable legislation which can, if necessary, be used in such
situations. Does anyone seriously suggest that such actions taken
in an election year are those of an indecisive Government?
Does it also show indecision to stand un and state our belief that
wage increases must be curbed to control inflation and then to
back up our statements by intervervening in every mator wage
hearing? What rubbish! If our critics can't come up with
something better than that, we won't have to worry much about which
way the votes will go.. 
In the samne way, the Parliamecnt has recently been
misu~ sed by time-waiting and q * uite childish arguments over the
interpretation of one word or another. Some may say that is fair
game in politics, but it reflects no credit on the Opposition or
dignity on the Parliament. op~ position membe-rs ought to have
more resp'ect for themselves as Parliamentarians than to operate
as a " jeer squad" In the House.
I also emphatically reject Labor's recent pathetic
and transparent manoeuvres to show some contrived differences
within the Ministry and the Party. It was ridiculous to suggest
a rift between the Treasurer and myself because he gave a pa * per
to the Taxpayers' Association meeting that I hadn't read first.
There was no earthly reason why he should. He was not committing
the Government. I don't read advance conics of every speech
responsible Ministers make.
In the Party room, as in the Cabinet room, I encourage
the freest discussion. That's the Liberal way. We stand for the
rights and freedoros of the individual. Not like the straightjacket
policy fastened on the Parliamentary Labor Party by its
outside Federal Conference.
The Coaliti-Pn, too, is as solid as a rock. My colleague,
the Daputy Prime iMinister, who is at this table tonight will, I
am sure, ag~ ree with that.
He will also agree that together we are going to win
the election. 



PM's NO 3n/ 1972
CORAL SEA GUEST
Statement by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William McMahon, CHII., M. P.
Astronaut John L. Swigert will come to Australia for the
Coral Sea Week celebrations this year.
Mr Swigert's official itinerary will begin in Sydney onr.
Monday 1 May, and from there he will visit Canberra-Adelaide,
Melbourne and Hobart in that order. He is scheduled to leave
Australia on Sunday 7 May.
CANBERRA March 1972
FOR PPESS: 



IAS TRALIAN MININC IND) USTRY C. OUNC IL
Speech by the mime Minis-ter, The Rt Hon. W-illiam Mc?' ahon, M. P.
Mr Prbident, Distinguished Guests and Gentlemen,
This occasion offers both to my Government and to your Council,
the chance to exchange views at first hand. The establishment of
the Ki~ ning Industry Council just five years ago showed the importance
you attach t1-o the communication of your views and trends in your
industry to the National Government here in Canberra.
For our part, we have for a considerable time now conducted
regular consultations at the Cabinet level with the organisations
representing the major groups in the economy. Your Council has become
a more important part of these regular economic consultations in recent
years, reflecting the dramatic increase in its conttbution to the
national economy. We consider this direct consultation1 to be an
important two-way stream of communication between the Government and
other component parts of the economy. We want it to continue and
develop, and I am sure you do too. You know the figures relating
to the Mining Industry's contribution to the nation just as well as
I do. Nonetheless, these figures need emphasis to a much wider
audience. Since the mid-sixties the Mining Industry in Aus; tralia
has trebledits performance in both total production and in its share
of our export income. In 1965, the " ex an" value of mineral
production was worth $ 542 million. By 1971, the figure was
$ 1600 million. In 1965, minerals and metals brought us in about
$ 300 million in export income. For 1970-71, the industry earned
$ 1250 million overseas or about 29 per cent of total exports.
These are impressive, and I am told that on present indications,
there could be a further trebling of export earnings from mining and
metals during the seventies to reach $ 3,500 million by 1980. Tib
upsurge in mining activity and production of minerals which those
figures describe has had the most significant effects on the growth
and progress of this nation. Our ' jpattern of trade was transformed
as the export contribution of minerals firstly overtook 1969
wool, and has since continued to overtake the contribution of the
whole of our other rural exports. T~ Iere are those who assert for
example that without the minerals boomt of the late sixties and early
seventies, Australia could have been faced with s _ vece balance of
payments problems.
That is the external picture. At home, there has been a matching
development boom accompanying the great new m~ mmaq projects and
involving new ports, hundreds of miles of new railway lines, and more
than a dozen new towns have been created in remote parts of our
continent. 
It is clear from this that the mining industry has contributed
very substantially to the broadening and diversification of the economy.
But in more recent times, your industry has, along with other important
sectors of the economy, suffered from the effects of the world currency
realignmentheoThe Government has been concerned at the effects of this
downturn in/ rate of development of world trade, and in particular, the
effects of mineral production and mineral exports. On the production
side, cost increases, falling demand and prices and currency realignment
have had their effect on iron ore, coal, copper and lead. On the export
side, we have seen the requests by* Companies to reduce below
the quantities specified in contracts, the tonnages of iron ore and
copper for delivery to their mills and smellfrs,.
Now I said the Government was concerned about this situation and
it may be asked,' well, what has the Government done Ve have taken
a number of important initiatives, both to assist the major exporting
industries generally and the mining industry in particular. Firstly,
there was the question of the revaluation of the Australian dollar.
In terms of pure monetary theory there could, of course, have been a
full appreciation to the'dia.-. point of 8.57 per cent in the Australian
dollar as against the American dollar. In reality, there was a
situation where major mineral contracts were affected to the extent
of approximately $ 8 million for each per centage point movement in
the appreai-atioi_ of the Australian dollar; where our other primary
industries faced difficulties in competition with other nations which
had already devalued and where the success of the manufactured
exports drive could have been affected. Above all, there was the
impact on confidence in the community generally to be considered. At
the time, confidence was not particularly strong, although I now
believe that with fresh signs of the recovery showing up, confidence
is being restored.
That brings me to the second point. One of the stimulus measures
we announced at the recent Premiers' Conference was the re-instatement
of the investment allowance which was mentioned so generously here
earlier tonight. As I am sure you are well aware, the Government is
keen to see a greater degree of processing of our minerals, especially
where this is economic and where it represents a rational use of
resources. We have assisted this aim in a number of ways. There is
the re-instatement of the investment allowance, which we believe will
prove to be a big help to the mining industry in establishing
processing and manufacturing plant. There is also our undertaking to
provide about $ 80 million to the Queensland Government for the Gladstone
power station of 1100 megawatts. We regard the establishment of this
large-scale source of power as a catalyst for the further expansion
of mineral processing at Gladstone. We stand ready to provide this
finance, so long as the conditions stipulated are met.
The third area of assistance has been in the decision to continue
the financial assistance provided under the industrial research and
development grants scheme for a further five year period from July.
It is estimated that expenditure on this scheme, which is designed to
encourage manufacturing and mining companies in Australia to increase
the-i research and development spending, will be $ 60 million for the
first five year VeriOd which began in 1967.
Our fourth recent initiative relating to the mining industry
concerned the Japanese requests for a cutback in iron and copper
deliveries which I have already mentioned. The Minister for Tnational
Development made representations to the Japanese Government tc ensure
that our companies were treated no less favourably than companies from
other countries in the negotiations over these requests. 
There are, of course, other recent Government decisions and
actions bearing directly on the mining industry. The Government is
looking at the development of our Uranium resources with a view to
achieving the maximum benefit from these resources to Australia. There
may well be benefits in co-ordinated development.
There have already been discussions between Commonwealth and
State officials and the industry on the production and marketing of
Uranium. We recently decided to provide a non-repayable capital grant
of $ 2.5 million to Western Australia for the provision of a new ship
which will help restrain the growth of transport costs in areas where
many major mining projects are located.
I notice that your council has this afternoon released a proposed
five-point mining and conservation plan for consideration by
Governments, both Federal and State. We are all aware of the growing
interest in conservation and environment protection and it is encouraging
to see a major industry group taking a lead to provide positive
proposals. It is a responsible way to approach this question.
Although, the States have the major responsibility in this area, I
know your proposals will be most carefully considered. We are, as
you know, in the process of forming a National Environment Council
The other questbn I would like to mention to you tonight
concerns our policy on overseas investment whichhas been the subject
of some comment recently. First, I must say that overseas capital
has had a great cal to do over the years with the expansion of our
economy and the technological advancement of our industry. It has
provided resources additional to those we have raised fromour domestic
capital markets, and in particular has been highly important in
sustaining our large-scale migration programme and, of course, it
brings with it not only capital resources but also advanced technology,
managerial skills and market connections. It is noteworthy that our
largest mining companies are managed by Australians, men who have a
close interest in the development of this nation.
The other side of this large contribution to our development
has been a significant measure of foreign ownership and control of
our company assets. It has long been the Government's aim to ensure
that Australians have the opportunity to participate in these foreign
operations and I am sure most foreign corporations respect this
attitude. Again, we have stood ready to prevent -specific takeovers
of Australian-controlled companies if such takeovers are seen as
against the national interest. Constraints under our guide lines have
been placed on foreign companies borrowing here, both to conserve
our domestic capital resources and to provide an additonal incentive
to overseas companies to offer equity participation to Australian
interests. There are, too, other causes of potential conflict arising out
of capital inflow. These will be thoroughly investigated in a
document being prepared by the Treasury, and nearing completion.
The very substantial level of inflow in the last two years or so
has created special problems for the successful pursuit of our
national monetary policies. THis issue is al. o being closely examined.
I have the personal belief that as time proceeds, Australians
should undertake more investment opportunities overseas, and particularly
in the Asian and Pacific region. Direct investment overseas,
which for most practical purposes is not restricted,'. has in fact
been increasing in recent years as Australian companies have been
establishing nterprises in many countries overseas, particularly in
/ 4. 
New Zealand, South-East Asia and the Pacific, but also in the United
Kingdom, the United States and elsewhere. We will be looking in
particular, at the sharp increase which has recently occurred in the
level of borrowing overseas and its impact on liquidity whether by
Australian-owned or foreign-owned companies in Australia, which has
contributed to the high level of capital inflow. It could be, for
example, that increased borrowings fromlocal sources would help ease ' hany
problems of excess liquidity arising from a level of inflow, and
contribute to greater stability of our domestic economy
In any review of this or other aspects of this important matter
the Government would, of course, take all factors into consideration,
including our over-riding wish to see the continued stable growth
and development of the Australian economy. Many Australian companies
have shown that they have the technical expertise and managerial
knowhow to set up successful ventures abroad. Although the trend has
been upwards in recent years the amounts involved have heen relatively
small. They hive averaged some $ 60 million annually over the past
years or so. I. sincerelyhope that the trends of recent years will
improve. The Treasury at present has in hand an in-depth study on the
whole subject of foreign investment in Australia. I dc not wish in
any way to forecast what, if any, 9hanges in the Government's policy
might eventuate as a result of its consideration of this study. I
can, however, say that one of the aspects we will be looking at will
be whether the very high level of capital inflow we have experienced
over the past couple of years poses difficulties for the domestic
management of the economy and, if so, whether there is need for a
change in policies to forestall any danger of that kind.
We believe the balance of the foreign contribution to our
development has, over the years, been very much in our favour.
Nevertheless, should it be demonstrated that in some measure the
volume and form of the inflow of capital are not, in fact, enhancing
the performance of the economy, we will, of course, review our policies
and announce them in clear and understandable terms. But we will do
so on the basis of fact and detailed analysis and against the philosophy
that what we do will be in the best interests of this country.
CANBERRA March 1972 



FOR PRE~ SS PM. No. 31/ 1972
TERRITORIAL SEA AND CONTINENTAL SHELF BILL 1970
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William M~ cMahon, CH, MP
The Territorial Sea and Continental Shelf Bill
1970 was discussed at the normal weekly meeting of the joint
Government Parties. Three aspects of the Bill were discus-sed:
The progress made between the Commonwealth and the
States relating to the matters to be discussed
at the United Nations Law of the Sea Conference,
possibly in 1973.
The report of the Senate Select Committee on
Offshore Petroleum Resources. Some of the
conclusions of the Select Committee dealing
solely with the petroleum legislation were
discussed. These have been referred to the
Standing Committee of the Australian Minerals
Council and will be on the agenda for the
Council's next meeting.
The Constitutional aspects which were raised in the
Senate Committee report. These will be referred
to the next meeting of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General by the Commonwealth Attorney-
General. The Prime minister has written to State Premiers
on the Senate Select Committee report and the U~ N Conference on
the Law of the C'ea. He indicated arrangements which were in
hand or available for full discussion and consultation on these
matters. After lengthy discussion in which varying views were
expressed, the parties agreed it was important to proceed on
these lines of consultation with the States in an endeavour to
resolve the Constitutional problems as early as practicable.
In the meantime, no action will be taken on the Bill.
There was a general desire to ensure that the problem
of Constitutional jurisdiction be resolved, particularly in view
of its wide-ranging implications and the many matters which arise
in this field, but it was also the general desire that this should
be resolved by conzu2I. tation and co-operation.
CANBERRA,
29 March 1972 



FOR PRESS; P. M. No 32/ 1972
HIGH COURT BUILDING
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon
M. P.
The Government has decided on the siting of the
High Court building in Canberra.
Thr-Pri. me MinisLi: said today that it had been
decided that the High Court building would stand within an
area lying to the north of the Administration Building, in
the Parliamentary Triangle.
The Government had also approved the holding of
an architectural competition to establish the design of the
building. No approval had been given for construction to
proceed, pending the establishment of a firm design and cost
estimate for the Court building, Mr. McMahon said.
CANBERRA, 4 April, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: PM. Nd 33/ 1972.
AUSTRALIAN ENVIRONMIENT COUNCIL MEETING
Statement by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William
McMahon, C. H. M. P.
The Prime Minister said today he welcomed the first formal
meeting of the Australian Environment Council as evidence of a
co-ordinated nationwide approach to the problems of improving and
protecting the environment and the management of pollution throughout
Australia. The Council, which comrrises Commonwealth and State
ministers resonsible for environmental matters, meets in Sydney
tomorrow. Mr. McMahon 3aid that Commonwealth/ State co-operation was
essential to the effective solution of problems associated with the
environment. The Commonwealth wanted to facilitate co-operation and
ensure a common approach which was essential to effective control and
protection measures. He said the Commonwealth had now decided to establish its
own Commonwealth Advisory Committee on the Environment. A~ full
statement covering the function and persohnel of this new advisory
body would soon be made by the Minister for The Environment, Aborigines
and The Arts, Mr. Howson.
The Prime Minister said a major share of the responsibility
for the environment within State boundaries lay with State and local
governments and there were already encouraging signs of success.
The States were already showing their concern and their
capability through the establishment of new ministries and authorities
and the implementing of stronger control measures.
Mr. McMahon also emphasised that Government activities
needed to be supplemented by the work of private organisations and
companies if anti-pollution and environmental protection efforts were
to succeed.
CANBERRA, 6 April, 1972. 



33
PRESS BRIEFING
CONCLUSION OF MEETING OF LIBERAL PARTY JOINT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FEDERAL POLICY 7 APRIL 1972
PM: Gentlemenk' I think you know that over the last few days
there has been some publicity about the meeting of the
Standing Committee on Federal Policy which is that section
of the Organisation, or that Policy Group within the
Organisation, that can make recommendations to the
Government about matters which it feels should be taken
into consideration, and if thought desirable, implemented
by the Government.
Under no circumstances can they do more than put a
recommendation to us and certainly can't tell us what
we should do. And consequently, whatever I say, therefore,
must be considered against that background.
We have had two meetings already: Each one extending over
very nearly two days, that's four days in total.
And we're decided that unlike most-cases in the past, that
it would be wise if I, as the Chairman of the Committee,
gave you a general survey of the kind of subject we
discussed, and how we intend to handle them in the future.
As to the subjects that-we've discussed, there are
about fourteen.
In each case, a paper has been prepared and they've been
particularly well prepared, and have dealt with the subject
in depth, both from a philosophic point of view, and from
the point of view of making concrete recommendations.
Each one of the submission or papers, together with the
recommendations, necessarily have to go to me as the
PRIME Minister, and then on to either the Minister
primarily concerned, or to the Cabinet. In most cases
I think they'll go to the Cabinet.
And subsequent to that they will then be announced
when the decision has been made, as part of the Government
policy. The Standing Committee decided that we should not tryan
hoard acisiong following the recommendations, but
we should be ready at all times to make decisions either
prior to the rising of the House and
announce them prior to the rising of the House, and
during the period of the Budget, or if thought desirable,
to keep the decisions for policies.,
But, as they believe public opinion is best served by
making the decisions at the most appropriate time, they've
recommended to the Government that we shouldn't be hesitant
in letting the public know what we think and why we think
it. 
PM: I don't know whether you'd like me to read out the
fourteen subjects to you, but I can do that if you
want it.
Yes please.
PM: There are such matters as the ecnm and which way
we should proceed in ensuring a sensible rate of growth.
Development, defence, foreign affairs, the quality of
life, urban development, immigration, arbitration and
industrial law, the rural of law, national health,
national goals, education, social welfare, and rural
matters. In particular today, we dealt$ with defence, national
goals, education, urban development, and rural matters.
Some of the others have been dealt with before and we
have about three, including social welfare and social
services, that will have to be dealt with the next time
we meet.
And we'll be meeting again on the 21st April.,
I personally believe they* are some of the best papers
that we have had prepared, and they've done by groups
of members of the Liberal Party, drawn from the
Parliamentary Party, including the Cabinet and Ministry,
members of the Organisa~ ion, and the Officials, particularly
the Secretaries, and the Research officer such as Graham
Starr, Federal Secretariat, and Jim Carleton from N. S. W.,
together with today, the new Secretary from Victoria.
There was, I believe, the fullest discussion of these
problems, and I think the range of the subjects indicate
pretty clearly what they see, not only as subjects which
are of great national importance, but subjects that they
believe a politically high in the order of priorities.
And therefore they wanted to drive home their message
of what they think has to be done in order to create
the proper atmosphere and psychology in which we can
start to develope an election programme, an electi-oh
policy. I think that's about all I can say to you as to what's
happened.
IQ. That's all on the record?
PM: All that is on the record.
Q. Did you discuss the national superannuation plan,
and decide to defer it
PM: We had that on the paper to be discussed today,
but we didn't reach it, and it's put down as the first
subject for discussion, amongst other social welfare
matters, for the next meeting of the Standing Committee
on Policy and the Federal Executive immediately after. / 3 
3.7/
Q. Sir, most of these things presumably, wil 1 have
to be translated into Government policy. National
goals is a philosophical thing Can you tell -us what
deicisions were made in that area
PM: No, I can't, because for most of them, there are
so many of them, they will, I believe, each one
of them, have to be put to the Government. Because for
the most part they deal with social issues: And social
issues of a kind that are of increasing importance in
a public relations sense, and we did decide that
each one of them would have to go to Cabinet for decision.
Q. ( An you tell us some of the recommendations, Sir
PM: No, I can't.
Q. Sir, what's the objection of the Liberal Party
telling us what their policies are
PM: The reason is, and this one of the other papers
that I wasn't going to mention, showing the differences
between the Liberal and Country Parties and the!
Opposition. The simple fact is that in our case they
can ONLY make a recommendation. They can-do no more,
adastfrere are Ministers present on the Standing
Committee on Federal policy, we don't want to put ourselves
in the position where that Committee can make
recommendations which subsequently might not be accepted
by Cabinet as a whole, or might not be regarded as
satisfactory for the Government, which means the
Coalition Parites.
Q But as the Leader of the Liberal Party, Sir,
don't you feel that the Australian public are entitled
to know what the Liberal Party policy is, before it
gets into power?
PM: No, I do not. I believe that when we are
looking at ' policy decisions, we must look at policy
decisions which mean something, and which will be
carried into effect. It is no use flying a kite wheni
there is a possibility that it might not be accepted,
because I think people want predictability and certainty.
That is the reason why we don't announce the recommendations,
and I emphasise again, they are recommendations,
Q. When will Oabinet consider these recommendations?
PM: I can't tell you yet. We've got so much on our
plate at the moment, and I've got to now convert these
into Cabinet documents. that I couldn't give you. But
we will try and get them out as and when we think it is
appropriate and as soon as we can. / 4 
Q. Will it be a matter of weeks or months
PM: I couldn't give you a clue.
Q. At the meeting today, did they discuss the
standing of the Government in the cormmunity
PM: No, they didn't.
Q. Sir to'get an idea of the level on which some
of the discussions took place, to pin you down
the discussion on inimig ration. Did that evolve around
a new immi(; tion policy for the Government, unless you
already have one, or how you can exploit Labor's policy
PM: Mainly, it centered round the paper that was
delivered by the Minister for Immigration, over in
Western Australia, an explanation of what it involved,
and particularly precautions that were necessary that
there could be no possibility of the idea of racism
entering into considerion of our policies.
Q. But this was the speech in which he talked about
racism ? 0
PM: Mfe made it abundantly clear that there was no
racism in our policies.
Q WHich Minister for Immigration, Dr. Forbes
PM: Dr. Forbes.
Q It would appear therefore, that your discussion
on immigration was on status quo. Dr. Forbes did not
put forward any new
PM: I won't go any further than that because now
you are starting to cross-examine me on an aspect that
I'm not prepared to be cross-examined on . I said that
we are here to give you an outline of what happened at
the Standing Committee on Federal Policy, and whatever
whaasd dtoi sguoc ssteod , a wMaisn isdtiesrc usosr edt o onCA btihme-etb, a ckagnrd outnhda t thIa t woiutld
not elaborate fully on those untill the Minister or
Cabinethad considered it.
Q. You'd said it was based on Dr. Forbbs paper......
PM:-' Based upon' is the word I used.
Q. And Dr. Forbes' paper did not advance policy
PM: I didn't say that at all, I eaid ' based upon'.
Q. Sir,-it's been suggested that there will be
a racist tone in the campaign
PM,: There'll be nio racist slant to the campaign in
any shape or form, and no-one, of goodwill and honesty
of intention, can think, if they look at the components
of our immigration programme, that racism can be involved. 
Prime Minister, you suggested that the policy
decisions if adopted by the CAbinet, and yourself, would
be spaced out possibly. That is what the Standing
Committee recommended. Do you see that some of these
might be acted upon and brought into Parliament before
the House rises, say on May 25, or thereabouts
PM: I'd be fairly certain that some of them will be
because they want them spaced out, and they want the
people to understand that work is being done now, and
put quickly into -operation so that the people get the
benefit.
Q. That only gives you seven weeks though
PM: Yes, but that's not a bad time.
Q. SIr,-. what justification is there in holding on
to policies until three weeks before the election, at
this stage
PM: I think if you had a great deal of experience of
policy-making and policy speeches, you'd have to accept
that no one has ever gone into an election campaign
without some policy matters. But that doesn't aniswerI
the question. As I put it to you, we will * be making
policy announcements as and when we can, and we will be
trying to do in a pretty regular fashion, and as and when
we ' re in a position to make the policy announcement.
In other words, unless there is something quite precisely
and definitely associated with the policy speech, we'll
make them immediately.
Q. Did you say that to the Policy Committee
PM: Yes.
Q. Could I take you a step further on that one?
PM: Alan, which are you talking about. I've been
putting the point of view that I have for long that
you can't save anything up for the Budget or for a
policy speech. You can't do that. And speaking in a
background way, I've been like a bullocky driving a
bullock team in order to ensure that we do, whenever
we can make a decision, we make it and we announce it,
and this is now generally accepted.
Q. This was a change of attitude? I had the impression
that policy-planning was in fact planning for your policy
speech..
PM: I think you can take it that it is a total change
of policy.
Q. You talked them around you said now ' Let's
get the think out as we arrive at it' 
6. 2-3
PM: And it doesn't only apply to background. It
applies to Government as well. another
Q. Sir, I'd like to ask question on imlration
that I hope you can clarify. Dr. Forbes' spe9c; T-h I c h
you said was the basis of this discussion, was interpreted
in the press publicly as an attempt to raise the issue of
Labor opening the flood-gates, and I think Alan wrote a
piece calling it a " grubby little speech". Was today's
discussion aimed at making sure that this approach wasn't
adopted at any Government
PM: I've said that I will go no further because
I said it was the basis on which we started to discuss it;
I'm not going any further until I take the matter back to
Cabinet again and we are definitive on what we're doing.
What I will say is that the basis on which we act is
one that we are not, and never have been, racist, and that's
proved by the number of non-European that we permit to come
into the country, and welcome them. And what can be
recorded, if you wish to call it, the Oppermann concept
which sets out our policy. For the rest, I go no further
because we will be having another good look at this,
particularly with regard to assisted passages, adid then
we'll be able to make a decision.
Q. Did you say numbers of assisted passages for
widening it
PM: Look, I'm not going any further on this. That's
as far as I'll go.
Q. I doh't want to ask about Government policy, but
from what you've said, immigr.-i&amp; ton will not be an
election campaign
PM: I didn't say that, and I don't mean it.
Q. Well, on what grounds would it be a campaign i' 3sue
PM: I will not go any further than I've already gone.
0 Q. PRIME iVIinister, could you tell me why you called
it the loppermann concept" I thought the most recent
change in Government policy was the Snedden concept where
we did in fact step up our intake of non-Europeans
PM. Yes, but the Oppermann concept is the three
conditions on which we accept non-Europeans. But I'm
not going any further on the immigration one.
Q. Could I ask you a question not applying to your
policy, but about I was in Parramatta last night,
and I was shown the Documents had been placed in a
letterbox saying ' If you want a nigger neighbour, vote
Labor'. Do you have any comment on that sort of campaign / 7. 
PM I have never seen one. I hope I don't ever see one.
I think it's a disgraceful way of acting.
Q. PM, I realise we are not going any further on
immigration
PM: Look, I'm not going any further
Q. I'd like to decide a point which Mr Reid made,
when he looked up in suprise when you said ' you'd be
looking at this in the context of assisted passage'
Now you mean assisted passage as we accept it now
PM: We'll be looking at this whole question. I go no
further than saying that. I'm not going to be drawn in.
Q. Sir, you've already gone to a point where you've
made it very major. I mean to say, at present the
principle is assisted passages for Euorpeans. The
Government has stated, as a matter of definitive policy,
no assisted passage for non-Euorpean migrants. Now you
are saying you are going to look at assisted passages.
PM: In a different context altogether from the one
you're trying to imply that I'm getting into. We -are
not going to cut down on the number of migrants.
Q. That's the point I want to make clear.
PM: We are not going to cut down on the number.
Q. Will you be putting most of the recommendations
from this meeting through CAbinet yourself?
PM: No, they tjo through the relevant Minister.
Q. Just for historical purposes, Sir, why do you
say the Oppermann concept and not the whole concept
PM: Look, I'm not going any further than that other than
the issue was raised and I was just raising the Oppeimann
concept to explain what our attitude was. And that has
notbeen changed.
Qould we have two more quesi-icns please
PM: Well, look it was a pity that we spent so much time
on o~ ne subject. I
Q. Are you confident that the House will rise as planned
PM: I will make a decision on that because I am not going
to permit the House to rise until we've finished our business. 
Q. Does that mean Sir, that you are going to keep to
your three weeks prelimary that no legislation can be
introduced three weeks before the House rises
PM: We will try. -, But I am not going to raise the
House prematurely.
Q. So it's not a fixed rising period
PM: We will try to the best of our capacity we will
try to raise it on that particular date. But if I find
that it's going to be a rush, the House is. not going to
rise,
Q. Sir, could I ask when we might have a general
on-record press conference
PM: You find the time for me.
Q. Well, Sir, in view of the fact that there hasn't
been one this year
PM: Look, I've had a fair amount of exposure. I will
try and give you one. My trouble is how I get lthrough
the work, as I explained to. you when I met you the other
night: The only real difficulty I've got.* 1
Q. Sir, as an alternative, we got a few minutes left,
could we ask you about other subjects now.
PM: No.
Q. Will you make any comment on the last public
opinion poll
PM: No.
Q. Any reason why not Sir
PM: I haven't got to answer every question that is asked.
And you've formed your opinions and I don't want to get
into an argument between yourself and myself. 



-74/
FOR PPRSS: PM No. 34/ 1972
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister,
the Rt Hon. William McMahon, M. P.
Arrangements have now been completed with the
State Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and the
Australian Loan Council to be held in Canberra on Thursday
22 June, continuing if necessary on Friday 23 June.
CANBERRA, 12 J-ue, 1972.
COL USTRALIA
3f~ t~ ctcc~ t 



MACQUARIE~ NETWORK WTEEKLY BROADCASTS
BY THE PRI-T MINISTER, TIF RT. HON. WILLIAM
McMATION, CH. 12 ARIL, 1.972
Good Evening: Maccuarie Network has made available one night each
week so that I can speak to the A11ustralian people on matters of
great national interest. I welcome the opportunity they have
given to me to speak to you.
Naturally enough on an occasion like this, I think it
would be desirable if I spokr about the mini-Budget we introduced
into the House of Rex~ resentatives last night.
You will probably remember that when we introduced
the last Budget in the middle of last year, we made the statement
that if we felt the economy needed an additional stimulus, or that
a change in policy was necessary, w~ e would do so immediately.
Since then, we have confirmed the view that it is
better to make our policy decisions known as scon as we could, rather
than to wait for another Budget or to wait until an election
policy speech was made.
So throughout the year in accordaince with this
decision, we have gradually given increased stimuli to the economy.
We started off with monetary Do] Lcy early in the year. We then
had the Premiers' Conference %,, here we made large sums of money
available for works and housing and for other purposes.
We made sumns of money available for education,
particularly at the independent schools, and for buildings in
the public schools. And now we have made several very important
decisions that intimately affect you.
The first of these decisions relates to income tax.
During the Budget last year we increased income tax by 2 per
cent. We have now decided that this part of the tax will be
takpn off, and it will mean that you will have an extra $ 117 million
over the year in your own pockets rather than paving to the
Income Tax Commissioner. We have also decided to increase Pensions and
repatriation benefits. In the case of pensions, the base rate
will be ipcreased by $ 1 per week, -and in the case of married
couples, by 75 cents per week. And we have also decided that in
the case of people with incomes of their own, that we will
liberalise the tapered means test so that they can still receive
a part pension and have a total income, in the case of a single
individual of $ 6.50, and in the case of a married couple. of_ 4&amp; l
per week. Now there were three reasons why we carried out these
changes. 
= 2-
The first onc3 was so that we could increase
purchasing power in the corrnunity and give people a greater
opportunity to purchase in the retail stores.
The second was undoubtedly humanitarian,
in order to provide assistance to those whom we felt were in the
greatest need, and to whom we could give the greatest benefit.
Third, we wanted to increase confidence in the
community, because with increased confidence we feel that demand
would increase, and as demand increases, the economy will grow,
unemployment will reduce and we will have the kind of society and
the kind of economy that we want and I know that you people want
too. There is one other change that we will make.
We have decided to carry out a review of the total taxation
structure of the Cormmonwealth. This will cover not only your
personal taxation, but will also cover indirect and corporation
taxation as well. Uip till the moment we have been carrying out an
enquiry witkin Treasury itself. But we ca~ me to the conclusion
that the people of this country would not be satisfied if we relied
wholly upon Treasury advice. We thought it-would be much better,
therefore, if we had an open enquiry by a judge, or by a group of
individuals who could carry out a public examination and then could
make their recommendations to the Government. This course we will
follow. we hope it will be for your benefit.
So I want to sum up in this way. We have made
these changes because we wanted demand to increase, and particularly
consumption expenditure to improve, and wffe wanted retail sales
to improve as well. We had the humanitarian purpose of helping
those people in the greatest need, and we also wanted to assist the
growing confidence in the community because we wanted to improve
and to help in the obiectives the Government has set of full
employment and a continually growing economy.
I am confident that what we are doing is right,
and if you will join me in this confidence, I can assure you
that we will have the kind of economy the ' Government wants and
the kind of economy I am sure you want as vell. 



EMBORGO; 6PM. SUNDAY 16 APRIL, 1,72.
NATIONAL HEART WEEK
NATIONAL T. V. NETWORK
Speech by the Prime Minister, the 7t Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP.
16 April, 1972.
This is the second occasion I have been given the
privilege of opening up National Heart Week. The Foundation has
suggested to me that I emphasise as strongly as I can, the ways of
minimising the risk of heart disease. Research over the years has
clearly indicated the basic causes of heart attack, and I am informed
that if you take four precautions, you can reduce the risk considerably.
The precautions you can take are these:-
Keep Fit
Keep your weight down
Give up smoking and
Have a regular medical check
Now the Heart Foundation believes that these four remedies
are the basis of a long and healthy life and will undoubtedly help
us avoid some of the most prevalent of heart diseases.
Their view is, I think, pretty well accepted now. To drive
home the risks taken, the Foundation has asked me to mention these
points to you:-The average middleaged Australian has one chance in
twenty of getting coronary heart disease within five years.
If you are unfit, overweight and a heavy smoker, then you
have one chance in five.
But if you do as the Foundation recommends, the risk is
reduced to one in seventy-five.
Now these are telling figures and I want you to think
about them. In fact heart disease kills more of us than all other
diseases put together. This is why the Foundation has drawn your
attention to preventive action of a simple kind. And we want you
to do all you can to lower the risk of heart disease that affects
so many people. As the Heart Foundation puts it, " Give your heart
every chance". And I emphasise, give yourself every chance of a
happy successful and interesting life. 



FOR PRESS: PM. ! o 35/ 1972
SPECIAL GRANTS FOR HEART AND CANCER RESEARCH
Statement b the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon.
William McMahon, C. H, M. P.
The Prime Minister announced today that the
Commonwealth Government had decided to make a special grant
of $ 250,000 to the National Heart Foundation and a special
grant of $ 100,000 to the Australian Cancer Society.
" The Government has noted that research in the
fields of heart disease and cancer is considered to hold
special promise of community benefits," the Prime Minister
said. " Heart disease is the nation's biggest single
health problem in relation to mortality and morbidity and
cancer is also a disease of major importance.
" The Government has therefore decided to make
special grants to the National Heart Foundation and the
Australian Cancer Society to assist these organisations with
their promising research programmes."
CPNBERPA, 16 April, 1972. 



2 r'APR1~ 97
AUSTRAJLI N-AMERICAN ASSOC IATIONt-UNCH-EON
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 17 APRIL 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. W. McMahon, CH, _ MP
May I formally express to you the admiration that
I have for all that the Association is doing. And I believe it
is doing it in the int-6. rests of our two countries that is our
continuing friendship with the United States, which I want to
stress, the United States being the acknowledged leader of the
free world, and our great Partner, as you all know, in the
Pacific. Today I want to talk about that friendship in a
very special kind of context. That context is -the changing
situation in Asia, with all its great potential for good, and
also, of course, its dangers.
And I think that I'm speaking here at an appropriate
time too. Because even though a few weeks ago people could have
felt that the dangers were remote, I think the days have come
-when we all realise that the unexpected can happen, and can
happen in an unfavourable way for us. Because who would have
thought three weeks ago that we could have had another offensive
from the North Vietnamese on the South Vietnamese, with all the
attending danger and all the potentialities that that could bring
in its wake. Now I'm sure you know the position of the super and
the great powers in the Asian area. Japan, for example, has become
a superpower economically. China now moves into new associations
with the rest of the world. The Soviet is showing an increasing
interest in Asia and as you know, the North Vietnamese are
increasing attacks on So" th Vietnam. The Nixon Doctrine is one
which calls on nations of the world, Particularly in the Asian
theatre, to do more in their own defence and to have greater
regional co-operation. And running through all this, is what they call the
bilateral relations or relationship between various countries.
The most of these happens to be the dramatic visit to Peking and
other parts of Continental China by the President of the United
States. Now, I think you know t1-hat we have been busy for a
long time ourselves, trying to establish what is called a dialogue
with the Peoples' Republic of China. We were successful, hut
immediately after the admission of the Peoples' Republic into the
United Nations, the di'alogue ceased.
But it has again been resumed. I think it is not
unfair to say that even some time before the US took an initiative,
we were taking one because it was our view that the PRO should
be brought into the international world that it should be able
to talk at the United Nations, to make its views known, and to
permit others to make their views known to China as well. ./ 2 
IThere
have been other developments, of course, but
I won't go into them to any great extent, oth -1; X-than to mention the
potentials of hostility between China and the6 USSR and America's
relations with Japan and the changing context in which these relations
are taking place. And also the visit soon to take place by President
Nixon to the Soviet Union, which we hope can lead to a greater detente,
disturbed a little, I must confess, by the events in North Vietnam
and South Vietnam over the last few weeks.
Now when I refer to the superpowers, I want you to
know that I refer to the United States and the USSR. These are superpowers
in strength of resources both -military and civil. W] hat I want
to point out to you is what the superpowers are doing, and consequently,
the way in which we must look at our problems. We must understand
what impact their influence can have upon us. Among the smaller
Asian countries and, I believe, in others in the region, including
Australia, tho idea of seeking Asian solutions to Asian problems is
growing. I remember when I went to the Djakarta Conference in
order to see what we could do about peace in Cambodia,' or a guarantee
of peace. That was the first time I heard the Asian peoples
themsel. ves say " Can't we create an Asian identity?-"-Not an identity of
disparate nations or independently pro-nations who weren't strong enough
to look after themselves, but couldn't we in fact create an Asian
identity that in terms of trade and mutual security will be able to
play our part in our constant growth and development, and would be
an impediment to aggressive or subversive action by others?"
But I did refer too, Mr President, to the necessity
or I should have referred to it under the Nixon Doctrine for each
country to be able to do more in the protection of its own interests.
Not that I believe that it means the Unitied States is likely to
leave them alone under all circumstances. But what I am sure about
i4 this. The more you do for yourselves within your own capacity,
the greater will be the desire and the wish of the United States to
make a contribution to the defence and to the freedom of those
countries as part and parcel of the defence and freedo-m of the free
world. But I want to emphasise that no country can go it alone
under all circumstances and conditions, and simultaneously make a
contribution to the peace and prosperity in this part of the world
in which we live. I emphasise, too, that this is not a wealthy part of the
world, leaving Japan and ouselves out of it. There are many parts
where for humanitarian reasons we all have to help, particularly,
Bangladesh. We've all got to try and make a contribution to see
that these people are able to have the good things of life in the
same way that our own people can enjoy them today.
So I want to turn to this question of co-operatn
co-oceration in order to cultivate a stable climate for neace and
development. This is what we are trying to do in the Asian context. ./ 3 
3
What we want is a climate to which the United States
will continue to make a-contribution. We want this trend to
continue this trend of co-operation not only with us, but with
Sall people, of all free people, particularly in the Asian theatre.
I can assure--you,.. as. the Head of Government, that we will do all
in our power, to be able to make our contribution in whatever way
we can. These are the reasons why Australia has welcomed the
development of ASEAN, and is taking an active part in such regional
organisations as SEATO, ASPAC, ECAFE and the Asian Development
Bank. This is the reason why we have established the Five Power
Defence arrangements with Malaysia, Singapore, New Zealand and the
United Kingdom. I can assure you that those arrangements are welcomed
by the Malaysians and the Singaporeans, no matter what you mght have
heard from other sources. I add that the Prime Minister of
Malaysia, Tun Razak, does not regard these arrangements as
incompatible with the ASEAN objective of regional neutralisation.
It is for this reason, too, that we have a programme
of defence co-operation with Indonesia. Recently we had President
Soeharto down here, and I think we realised more emphatically than
we've ever realied before how much they wanted to co-operate, and
how much we think it desirable that we should co-operate with them.
Recently we have been able to aoprove the gift of
a fairly large number of Sabre aircraft to Indonesia and of help
in the construction of the airfield at Iswahjudi, so that they will
have aircraft that will be able to make a contribution to their
deterrent effect in the Asian region.
I also want to mention that for the last five years,
our programme of what is called Government aid, but frankly
which I should call your aid because you make the contribution in
terms of financial assistance and taxation. We are third in the
world as a giver of Government or national aid to the developing
countries, and a large part of this aid does go to Indonesia.
Government aid is the financial and material assistance
we give expressed as a percentage of our gross national production.
You will be glad to know that we are pretty high up in world
affairs with the amount we give something like 1 per cent
of cur gross national production. That is the goal that is set by
international organisations when they ask other countries to be
of assistance. Now it is sometimes said and I've said this before,
particularly at the National Press Club in Washington, that we are
a satellite of the United States and that this might affect our
standing in Asia. I want to assure you this is nonsense. We are
free and independent and, I believe respected throughout the world,
not only for our growing maturity and independence of thought and
action, but because they know we are reliable friends. / 4 
-4
During my recent visit to the tUnjted States, I
said more than once that Australia is a-!_ artrfer with the United-
States in many areas. In my discussions with the Amxerican leadexs_,_.
they responded warmly to the concept of partnership between our'
two countries. And I think I can emphasise that the ones who
responded most warmly to the concept of partnership were those
members of the Admi'nistration under President Nixon who had an
intimate concern with Australia and wanted to make sure that
relationships between the two countries improved.
As an act of policy judged to be in our national
interest, we have decided
closer relationship between the two countries will be to our
mutual advantage. Now this choice does not foreclose differenqes
of opinion nor does it foreclose different policies on different
issues. It is happily reinforced by a genuine warmth of feeling
and mutual understanding which your Association has done-so much
to achieve. But the point I want toemphasise now is that our
partnership with the United States is based', in the first place,
on a hard-headed assessment of mutual national interest. And I
think you can take it for granted that in international political
affairs, naturally enough each country thinks first and foremost
of its own national interest, and then of the contribution it can
make to the solution of the problems of world affairs.
I have to emphasise to you that when we are looking
at our international relationships, of course, the first consideration
is national interest rather than that of other countries.
our formal pqrtnershi.-finds expression in the ANZUS Treaty. The
assurances which I received from President Nixon in Washington,
spontaneol4sly received, have been reinforced by what he said in
his recent state of the world address.
We in Australia, I can assure you, welcome this
confirmation. And we also regard ANZUS as central to our
Asian policies. It is a defence treaty, and something morq.
It must not be turned into a solely social welfare concept as some
of our opponents are trying to turn it.
It is the framework for a wide-ranging system of
co-operatin covering all fields of international relations. ' The
emphasis on self-reliance has long been basic to our foreign defence
policy, and I believe that it antedated the Nixon Doctrine.
I say this only because I want to emphasise the
independent kind of action we take and the way in which I think
the new Department of Foreign Affairs is constantly alert to the
need for new initiatives whenever we feel that it will be in our
own national interest. But what thi * s elf-relance is, is one within the
framework of our alliance with the United States. Inevitably,
and this ought to be stressed, we have followed parallel policies
to those of the United States in a number of what I shall call
ASEAN initiatives. We have done so when we have thought it would
be in Australia's best interests that we have those mutually
accomdating policies.
May I take one exam Pie, and that is our negotiations 
with China, which is now after years in the wilderpness a member of
the United Nations.' Iannounced that-Auatralia-was seeking--t6-...
normalise relations with the People's Republic of China shortly
after I became the Prime Minister..
I well remember that paper, prepared as it was by
the Department of Foreign Affairs and myself, because I think it
did start a new epoch for Australia, and drew attention in the
most forceful way to the changes that were occurring in the Pacific.
And I want to emphasise that it was taken at a fairly early date so
far as the Western countries are concerned. It is the nature of
things that a superpower, such as the United States, would have much
more scope for a dialogue and for a wider range of issues with
another great power, than one of the medium-sized countries like
ourselves, because it is not so exposed to a demand for making
important concessions on major issues.
Now Australia is, understandably, in a different
position to the United States. As I said following the Nixon
" isit, I hope that all nations would be treated alike by China. That
hope has not so far been realised. But we hope it will come. Now
I can assure you that the dialogue which did temporarily end
immediatel) after China entered the-United Nationg has now been
reopened, and I believe, is proceeding on a sensible and, I believe,
reasonable course. Now, Mr President, we have parallel policies on
many issues with America, so, too, do our policies diverge in other
areas. Let me give you an example from the past. During the
confrontagion in Indonesia a few years' ago, Australia maintained
its relations and contacts with that country. And we did so betause
we believed that if we weathered the storm, a firm foundation would
be prepored for better relations in the future with Indonesia.
And our wish and our intentions have-come true.
This policy has paid handsome dividends, and is
underlined by the recent visit of the President that I referred to
a few moments ago. Again, but not so Much on exactly the same scale,
but again during the recent crisis on the Indian sub-continent, our
policy again tempcrarily diverged from that of the United States.
Although we were, and remain, anxious to maintain
our friendly relations with Pakistan, we took the view that peace
and stability in the region were likely to be best served by our
immediate recognition of Bangladesh. So Australia did take the
initiative, not only in the Asian theatre, but in the United States
and amongst the continental countries in order to see if like-ipinded
countries could join, and join as quickly as they could in recognition
and in giving assistance to that country.
The fact therefore is this. I hope those two points
that I have mentioned make it clear that our policies are Australian,
and I believe recognised as such and respected as such in Asia.
Much as our opponents contest this view, our alliance
with the United States is understood and accepted in Asia azd in
many cases it enhances our standing and importance in the region.
So we do get the indirect benefit of the very friendly and worthwhile
relationships which we have with our great neighbour over to the East.
But of course we can't affQrd to let this be taken
for granted. We must continue to develop a distinctively Austra'lian
role in the Asian region. And we are. moving in the right direction
in demonstrating that we are helpful and we are cp-operative with
them. / 6 
I have spoken alroady of the hopeful signs of great
power accommodation, of growing confidence and co-operation within
the region itself. There remain problems in the region which
are cause for concern. I mention again the position in South
Vietnam. The invasion by the North in blatant defiance of the
Geneva Agreements is causing the South Vietnamese Government its
greatest test. This, I emphasise, is aggression, naked and.
unashamed, and is being increasingly accepted as such by most
people even those in the Western world who a few months ago were
critics. Now it's still too early to speak with confidenqe about
the outcome. But what we can say, and what we can emphasise, is
that because the Americans and their Allies, including Australia,
have done so much fighting and training and rehabilitating in the
South, the South Vietnamese Army and the South Vietnamese people
are now better trained, better armed and able to take this onslaught
in a way they would not have been capable of taking three or four
years ago. I can assure you, too, that it is giving a good
account of itself.
I do ask you all to note that the offensive now is almost
wholly by the North Vietnamese. The Communists have not launched
this offensive as ' they did at the time of the ' Pet offensive in
the mistaken belief that there would be a spontaneous uprising of
sympathisers throughout South Vietnam. The war in Indochina is
likely to remain with us for some time to come. We want to negotiate
a settlement. And we will continue to seek a peaceful one, but
the inflexibility of the Communists is against an early settlement
and we can see no prospect at the moment however much we and
America and our friends will try in the intervening period to get
one. In the meantime, the Oc~ ernment will continue to assist
the South Vietnamese in other~ ways, even though our troops are home
now. In particular, in economic development and other aid, we
will continue to play our part.
Now there are, of course, other areas of concern for
us in Asia, including the great humaitarizn tasks and development
problems facing the peopl. e of th( region.
This is the situation in Asia as we see it today. The. Ai
picture is a hopeful one. It is also a dynamic one. Recent Changd liv,
have bQen staggering compared with centuries and centuries of little
change. Change is everywhere and everything is changing. we must,
in Australia, be alive to these changes, flexible in our approach,
and we must be willing to take the initiative in meeting the
demands of this new situation, whether it might be in terms of
defence and security, whether it is in terms of aid or personal
visits, whether it is in terms of friendship and co-operation.
In each and every one of these areas, we and the United States must,
and I am sure will, be prepared to play our part.
The free world does hold many initiatives. Australia's
policies in Asia, based on our alliance with the United States,
are, I believe, one of the keys to a stable and prosperous future
for the world in which we have to live. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 36/ 1972
TASMANIAN FRUIT-PR~ OCESSING INDUSTRY
Statement by the Prime minister, the Rt. Hon.
William McMahon CH, MP
The Prime Minist br has received representations
on the economic difficulties of the Tasmanian fruit processing
industry from Dr. Solomon, MP and Senator J. E. Marriott,
who had been in consultation with the Premier, Mr Bethune.
The Prime Minister said that he had noted
the dependence of the Tasmanian fruit-processing industry
on a limited range of crops, mainly apples. He stated that
he would arrange for Cormmonwealth authorities tc investigate
and report to the Government on the matter.
CANBERRA, 19 April 1972 



AWA
PRIME MINISTER
MAfCQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST 4
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP. 19 APRIL 1972
D E FE NCE
I want to speak to you now about the defence and
security of Australia. Most of you know that not so many years ago we
relied for our defence on the might of the armed forces of Britain
and America. World War Two and other events, such as the large-scale
British withdrawal East of Suez, and a changed American approach to
its role as world policeman, have changed all that.
There has been another significant change. For
literally hundreds of years the Asian nations remnained unchanged and
unchangeable. In contrast, dramatic changes are now occurring in
Asia. China is becoming a world power. Make no mistake
about that. And there can be no doubt that, as part of her tpolicies,
she is continually promoting insurgency in other countries. For
example, in Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia. These are all close to
US. Even in these conditions, some people argue that we
should not spend so much money on defence because, they say, there
isn't much chance of a direct attack on Australia now.
My answer is that any person who is prepared to take a
risk with the defence of this country is acting in a way that is
completely intColerable. The unexpected can happen, and we have to
prepare for it. In defence you cannot preroare overnight. You cannot
rely on a crash programme. Highly-trained troops with good equipment
are essential. Let mc give you a couple of illustrations of how
quickly conditions can change.
You will remember confrontation between Indonesia and
Malaysia and the possibility that this could spill over into Papua
and New Guinea even closer to us than Indoncsia. You will remember
Communist-inspired insurgency in the North of Malaysia and in Thailand.
You will remember the recent border conflicts between India and Pakistan
and between China and India. And now we have the most serious
invasion of all the blatant and unprovoked attack by the North
Vietnamese against the South Vietnamese. 
-2-
We know,. too, of the growing presence of the-Russians
in the Indian Ocean,. and the-assistance'Russia has given to the North_
Vietnamese. We in the Government are not prepared to expose our
own country to similar unexpected attacks. Consequently we must
prepare to meet threats expected or unexpected as they emerge. And
we must be prepared to help our neighbours to the North who are a
shield against attack. There is a further point to be empDhasised. No country
can in all circumstances go it alone. No country can successfully
retreat into isolation. So we have the additional responsibility of
maintaining our treaties and our alliances.
of these the most imp-ortant is with the United States
under the ANZUS Treaty. This Treaty is crucia~ l to our long-term
defence planning because it could be our most important guarantee
in the most critical circumstances. Only a fool or a traitor would
want to throw it away.
It is true that in our defence preparations we must
increasingly strive for self-reliance and self-sufficiency. But we
have to be realists in a world in which no nation c-an stand alone.
The two, that is, our treaties and maximum self-reliance are linked
together. They go together.
Let us go back to ANZUS. Remember it is basically a
military treaty. It would be deadly dangerous to try and turn it into
a human rights declaration, as some people want to do.
ANZUS is also a two-way traffic. We can't expect
everything and give nothing. We must command respect for our own efforts
and willingness to help our friends. That is why we have agreed to have
defence installations at the North-W~ est Cape, at Pine Gap and at Woomera.
I assure you there is nothing sinister or "-nderhand about them. They
are part of our defence -partnership with America. And we are not doing
anything that would make Australia a target in another nation's cause.
We are thinking of our own security and our co-operation with the
United States in mutual defence.
Fina-lly, let me sr~ cak about National Service. This is
the only way at present to keep the Army up to the minimum strength
required to meet our defence needs. So thlis is the question we have
to ask. Whose judgment would you trust : I!--Out the size of our armed
forces? Our military advisers or those who are pledged to abolish
National Service in a bid for political popularity?
To abolish National Service now would upset the w-hole
balance of our forces and would reduce the nation's military strength
to a dangerous degree. We will have none of this.
We, in the Governm~ ent, are realist and national. We
are not adventurers. We have a duty to you and to our allies. So
defence must always be the primary concern of all loyal Australians.
And we in the Government are determined to keen it
that way. 



EL3.. ARGO -OfZ--F LdtLE" E BEFORE. 11 Pm 1 9/ 4/ 1 972
PRIME MINISTER'\ 89~~
FOR PRESS PM. No. 37/ 1972
VISIT TO SOUTH-EAST ASIA
It was announced today that the Prime Minister,
the Rt. Hon. William cMahon, CHi, MP, would make official visits
to a number of South-East Asian countries in June.
? r McMahon will visit Indonesia from 5 to 8 June,
Singapore from 9 tZo 11 June and Malaysia from 11 to 14 June.
The visits reflect the Australian Government's
long-standing interest in the region and the importance of its
friendship with the governments concerned.
The Prime Minister's visits take place at a time
of rapid and far-reaching changes in the international scene which
affect the whole South-East Asian area. The Prime Minister will
take advantage of his visits to discuss with the leaders of the
friendly countries of Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia a wide
range of international issues which have a bearing on the region.
Australia shares with her three neighbours similar
views on the independence, progress and stability of the region
and on the importance of regional co-operation and national
resilience. The Prime Minister's visits therefore come at a
particularly appropriate time.
Australia's association with Indonesia dates back
to the first days of Indonesia's independence. Particularly close
relations have been developed in recent years, extending over
many fields of co-operative endeavour.
The strength and cordiality of these relations was
demonstrated during the successful visit recently made by President
and Madame Soeharto to Australia. At that time President
Soeharto issued an invitation to the Prime Minister to visit
Indonesia and it is in response to this invitation that the Prime
Minister's visit will be taking place. / 2 
2
It is expected that many of the initiatives for
deepening Indonesian/ Australian relations which were discussed
during President Soeharto's visit will be taken forward by the
Prime Minister while he is in Djakarta. The Prime Minister
lookcs forward to renewing his close personal relationship with
President Soeharto.
The Prime Minister welcomes the opportunity to visit
Singapore, a friendly Commonwealth partner with whom Australia
shares many interests bilateral, regional and international.
He last visited Singapore in 1971, and it will be a great
rleasure to him to renew the friendshins then established. He
looks forward to fruitful discussions on a wide range of questions
of mutual concern to Autralia and Singapore.
Australian relations with Malaysia, anothar Commonwealth
partner, have been characterised since their inception by frequent
consultations at the highest level. The Prime Minister sees his
visit as part of this continuing process. He believes that
such consultations will contribute to further improvement in
the already close ties which exist between Australia and Malaysia
in so many fields.
When details of the programme in the respective
countries have been determined they will be announced.
CANBERRA, 19 April, 1972 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 38/ 1972
ADMISSION OF BANGLA. DESH TO THE COMMONWEALTH
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William McMahon, CII, MP
I am pleased that Bangladesh has joined the
Commonwealth. Australian support for Bangladesh's membership
was given publicly when we recognised Bangladesh in January.
I am glad that it has now proved possible to complete
successfully the necessary consultations w.% ith other members
of the Commonwealth. One immediate result will be that our Ambassador
in Dacca will become a High Commissioner and the embassy a
High Commission. Bangladesh's first head of mission in
Australia, who is expected to reach Canberra shortly, will
also carry the title of High Commissioner from the outset.
I have sent a message of congratulations to the
Prime Minister of Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujibur RahIman. The
text of my message is as follows
" On behalf of the Australian Government, I send
you my warmest congratulations on Bangladesh's
becoming a member of the Commonwealth. We shall
welcome being joined by representatives of Bangladesh
at future Commonwealth meetings. We look forward to
mutually beneficial co-operation in the many diverse
fields of activity for which the Commonwealth association
provides."
CANBERRA, April 1972 N 



FOR PRESS: HISTORIC MEMORIALS CO MITTEE ? PM. No 39/ 1972
.2 81 " 9,
PORTRAIT OF THE RT. HION. J. C. GOP. TON
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon, CH, P
The Prime Minister has announced that the Historic
Memorials Committee has accepted the portrait of the Rt Hon.
J. G. Gorton, painted by Miss June Mendoza of
Melbourne for inclusion in the Historic Memorials Collection.
The portrait is presently being reframed after which it
is expected that it will be hung in Kings Hall, Parliament
House, Canberra along with the portraits of Governors-General,
other Prime Ministers, Presidents of the Senate and Speakers
of the House of Representatives.
CANBERRA, 21 April, 1972. 
BACKGROUND: MISS JUNE MENDOZA PORTRAIT PAINTER
Miss Mendoza received her art education in Melbourne
and London. She is a member of the Royal Society of Portrait
Painters, the Royal Institute of Oil Painters, the Contemporary
Portrait Society and the Pastel Society. She has accepted
commissions in New York, London, and Paris, and previous
subjects have included the Duke of Edinburgh, Prince Edward and
Miss. Joan Sutherland. 



TWENTY-FOURTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE STATE OF ISRAEL MEETING
Melbourne 23 April 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William McMahon, M. P^
Mr President, Members of the Executivu of the Zionist Federation
of Australia and New Zealind, and all of you who have come to
commemorate the Twenty-fourth Anniversoryof the Proclamation of
the Independent State of Israel:
I am honoured to be your guest today. Some ? eople will say I
came here tonight to demonstrate clearly that there was no hint of
bigotry or discrimination associatea with me. There is a simple
answer. It is true and correct.
Australian Jewry has always treasured the absence of discrimination
and anti-semitism, and the traditions of freedom and democracy
in Australia. I have always treasured those principles and I always
will treasure them. I am here this evening to renew that commitment
on my own behalf, on behalf of our Government, on behalf of the
National Government and, I am absolutely certain, on behalf of the
great majority of all Australians.
All the world knows the story of the miracle of modern Israel.
Israel is a haven for the oppressed and unfortunate. It is th2
chanpion of Jewish rights and of the right of survival, wherever they
are threatened. And it preserves the historical identity of the
Jewish people, through its culivation of treir spiritual and cultural
heritage. So this is a proper occasion to remind ourselves of the
prophetic visions of justice and peace upon which the State of Israel
is founded, and by which it is guided. The story of Israel is unique
in our generation, which has seen the emergence of so many new nation
states. There is noather exayole of a people who, having lost their
independence and become widely dispersed in foreign lands, have been
able, twenty centuries later, to come together to form a nation state.
It is living testimony of faith, vitality, and determination. It is
a reminder that forbearance, courage, resolution and industry can
prevail during the darkest night. There is no bravernor prouder story
than the record of Jewish history. It is a story of sadness and of
unbelievable triumph. It is a story which is still unfolding in
Israel where a strong and independent modern state has been built by
Jews in the land of their fathers. ./ 2 
S2. Through sheer hard work and the clever application of scientific'
knowledge, an arid and exhausted land has been restored and made
productive... this was eloquently and felicitously expressed with
masterful understatement by Winston Churchill in Jerusalem more than
fifty years ago in speaking of the beginnings of the new Israel:
" It is making two blades of grass grow where one grew before". This
prophecy has been fulfilled. The grass is green in Israel today.
The desert is blooming.
Australians have not forgotten the evils that shamed humanity
which were revealed following the second world war. They have not
forgotten the victimisation, the persecution the massacres and the
injustices which would have broken and overcome a lesser people. It
is this imperishable spirit and this irresistible urge for freedom
and independence which we salute tonight from one young and free
nation to another. Our two countries have many links which hind
us closely. In two world wars, a warm relationship was built up
between the Jewish population of Palestine and our own fighting
men. This is a relationship forged in war that has continued
undiminished and which.. I know will endure and grow.
Through its active membership of the United Nations Palestine
Commission and the General Assembly, Australia helped the modern
state of Israel to take its place as a nation in 1948. Since then,
we have consistently supported Israel's right to exist, along with
all other states in the Middle East. We have -ackedI srael as a
sovereign independent state with a right to exist within secure and
recognised boundaries free from threats or acts of force. It is
one of the tragedies of our time that the issues which divide Israel
from its Arab neighbours still remain unresolved. The major
influences on events in the Middle East are exercised by countries
other than Australia. But we, in this country, have emphasised
both in the United Nations, and anywhere else where our voice is
heard, that Australia stands ready to support any constructive efforts
designed to further a negotiated settlement. We continue to hope that
good sense and moderation will prevail.
Mr President, it has also been put to me that you support an
immediate start to meaningful dialogue between the Arab States and
Israel. And, further, that such a dialogue should lead to a just
settlement of the Middle East conflict, based firstly on secure and
defendable borders, and on mutual recognition and dignity. It is
said that such a settlement would once and for all remove the dread
of war from the Middle East in the interests of world peace and the
co-operative development of this important region of the world. And
I might add, it would be a settlement of immeasurable benefits to men
and women of all nations in that area.
That is what has been put to me as your position. It is a
position with which I must say I agree add support as a constructive
attitude. Peace in the Middle East is not only in the interests of
those nations who live there. It is in the interests of the world,
and it is in the interests of Australia. I am proud to be Prime
Minister of a country where men accept each other for whlat they are
and where bigotry has no place. / 3 
0 3.
Over many years, this country has been sympathetical-ly
concerned with the plight of Jewisb pooplz in countries where they
have been subject to discriminattion and oppression. For some of
those who haue been aV'le to e; ni'grate, we have gladly provided a
new home. We believe others who wish to emigrate from countries
where they feel unwanted shogid be allowed to do so. And I mention
particularlythe struggle of Soviet Jewry to live in freedom with
thQ right to cherish their culture and tradition, and their struggle
for freedom to return to the land of their forefathers in Israel if
they wish to do so.
Australia has cause to be thankful to its Jewish community
for its significan contribution to our society and national life.
You have added the weight of your faith to the spiritual life of
this nation. You have given much to our own culture. You have
given your skills to businass and commerce. You have given us
notable leaders in war and peace.
I take three names only from our history; names that are
honoured for the diversity of their contributions to our natidial
life. There are, of course, many others. Firstly, the late Sir
Isaac Isaacs, our first Australian-horn Governor-General. He was
a man of the law and of letters and of politics who helped to draft
the Australian Constitution by which we live today; a Chief Justice
of the Commonwealth and before that a Cahinet Minister.
Then there was the late General Sir John Monash, a Jew hy
race and faith, who was one of our greatest Australian~ s. He led us
superbly in war; he was an innovator in peace; he was warrior,
acadamic, administrator and the first president of the Australian
Zionist Federation. And lastly, the late I. H. Boas, son of the first Rabbi for
the Jewish community in South Australia. A scientist who made a
dramatic contribution to Australian industry by pioneering the use
of our native gum tree and the eucalypt, in paper-making. He served
Israel, too, with his special genius. You honour him with the Boas
Institute of Forest Products in Israel. Part of a giant industry
is his monument in Australia today.
These men adorn the Australian story and there are many more
of Jewish faith, living and dead. Their lives are fine examples of
the way in which the Jewish community enriches the quality of
Australian life. We will continue to be enriched if we remain one
peoplc of several faiths certainly but united by a common
purpose and sharing the same dangers and the same opportunities.
And I say to you with all the sincerity of which I am capable: I
will repudiate and reject any hint of anti-semitism as disgraceful
and unworthy of any Australian. I have nothing but comtempt for
any Australian who would stoop to such statements or behaviour.
Mr President, as Israel stands on the threshold of its
year, I am most honoured that you have included me on this
occasion. Together we share in the pride of achievement by Israel.
It is the hope of all of us that a just and lasting peace will be
achieved before we next meet to commemorate this great anniversary. 



PRIME MINISTER
ANZAC OPEN AIR SERVICE
CONCORD, N. S. W. 23 April, 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon, CH, MI. -i
Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen,
O We are here to honor those who died in war and to
commenorate-Anzac Day, one of the notable anniversaries in our
history. Anzac has become a symbol of a nation's valor in war.
It has become a symbol.. of " mateship",-and it has become a symbol of
the bond which unites us with our New Zealand comrades across the
Tasman. All these thoughts are with us today.
Though the forms of observance have changed, the day itselfhas
an-immortal place in the Australian story. It is my hope that
the younger generation, as it grows to manhood, will not forget
what my generation so well remembers. For we remember that it was
on the beaches and hills of Gallipoli that our own created an image
and tradition that is imperishable. They made a name that every
civilian respects. We loathe war: Its brutality, its tragedy and
its waste. But we also cherish our inheritance, freedom and liberty.
Withou. t these freedoms we would not be here in these gardens today.
That is why the originals fought at Gallipoli. That is why
Australia has always been in the-fight for freedom through two
world wars,. in Korea, Malaysia and in Vietnam. We were born free;
not by the accident of history; but by the determined will of the
Australian people and the courage of its fighting forces. You may
say: " That experts tell us that there's no major threat to Australia
in sight in the next few years. " Why then" they ask " Do we
spend so much money on defence, why do we call-up some of our
young men?". " Why are soldiers and sailors and airmen in Malaysia
and Singapore?" The answer is simple; because we must be prepared.
We have to demonstrate to all, that like the Anzacs, we are ready
to stand with them, and if necessary, to fight with them. We have
to remind a would-be aggressor that like the Anzacs we are
ready to fight tooth and nail for freedom and the defence of our
own country: It is better to prevent wars.
The international bully will always think twice if he knows
the other fellow big or small is in fighting trim and packs a
pretty heavy punch. 
There was a phrase used during the first world war. " This is the
war to end all wars". Unhappily, it was not. But out of the
sacrifice of those dreadful years freedom was preserved for decent
people. Freedom was won; it was not guaranteed. It is up to us
and our allies to do all we can now to provide the guarantees.
Freedom was again challenged in the second world war-again the
challenge was beaten. It is being challenged again in South-East
Asia. That battle is still being fought; so the need for a
guarantee remains. That is why we must. be strong. That is why,
we must prepare for war in the years of peace. Never in our history
has an aggressor set foot on Australian-soil. But hostile aircraft
bombed us in the north and we had enemy submarines in Sydney Harbor.
It has been as close as that. Don't let us live in a " fool's
paradise": We must not take risks. We must keep-. faith with the
tradition of Anzac.
I am proud to say that the va st-majority of Australians are
keeping the faith. The young Australians who have served or are
serving under the National Service Scheme are Anzacs through and
through. There are no differences, nor distinction; between . them
and the regular soldier. They have bean decorated in battle in
Vietnam. They have served with courage.
Ladies and Gentlemenon this Anzac Sunday our memories are with those
who died on the land, on the sea, and in the air. We will never
forget them. Our thoughts, too, are for their families. It is
with humility and gratitude that we honor the Anzac today and we
pledge ourselves that so far as it is within our mortal power
to carry on in their tradition. " What they have left to us would
enrich the proudest nation on earth." I thank you. 



4. 0 PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP. 26 APRIL 1972
INDUSTRIAL LAWLESSNESS
This evening I want to talk to you . about industrial lawlessness
and stikes. Before I do-this I want to sketch in the background against which
the problem has to be considered. I assure you that our economy i-s
basically sound and that no other country has prospects quite as good.
For over twenty years our production and living standards have grown.
And today is only the. foundation of what we can do in the next twenrty
years. Let me return to the problem of industrial unrest and lawlessness
and its cost to the community in lost production and the uncertainties
it creates. I will also explain what my Government is doing about it.
For m-st of those twenty years Australia has had relative industrial
peace. The significant exception to this rule has been the last three
years. Until then, the conciliation and arbitration system worked well,
and it brought a wide range of benefits to wage and salary earners,
particularly those less able to look after themselves. But in the last
O tahrrbeiet rayetairosn hiansd usbtereina lw eapkeeanceed . h as Itbse eenf vfieoctliavtee d suanrdv ivtahle wihs olteh rseyastteenme d. o. f
During 1971 the number of working days lost in strikes. increased
by 28% compared with 1970. In money terms, the loss -of wages last
year was $ 45 million. Excessive wage increases and industrial trouble
undoubtedly push up prices and are the root cause of inflation. Theserising
prices affect everyone. They seriously worry you. This worry
is understandable because most people naturally expect continual
improvement in their standard of living. But they will not get it
through the destruction of the arbitration system or the failure of
some big unions to accept awards. This new industrial lawlessness
S coincidedvith the capture of the A. C. T. U. by a leftist coalition. As
Ssoon as they-secured the election. of Mr Hawke, the principles of
industrial unionism followed by Mr Albert Monk-were undermined. In
its-_ pJLace. we see more -political strikes and an attack on the
. disciplinary provisions of the Arbitration Act. / 2 
2.
At the same time there are moves towards collective bargaining
and more power to the big radical unions. No-one has yet invented
an effective means of enforcing collective bargaining. Overseas, it
has produced big and prolonged strikes. But let me explain what we
are doing to help solvo these problems. Some months ago my Government
ordared a thoroughgoing review of the arbitration system. We recognised
the need to modernise and strengthen a system which has served this
country so well for so long. We do not deny the right to strike.
We do think that under our arbitration system there should be very
few occasions when a strike can be justified. When disputes are
legitimately settled by arbitration, the award must be obeyed.
Discipline is essential to an effective arbitration system.
That is why we will strengthen the disciplinary powers of the
Arbitration Commission in the new legislation we introduced in the
Parliament only this afternoon. That is why we will have secret
S ballots. We have already strengthened the power of arbitrators in
Wthe Public Service.
You will remember the problems we had with postal workers and
their failure to satisfactorily maintain telephone services over
S the Christmas/ New Year period. Initially the union involved refused
Sto take its claim to arbitration and took Dart in a course of action
which disrupted telephonc services to an intolerable extent. So we
introduced a hill to give the Public Service arb trator power to
introduce into awards the principle cf " no work no pay". Until then
we had no real power to ensure that Governnent employees satisfactorily
carried out their jobs of providing you with services. We now
have the power and can use it.
To sum up. We reject industrial violence. We reject political
unionism. We stand for conciliation and arbitration as the foundation
of sound industrial relations. That's why we want conciliation and
arbitration to be successful. That's why we have acted. That's why
we have taken the major decisions I've mentioned; decisions made to
ensure that you are provided with the services you need and richly
deserve. 



STATEMENT IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMkHON, CH MP
TRAVELLING ALLOWANCES FOR MEMBERS OF
PARLIlAMENT 26 APRIL 1972
In response to representations from both sides of the
House, the amounts of travelling allowances paid to Members of
Parliament have been reviewed.
Along with his recommendations for increased salaries,
Mr Justice Kerr in his report tabled in Parliamont on 8 December
1971 recommended that travelling allowances payable to Membors and
to ministers and office-holders be increased. The Government
subsequently decided not to proceed with any of the three hills
relating to increases in Parliamentary salaries and allowances.
That remains the position. Travelling allowances are not covered
in this legislation and can be regarded separately from salaries,
electorate allowances and Ministerial allowances.
The travelling allowance, or Canberra allowanqe, paid
to Members of Parliament for living expenses and out-of-poqket
expenses incurred in attending Parliamentary Sittings has b~ een
a day since 1968. Mr Justice Kerr recommended $ 22 a day. In several
areas of the Commonwealth Service in Canberra in the less Tenior
grades, the travelling allowance now paid is higher than th~ e
Canberra allowance paid to Members of Parliament. It has bqen put that
to meet Members' increased living costs in Canberra and the increased
costs of out-of-pocket expenses, the current rate of Canberra
allowance should be increased. It has been decided to accqpt this
view and to increase the allowance to 822 a day as recommended by
Mr Justice Kerr. M~ r Justice Kerr made recommendations about the payment
of Canberra allowance for Party and Committee meetings held when the
Parliament is not sitting. These recommendations will be accepted.
It was also recommended that the conditions of payment
of travelling allowance be clarified. With this objective, a
review of the conditions of payment will be undertaken.
As part of his general review, Mr Justice Kerr
recommended that Members of Parliament residing in the ACT should
receive half the Canberra allowance. As this matter is now being
treated in isolation, it has been decided that Members of Parliament / 2 
2
residing in the ACT will not receive any increase in Canberra
allowance but will not have the allowance reduced. These Members
will continue to receive $ 15 a day.
Mr Justice Kerr recommended increased travelling
allowances for Ministers and office-holders. In general, the
amounts of these allowances have not changed since 1964. The
allowances are paid for travel away from Canberra on official or
Parliamentary business. The recommended allowances were
PRIME MINISTER $ 42 A DAY
SENIOR MINISTERS AND THE
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION $ 36 A DAY
MINISTERS, THE PRESIDING OFFICERS,
THE DEPUTY LEADER OF THE
OPPOSITION AND THE LEADER OF
THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE $ 33 A DAY
DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
IN THE SENATE AND THE LEADER
OF THE SECOND NON-GOVERNMENT
PARTY IN THE SENATE $ 28 A DAY
THESE RECOMMENDED AMOUNTS OF TRAVELLING ALLOWA7NCE
WILL BE PAID. The current travelling allowance of $ 21 a day
payable to Members of some Parliamentary Copumittees for n etings
away from Canberra will be increased to $ 25 a day. Travelling
expenses will be reimbursed to Assistant Ministers to a maximum
of $ 25 a day. The new rates will be payable from tomorrow. 



PRIME MINISTER
OFFICIAL OPENING OF " CONSTRUCTION HOUSE
CANBERRA 27 APRIL 1971
Speech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William M~ c~ ahon, C. H. g, M. P.
I would also like to thank Mr. W-illiams and Mr. Box on your
behalf, and on behalf of my wife and myself as well, for inviting
us today. It i-s most appropriate that the building and construction
industry should decide to build this magnificent national head.-'
quarters building in Canberra. it's hard to imagine a more apt way
for the industry to display its presence in the national capital.
Thi~ s city which is as much a tribute to the construction industry
as'-' it is * oour own planners, architects and engineers. There are
three industry organisation partners here in Construction House.
Firstly, the Master Builders' Federation of Australia which is well
known and respected in Canberra. It has been submitting the views of
the industry to the Federal Government on a wide number of matters
of industry concern for a long time. And last year, my Government
was pleased to co-operate with your industry in sending an official
sur-vey mission to South East Asia to help Australian contractors try
to win competitive contracts in that developing region.
During the last three or four years, Australian consultatts
have been successful throughout the South East Asian region. It
would be natural for Australian building and construction companies
to be looking for a similar trend in the export of their skills.
This region is virtually on Australia's doorstep, and it is one
where Australian building could make an important contribution in
applying the world standard of competence it has reached.
I will be visiting Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore myself
soon, and my Government attaches very great importance to our
relations with these close neighbours to our north whether in
defence, in aid and development programmes in cultural relations,
or in the growth of trade. We would like nothing better than to see
private enterprise doing more in backing up and developing the
Government's efforts to strengthen our ties with these nations. ./ 2 
The Australian Institute of Building is a newcomer to
Canberra. But its vital role in establishing and maintaining
standards is wcll known in the building industry. The third
member of the triumvirate occupy" ing this buTIlding, the Master
Builders' Association of the A. C. T. deals with the day-to-day
industry problems in Australia's fastest growing city. And it
does that well, as the evidence of our eyes shows.
In a short ten years, building in Australia has grown from
a modest to a very large industry. It is now an industry which
helps significantly in setting this nation's growth pattern. And
much of the credit for Australia's development in the past twenty
years must go to it. its influence in Australia's growth,
development and standard of living are, of course, visible everywhere.
Let me elaborate Investment in physical capita. is one
of the mainsprings of economic progress: It has nlhyed a key role
in Australia's strong rate of economic and population growth.
The building and construction industry is responsible for
something over half of total fixed investment and about 14 per cent
of gross national expenditure in Australia: But its importance
does not end there. Through its demands for materials the industry
affects output and investment throughout many sect6rs of manufacturing
industry. It is also a very large employer of 430,000 people,
or 9 per cent of the national workforce, according to the last
census. But if you take account of related industries, building
and construction could be said to be responsible for employing
about 15 per cent of the workfcrce; you hIave rapid growth as well.
In those ten years, total spending on building and
construction has gone up by about 140 per cent. That compares with
an increase of 12o% in gross national spending generally, because
your industry is such a mass user of scarce resources, j. t has an.
important responsibility to make a maximum contribution to growth
by making the best and most efficient possible use of those
resources thus both your industry and our own economic-policymakers
have a strong interest in the soundly-based growth of
building and construction activity.
Continuity in building and construction operation raises
productivity, encourages technological innovation and facilitates
longer-term planning. Stability in your industry makes it easier
for us to maintain stable growth and full employment in the
economy as a whole. That's why we are very pleased to see the
development of, and increasing professionalism in organisations
1like the Master Builders' Federation.
The Federation and its affiliated bodies have also found
themselves increasingly involved in industrial relations, and
Master Builders' Associations have recently featured prominently
in major industrial disputes in the industry. I can recall some
recent disputes in New South Wales which have proved very costly
both to employers and individual employees# One particular
building union resorted to the use of physical violence and
caused damage to property in pursuing its demands. ./ 3 
But I am confident that under the guidance and co-ordination
of your Federal organisation now established in Canberra, industrial
relations in the building industry will bring increased employeremployee
harmony. I would not want to leave such a distinguished
audience as you are without some comments on how we in the Federal
Government see our role in relation to your industry, ? articularly
in relation to housing.
It has become almost a cliche of the political scene that in
Australia we enjoy the highest level of home ownership in the world
and one of the highest rates of housing construction. Put no matter
how well accepted and commonplace those statements may seem to some
observers, they show a solid record of achievement against which
current problems and criticism must beweighed. TVere will always be
problems to be overcome. But we are not resting on our record in
this vital area of housing which is so closely identified with the
everyday life and aspirations of Australians. On the contrary,
we are carrying on and improving the record of successive Liberal/
Country Party Governments, in the increasing involvement of the
Commonwealth in housing.
Housing is one of the few portfolios that I have not held
during my minlsterial career and that's mainly because it was
established in comparatively recent years. I seem to have had my
chance in just about all the others. The total is thirteen portfolios,
they tell me. Our position as a Government with respect to
housinq is that we believe every Australian family should be well
houseWdA nd housed in a fashion of its own choice. We recognise
that Government assistance is necessary to achieve this aim. But
we believe such assistance should be implemented in a co-operative
rather than in a domineering and bureaucratic way.
We take the approach that we can co-operative successfully
with private enterprise, and this new building and this national
caDital are testimony to the success of that approach. We also
believe we should co-operate with the state Governments in helping
them to fulfill the housing needs of the reople as speedily as
practicable. More recently, we have taken a number of decisions in the
housing area. For example, last December we made new arrangements
for Commonwealth financial assistance to the states for housing.
As a direct result ther ' havo been substantial reductions in the
interest rates charged by all state authorities. They represent
the greatest reduction in hcusing interest rates in a quarter of
a century. The interest charged on dwellings sold by the state
housing authorities and financed by co-oerative societies have
been reduced substantially, and the benefits of these reductions are
being passcd on to home buyers. We have also relieved the States of
the need to provide housing for members of the armed forces. This
has released additional funds for civilian and welfare housing.
We are also paying the States $ 1.25 million a year for the
next five years towards rental reductions for the really needy. 
Since the last Budget, the maximum advance under the war
service homes scheme has becn increased by $ 1000, and interest
charged by our housing loans insurance corporation has been reduced.
At the Premiers' Conference in February, we provided additional funds
for state works, and a number of states have stimulated their home
building programmes as a result.
These are all decisions taken to assist housing, but another
problem the industry faces is the rising costs of land. This
problem can only be solved by co-operation b tween all levels of
Government and private enterprise.
As for the future. You can be. . assured that we will.. continue
to improve and undate Government asistance in the housing area, as
we have dcne in the past: We are proud cf our record. But we
acknowledge that there are still many policy aspects of housing
which we should be looking at. Having said that I want to thank
you again for inviting us here today, and I have much pleasure in
declaring construction house officially 6pen. 



ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY
Statement to the House of Representatives by the
Prime Minister ( the Rt. hion. William McMahon,
Thursday 27th April 1972
I rise to inform the House of new
arrangements that the Government will make in
relation to science and technology in Australia.
These arrangements will involve the
establishment of an Advisory Committee on
Science and Technology and provision for an
appropriate secretariat. The function of this
Advisory Committee is to furnish co-ordinated
advice on actions and policies that would
assist in the alignment of our science and
technology, to our national objectives.
Honourable Members will be aware of
striking advances in science and technology over
the past half-century. A few familiar examples
come to mind radar, antibiotics, the jet engine,
immunology, satellite communications and
latterly, space exploration there are many others. / 2 
After World War II, it was recognised
internationally that major investment in science,
in education and in science-based activities would
be a prominent feature of the future. Scientific
research in all fields has therefore received
increasing support from governments and as a
consequence, science and technology in their
totality have contributed enormously to the economic
and social advancement and the well-being of many
countries. Australia has both contributed to and
benefited from these advances. The Commonwealth
Government has been involved in the development
of science and technology in Australia virtually
from the time of Federation, and has played a
key role through the policies which it has
developed over the years to meet the changing
pattern of national needs and opportunities.
These policies comprehend the creation
of a resource of skilled scientists and
technologists, and the pursuit of rigorous
programs of scientific research and technological
development, both within the Government and
outside principally in the universities and in 
-3-
industry. Some of these activities have been
undertaken in partnership with the States.
The Commonwealth has encouraged and
expanded the scientific and technological efforts
of its own agencies such as the the
Australian Atomic Energy Commission, and the
Department of Supply. Moreover, the Commonwealth
has developed schemes to provide financial support
for science and technology outside of its own
fields of immediate responsibility. For example,
research of high scientific merit is supported
financially through the Australian Research Grants
Committee; industrial research and innovation are
assisted through the Industrial Research and
Development Grants Board, and scientific work in
the fields of medicine and health services is
supported through the National Health and Medical
Research Council. One result of this support has
been the emergence in fields such as radio
atroriorny and medicine, of institutions which
have i. eved international recognition and have
become centres of excellence. The Government
will continue to foster the development of such
centres and in this context I remind the House of
the Government's decision to establish an 
-4-
Australian Institute of Marine Science which
we trust in the fullness of time will achieve
similar international recognition.
The Government has thus played,
through its various policies and actions, a
major role in bringing Australian science and
technology to their present advanced state, and
has, I believe, abundant reason to be proud of
the record of Australian scientists in this
regard, The Government will continue to play
a major role in these fields.
The rapid, and at times spectacular,
advance made by science and technology in
recent years has brought with it a number of
problems. For example, some research has
become very expensive in terms of manpower,
money and equipment. Indeed some fields require
facilities which are beyond the resources of
almost any single one of the developed nations
beyond the resources, that is, if the country
concerned is to maintain balance among the
competing claims on the public purse. As a
consequence, countries have been compelled to
make explicit choice from among its various
scientific and technological projects and to 
determine priorities for the allocation of
resources. There is an increasing tendency
therefore for countries to concentrate part of
their resources on particular areas in which
they have demonstrable need, expertise, or
unique environmental opportunities. In addition,
there is a growing tendency to avoid the national
development of large and very expensive projects
and to look towards the possibility of
co-operation on an international basis.
Another problem of increasing concern
to many countries, arises from the adverse
effects which have been recognised as flowing
from some applications of science and
technology. I need not elaborate in detail on
such matters as despoliation of national
resources. What I do want to emphasise is that
the Government takes the view that, before
deciding to support new areas of science and
technology, it is mandatory not only to assess
the potential benefits, but also to forecast
possible undesirable results. Only the best
advice that can be obtained for this purpose is
good enough. / 6 
-6-
Australia has reached the stage where
it becomes more important than ever to judge our
priorities carefully because we cannot cover the
whole field. We are therefore obliged to make
decisions as to which of the demands should be
satisfied. It may also be necessary to create
opportunities for new scientific and technical
developments so that specific national objectives
can be achieved. We have thus two aims to
resolve the demands and promote areas outside
of these demands. Neither can be neglected and
a balance must be achieved.
The growth and complexity of science
and technology, together with the emergence of
problems such as those outlined have led other
countries to establish formal machinery for
providing to them expert advice on a co-ordinated
basis. While the Government has been aware of
these moves it has only reached its present
position after careful consideration of the
desirability for Australia to adopt similar
procedures. Up to the present time in developing
policies for science and technology it has been
our practice to seek advice through formal or / 7 
informal channels from those sources most
able to assist. However, with the experience
of other countries as a guide and the increasing
range and complexity of the problems which we
face it is now timely to change our approach.
After examination by the Minister for
Education and Science of experience and
developments overseas, and following discussions
with leading industrialists, with the Australian
Academy of Science and with senior Government
scientists, the Government has decided to
establish an Advisory Committee on Science and
Technology. I should perhaps point out to
Honourable Members that the establishment of
similar advisory committees in other countries
and the problems tackled by them have led to the
use of the term " science policy", the meaning of
which is frequently misunderstood. Science
policy in the sense in which it is generally
accepted by governments implies a deliberate
and coherent framework for the provision of
advice on the size, structure, creativity and
utilisation of scientific and technological
research, as a basis for policy decisions on
these matters. 
-8-
The purpose of this framework, in
the sense that I have described it, should be
clearly understood, It is one of the means by
which governments can be assisted in their
considerations of the various factors which
need to be taken into account in reaching
decisions concerned with the attainment of
national goals. The primary function of the Committee
to which I have referred and which will report
to me through the Minister for Education and
Science will be to make recommendations to the
Government, on Australian efforts in civil
science and technology. It will assess on a
continuing basis Australian requirements,
resources and potential in civil science and
technology and will provide advice on these
matters. The Government intends that the
Committee should make wide ranging and
comprehensive assessments of the scientific
and technological situation. It will advise
on such facets as long term planning, new areas
which are of importance to Australia, the
priorities that should be assigned to specific / 9 
-9-
projects or areas of research, the means for
improving efficiency in the use of resources
and the effective development and utilisation of
scientific and technological manpower.
The Committee will be empowered to
undertake studies on its own initiative, in
addition to providing advice on specific
matters that are referred to it by the Government.
The Committee's interests will lie
mainly in the fields of civil science and
technology. It is not intended that it be
concerned with questions of defence science
except to the extent that these may be related
to matters that fall in its own fields of
primary concern. Nor is it intended that the
Committee's activities extend into fields of
medical research which are the responsibility
of the National Health and Medical Research
Council. The Committee will have a membership
of 11 distinguished persons with experience in
manufacturing industry, primary industry, mining
industry, commerce and finance and science. All
members, including the Chairman, will serve 
part-time and will be appointed for three year
terms. Members of the Committee will be
announced at an early date. Senior Commonwealth
officers, including Permanent Heads, will not
serve directly on the Committee, but will assist
it as assessors and will be available to advise
on specific matters within their areas of
individual responsibility. It will be seen
therefore as completely independent.
The Committee will consult with other
relevant advisory bodies with a view to ensuring
liaison on areas of mutual interest and to
avoiding duplication of effort. It will submit
an annual report which will be tabled in the
Parliament. The Committee will have difficult
and long ranging tasks to perform and it is
serviced by a competent and high level
secretariat which, by the qualifications and
experience of its members, will be able to
provide the support which the Committee will
need. As I have already mentioned the
Commonwealth over many years, has played a
key role in the development and application of / 11 
-11-
science and technology in Australia. However,
the Government recognises the important roles
also played by State Governments, by industry,
and by Universities. It therefore looks forward
to their co-operation in the work of this
Advisory Committee, in the belief that the
effective and balanced development of the
national effort in science and technology will
be in the best interests of the nation as a whole. 



92
4-iLkVy1 7
PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 40/ 1972.
GOVERNOR-GENERAL TO VISIT BRITAIN
Statement by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon William MctMahon,
C. H. M. P.
With the concurrence of the Government and with the
approval of the Queen, the Governor-General and Lady Hasluck
will make a visit to Britain during July. They expect to be
away from Australia for five or six weeks. The date of
departure and other details have not yet been settled.
The Governor-General will report personally to Her
Majesty while in London.
The Government of the Commonwealth will be administered
by His Excellency Sir Rohan Delacombe, Governor of Victoria,
whilst Sir Paul is abroad.
CANBERRA, April, 1972. 



E M B A RGO NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 9.00 PM on 1 MAY 1972
PRIME MIN.
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
BENDIGO, VIC. M AY 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William IcMahon, C'E, PiP
Mr Mayor and Mrs Elliott, Ladies and Gentlemen
I am delighted to be back in Dendigo for one
vitally important reason. I am here to help and to make absolutely
certain that John Bourchier will take his place as the next Member
for Bendigo in the National Parliament.
I share your enthusiasm Fand confidence that
when the numbers go up he is going to be sitting in Canberra with
me on the Government benches. You can count on that.
To achieve this, we are going to need your help;
we are going to need your energies; we are going to need your
donations. But most of all, we are going to need what I call the
influence of key Liberals in this community and in every electorate
throughout this nation those men and women in every community,
large or small, whose opinions are worth having, and whose judgments
are respected and sought by others.
They are people like you. People who understand
the fundamental qualities of the Australian way of life. They
understand, just as we in the Parliamentary Liberal Party understand,
that today we are at a crossroads of our national life.
For many years, the Liberal and Country Party
coalition has governed this country steadily and effectively. It
has served the people well. Today there are elements in our
community who want not just change, not just an alternative, but a
complete upheaval of our whole pattern of living.
Until recently, it looked as thotghthis viewpoint
may have been gaining unthinking adherents. But now there are signs
that these elements are beginning to take a harder look at the changes
that might confront them under the regime of the Labor Party. / 2 
2
There are signs that many Australians are gdng
to think much more carefully before they throw away a whole and
wholesome way of life and before they vote to downgrade individual
freedom, and replace the rewards of individual initiative with a
stereotyped society. It is up to us as Liberals to get out into the
community in the coming months and make our opinions. felt. We have
had the support of the majority in. this State for many years. The
basic reasons for that.. support are simple and clear.
There was the appeal of our own policies and
people in creating the climate for the unprecedented growth and
development of this nation, and there-was the disunity-of the Labor
Party, especially in Victoria.
Mr Chairman, we all know that very little has
changed. There-are plenty of brave words and idle visions put before
you but-nothing has come of them. Remember the great reforms
that were going to take place in the Victorian Labor Party. All
Australians now know what a sham they were. That was shown the other
day in the cynical and coldblooded support of the North Vietnamese
invasion. Need I say more? In Victoria, our opponents condemn
themselves. I think it is also appropriate, here in Bendigo,
to say something about our educatbn policy and achievements. In that
context, I question the attitude of the Victorian Labor Party to
education policy an attitude that was exoressed so stridently in
recent weeks by the Labor Member for Bendigo. That is, until the
Leader of the Opposition had a talk to him. This was an episode
which I believe could justifiably be called a story of pride and
prejudice. We inthe Government are proud of the record of
the Commonwealth in education over the last ten years. Particularly,
we are proud of our unsha'eable commitment to freedom of choice, of
schools for individuals and groups within the community. I will
give you an outline of what we have done in education, and of our
guidelines for the future, in a moment. But before that, I want to
turn to the other side of the story.....
I am not sure whether or not the Member for
Bendigo regards himself as the Oppositbn's spokesman on education
matters. They have three or four people who seem to claim the
title. But at any rate, the Member for Bendigo is the one who
goes along with the Victorian Labor Party in its opposition to the
principle of aid to independent schools. This was shown by his
recent most intemperate and prejudiced statemeatson the subject of
aid to independent schools and the Governments actions in accordance
with that policy. I will give you a sample to indicate the feeling
of the honourable member on the subject. These are quotations
from his newspaper interviews: / 3 
3
He says the Government has " become crazed with
the madness of a mindless State aid system." That we were
" Drunk with the mania of State aid", and that a grant we made to a
school in Canberra was, and I quote " The last word in the insanity
of Liberal State aid". Here ends the quote.
I think people can be left to mrke their own
judgments about anyone who makes such absurd exaggerations as a
substitute for genuine political debate. Australians in general
and Victorians in particular have never had much time for extremism
and bigotry, the more particularly in this time on questions of
education policy. That has been shown by the results of elections
here for many years. These recent events give me confidence
that Victorians will continue to reject unrepresentative and
extreme views as well as the men who enunciate them.
But before I leave the honourable member
for Bendigo to his melancholy future, I want to complete the story
of his assault on the policy of Commonwealth aid to independent
schools as it operates in Canberra.
My own Minister for Education, Malcolm Fraser,
gave a very good answer in Parliament to his extreme allegations.
A few days later, a leading churchman described the honourable
member's approach as misleading and distasteful. He wanted to
know whether the Leader of he Opposition agreed with those statements.
We have not heard a peep out of the Labor Party since.
The honourable member did, of course, receive
a severe caucus rebuke from a very senior Labor man and is also
reputed to have been carpeted by his leader. In public, the
question has been hushed up.
I invite you to contrast that sorry story with
the record of Commonwealth involvement in education, which I
believe we can justifiably point to with pride. Later this week,
' e will be releasing a booklet which sets out with great clarity
the objectives of the Liberal Party's education policy and the
record of the Government's achievements. I recommend it to you
strongly. It will set straight these recent attempts to mislead
the public about what the Commonwealth is doing in education.
There is one central fact that is very hard for
anyone to ignore. It is this. The Liberal Country Party Government
was the first and only Federal Covernment to act on aid to
independent schools and to give extensive direct Commonwealth
assistance to all schools. We began with a policy of aid to independent
schools in the Australian Capital Territory many years ago.
Successive Liberal and Country Party Governments have carried on
and expanded the Commonwealth's involvement. We are the only
major political Party that has wholeheartedly accepted the challenge
of the plural society to help educate children outside the State
system. At the same time, it is grossly wrong to imply
that we do not have a significant and great concern for Government
schools. This is shown by the fact that our opponents have very
little on which to hang an education campaign. 
4
Of all the capital assistance going directly
to schools from the Commonwealth, 83.5 per cent goes to the
State schools which educate 78 per cent of the schoolchildren. On
that basis, our support is weighted in favour of the Government
schools. Our teacher training assistance is helping to
produce new teachers at a much faster rate than the growth of new
enrolments. In the past ten years, the Commonwealth's direct
spending on education has gone up more than six times, from
million to $ 357 million. Equally indicative of our growing interest are
the increasing numbers of new areas of education support which we
have moved into. I mention, particularly, programmes which are
helping migrant children with language problems. And the aboriginal
study grants schemes which are training some thousands of aborigines.
Then, of course, there have been our science facilities and our
libraries programmes. In providing this support, we do not arbitrarily
decide that one school shall receive some assistance and another
shall not. We have publicly stated the standards which are to
apply. And as we havc said, many many times, if a school exceeds
these standards, it will not get a cent out of the Commonwealth.
But we do not make these decisions ourselves.
In the case of independent schools, we have Advisory Committees
from outside the Government. And in the case of Government schools,
the States themselves decide their own priorities. So they should.
That is the system we operate for capital grants.
It is lump sums for the establishment of new facilities. In the
case of our help with day to day running costs, we apply a policy
of across-the-board payments without any means test. And this
is where we find the fundamental and vital difference between Labor
and Liberal policies. They want the power to say which school shall
grow and which shall wither, whether it be a Government or a non-
Government school. This is the essence of Labor's Schools
Commission Plan. They want the power to reach into any one or all
of Australia's 10,000 schools and determine each school' policies
by giving or withholding finance. They even want the power to act
from Canberra in the movement of teachers from one school to another.
Turn now to our own policies. From the
beginning of 1970, we provided per capita grants to independent
schools at the rate of $ 35 per primary pupil and $ 50 per secondary
pupil. If we had not done this, significant numbers of independent
schools would have closed down. And the State system would have
been compelled to take over the extra burdens.
From the beginning of this year, we increased
these grants to $ 50 per primary pupil and $ 58 per secondary pupil.
But the Labor Party moved a motion in the Senate which, if
successful, would have stopped those increases. 
5
It was a clear indication how some substantial
elements of the Labor Party interpret their policy. It is a policy
which is supported by the Member for Bendigo, by the Victorian
Labor Party, and by very significant sections of the Labor Party in
Canberra. It is a oolicy which will deny diversity and end experimentation.
It will inevitably lead to a centralised monolithic system of
enforced uniformity and conformity.
We repudiate it utterly. Labor's policies, based
on the South Australian model, would put a penalty on dedicated
parents. The harder they work for their child's school, the less
money that school will get from a Labor Government. They would
have a means test on education, but no means test on pensions.
This is comnletelY unacceptable. We will provide
the maximum Commonwealth support for both Government and non-Government
schools with the minimum of Comm-onwealth control.
Parents wh(-send their children tc non-Government
schools are saving the taxpayer hundreds of millions of dollars.
At the same time, they are exercising their right to freedom of choice
to which we as Liberals are dedicated.
We will fight to maintain that freedom of choice. 



FOR PRE~ SS; P. M. No 41/ 1972*'
CONS IDERATrION OF AUSTRALIAN WOOL INDUSTRY C0ONFERE~ NCE PROPOSALS
Statement by the Prime minister, The Rt THon. William
I. ZC., hon, C. H. M. P.
The Government toaay had a long and detailed discussion
of the wide range of issues raised by the Australian Wool Indu~ stry
Conference in its re * port on proposed marketing change in the
Australian wool induStry.
It had before it a nreliminar-. 1 report of the : Randall
Committee. This Committee, con~ stituted of senior representatives
from the Departments of the Prime Minister, Trade and Industry,
Treasury and Primary Industry, under the chairmanship of the former
Secretary to the Treasury, Sir Richard Randall, was commissioned to
undertake comprehensive examination of thc-Wool Industry in all its
aspects. In view of the expected receipt of the final report of
that Committee within two weeks, it was decided that no decision
should be taken to introduce legislative changes for the 1972/ 73
Wool Selling Season before the final report of the Committee had
been considered. While no decision has yet been taken on the A. W. I. C.
proposals, the Government will be considering the Randall Committee
report before the commencement of the next wool sel~ ling scason and
advising the industry of its decision.
This will mean the continuation of PAP for the next pool
period commencing on 1st July next.
The decision will of course in no way affect the
maintenance of support given to the industry at 79.37c per kg.
average ( 36c per lb) during the present wool selling season.
CANBERRA, 2 May, 1972. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASELWORE 5.30 PM ( EST)
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME M" INISTE R, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP' 3 MAY 1972
E D U C A T I 0 N
Most of you will agree that our greatest resources
as a nation are the talents and abilities of our young people.
It is therefore absolutely vital to our future as a nation that
education should have a high priority among our national goals.
Education has this high Priority in the policy
thinking of Liberal-Country Party Governments. That's why we
have seen a rapidly-growing Commonwealth involvement in many
areas of education. Our help to the States and thie non-Go. vernment school
system at an accelerating rate are quite specific.
Firstly, there is the need to increase the availability,
or quantity of education as the population grows, and to meet the
aspirations of children who wish to stay at school longer or to go
on to higher education. Secondly, we aim to improve the quality of
education. To achieve these two overriding objectives, we are
committed, firstly, and very importantly, to our very strong
belief, that people have a right to freedom of choice of schools
for individuals or groups within our community. We also want to
reduce inequalities of opportunity in education and we want to
instill in all families a wish to encourage their children to make
the most of their personal potential.. They are our major
objectives. Our methods, too, are simply stated. We want to work
in co-operation with State Governments and independent school
authorities. We want to encourage much greater local intrest in
the day-to-day running of schools. Above all, we want to avoid
centralised monolithic control and enforced uniformity and
conf ormrity. In a nutshell: The Liberal Party approach is aimed at
releasing energies, removing obstacles and encouraging innovation. / 2 
-2
Now you are entitled to ask: What have we done to
achieve this? Let us take the ten years up to 1971 as an example,
although we were already giving substantial help in educat ion before
then, with universities and scholarships. one significant move by
the Commonwealth was on aid to independent schools.
This policy began in a limited way in Canberra many years
ago, but the Liberal-Country Party coalitiomwas-tVe f irst Federal
Government to act nationally on aid to independent schools, as part
of programmes of direct Commonwealth assistance to all schools.
We were the only major party to wholeheartedly accept the
challenge of the plural society to help educate children outside
the State system. But it would be grossly wrong to take this to mean that
we do not have a significant and great concern for Government schools.
The figures for direct Commonwealth assistance to state schools
show that our support is weighted in favour of Government schools
on that basis. Teacher training assistance is helping produce new
teachers faster than new pupils. Average class sizes are coming
down. In 1961, only 28 per cent of the 15 to 18-year-olds stayed
at school. Last year, it was 42 per cent.
We are moving into new areas of education support by
helping migrant children to overcome the language barrier, and by
special grants we are deliberately discriminating in favour of
aboriginal students.
There were over 600,000 more children in Australian
schools last year than in 1961, many of them in the higher secondary
classes where costs are greatest.
Through our expanding general revenue grants to the
States, it can be shown that the Commonwealth provides more than
half of the total recurrent spending by Governments on education in
Australia.. Since 1961, direct Commonwealth spending on education
has gone up more than six times, and spending on universities has
almost tripled. In the last Budget, the increase for education was
14 per cent. In December, we deciced on a further $ 20 million
grant to the States. This was the first time that Federal grants
have been made specifically for primary and secondary school
classroom construction. Sorte of that money is already being spent to replace
and remodel old and outmoded schools in the cities.
From the beginning of this year, we also substantially
increased the grants to independent schools which we began in 1970.
o / 3 
3
You can see our record is a-good one.; And you can
count on us to improve-on it inr-the future.
We aim to provide the maximum Commonwealth support
to both Government and non-Government schools with the minimumof
centralised controls.
We do not want another bureaucratic apparatus in
Canberra with the power to reach down into schools across the
nation and dictate which shall grow and which shall wither by
giving or withholding finance. 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 42/ 1972.
TRADE PRACTICE AND OVERSEAS INVESTMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William
McMahon,
For some months past, the Government has been considering
proposals for strengthening the restrictive trade practicos
legislation of the Commonwealth.
The issues involved have required careful and detailed
considerationas they profoundly affect the future development and
standards of efficiency of the Australian economy.
They also influence the most effective allocation of
resources with consequent long-term impact on cost and price inflation.
The Government has now decided that the Attorney-General
will make a comprehensive statement to Parliament during the
present Session probably during the next two sitting weeks.
The proposals have boon considered in the context of the
Government's attitude to restrictive trade practices and also its
belief in a free enterprise system under which citizens have as much
freedom as possible to participate in the production and
distribution of the nation's wealth.
The Prime Minister went on to say that it would be
remembered that the decision of the High Court in the Concrete
Pipes Case had clarified the Commonwealth's Constitutional powers
in the area of restrictive practices and the extent of its
legislative capacity in this area.
The Government recognises the impact that such legislation
can and will have on the future development of this country.
It has therefore decided that the appropriate course is
to make a statement to the Parliament for debate, as a means of
informing the public mind, and as a basis on which discussions with
industrial, commercial and other interests can take place before a
bill is prepared. / 2 
During the present Session, a Treasury paper on
overseas investment in Australia will also be tabled by the
Treasurer. This paper will not put forward policy proposals but
will again provide the basis for discussion of a large range of
issues concerning the general field of overseas investment in
Australia and the desirability of controlling capital inflows in
the interests of the Australian people.
It, too, will assist the Government to arrive at
decisions in this area of private capital inflows.
CANBERRA, 3 May, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: No. 43/ 1972.
TRIBUTE TO SIR KENNETH BAILEY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William
McMahon, M. P.
Sir Kenneth Bailey came to the service of the Commonwealth
Government after distinguished academic and administrative service
at the University of Melbourne.
He held high office in the Commonwealth Service for more
than twenty-five years. In particular, he was Commonwealth Solicitor-
General and Secretary to the Attorney-General's Department between
the years 1946 to 1964. In these two offices, he was principal law
adviser to successive Attorneys-General and Prime Ministers and to
governments generally. He occupied these posts with great
professional and personal distinction.
After 1964, he was for five years Australian High
Commissioner in Canada and since 1970, special adviser on
international law to the Attorney-General's and Foreign Affairs
Departments. He represented Australia at many major conferences. His
renown extends widely abroad.
Sir Kenneth Bailey was a man of outstanding scholarship
and industry. He had great humanity.
He was a personal friend of mine and on all occasions a
charming and pleasant companion. He was a great Australian and a
great civil servant.
I extend to Lady Bailey and his family my own and the
Government's deepest sympathy.
CANBERRA, 3 May, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No 44/ 1972.
IMMI GRAT ION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William
McMahon, C. H. M. P.
The basis of the Government's irmiaration Policy has
been stated time and again. It is the one that will be adhered
to in the administration of Government policy. It is the one that
counts. I re-state it now.
First of all the aim of inmmigration policy remains the
preservation in Australia of an essentially homogeneous society.
That means a society that does not have permanent minorities of
people with extremely different backgrounds that will resist
integration in the long-term. We want one Australian People, one
Australian nation. This is no racist policy based on bigotry or Prejudice.
On the contrary it is a policy having the valid social objective
Of preventing the frictions and tensions which can come from
permanent enclaves and a divided nation.
Of course such a policy has not prevented and will not
prevent the entry of people of widely different backgrounds. But
the policy d1oes stipulate a necessity -for prudent caution as to the
volume and type of migration, with emphasis on the ability of
individual migrants to become integrated or assimilated into our
Australian society, within one generation at most.
In each of the last three years, over 9,000 people of
non-European or partly non-European descent have been allowed to
settle in Australia in pursuance of the policy I have stated. All
the evidence points to their having been industrious and successful
and to their having had no real p~ roblems of settlement. Obviously
the policy and its admrinistration have been successful.
PERTH, 4 May, 1972. 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS., P. M. No 45/ 1972
A. L. P. IMMIGRATION POLICY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William
McMahon, M. P.
There are three elements in the A. L. P. Immigration Policy
which are relevant to non-EuropeQn immigration to Australia.
1. the ' non discrimination' clause inserted into the A. L. P.
Platform at the Launceston Conference.
2. the policy of basing immigration entirely on sponsorship
by relatives, friends and employers resident in Australia.
3. the decision to grant assisted passages to non-European
immigrants.
The first requires " the avoidance of discrimination on any
grounds of race or colour of skin or nationality".
The second would bias the composition of our migration
programme heavily in the direction of those countries which have an
ingrained tradition of sponsorship of friends and relatives that
is, the Southern European, Middle Eastern, and non-European countries.
This ' pyramid' or ' chain' migration as it is sometimes called in not
characteristic of the Northern European and North American countries
or Britain. These patterns of sponsorship for various countries are
clearly established in statistics of the Department of Immigration.
The third element, the granting of assisted passages, would
undoubtedly increase the pressures for entry to Australia from non-
European countries. From practical experience, we know that, even
under present restrictive policies and without assisted passages
very large ntumbers of enquiries are received involving very large
numbers of people.
If, despite this established evidence, Mr. W'nhitlam claims
that under a Labor Government there will be fewer people of non-
European descent admitted to Australia than at present, he has a
clear obligation to explain how it will be achieved. In the view of
the Government it would require a savage and ruthless use of the
immigration power to prevent entry into Australia that would be
difficult to sustain.
Mr. Whitlam's obligation to explain where he stands is * all
the more pressing when it is realised that the aims of a Labor
Government in this field could be achieved purely by administrative
action without the Parliament or the Australian people being aware
of what was happening.
PERTH, 4 May 1972. 



/ NOT FOR RELEASE
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARMELIA HOTEL,
PERTH. W. A. 4L/ f
4 May 1972
I wonder if I could go through some sort of preliminary
explanation to you first.
As we all know, there has been a deal said about our
Imiration Policy and programme, so on the way here, I had a talk
to D. For es, the Minister for Immigration, in Adelaide; and then
on the way across here, I personally edited a statement relating to
Government policy.
Now this is of great national importance because it will be
definitive, but it will explain exactly what our policy is, in fact,
and the way the administration of that policy will be carried out in
the future. I don't know how you'd like me to handle this, but I have
copies of this paper prepared for you. Simultaneously, on the trip
coming here I prepared one on the differences between the Policy of
my own Government, the Liberal/ Country Party Government, and that
of the E: Pposition., and the questions that the Opposition must
* answer. I've done both of those they're in type.. If you'd like
I could just read them out to you now and then you could know
exactly what our policy is. Then, you can go on to any other kind
of question that you want to ask me. I think the first one is so
important, the precision is also important to us.
Q Prime Minister, your visit here is being seen by some
as the launching of the Liberal Party campaign for the
Federal Election this year. If so, how worried ar you
about the Election?
PM Well, the first ~ part of your statement is wrong
the second one is not necessarily cause for alarm.
Q Sorry, Mr Prime Minister, for reverting the statement
like that. Could you tell us whether you see any disparity
between this statement and those made by Mr Chipp?
PM Mr Chipp has gone on the record. I'd say that he
endorses the statement made by my colleague, the Minister
for Immigration, and has no differences with him whatsoever
as to what Government policy is and means.
Q We've a very severe drought in our goldfields areas -9
at the moment. What are the prospects of our pastoralistsJ
in those areas getting Commonwealth loan grants
PM Yes, we have a policy that ought to be pretty well
known by now because it's been in existence at least since
I was in the Treasury, and I was one of those who could be
regarded as the father or the mother of the programmes
relating to drought and other national disasters. What
we do is to say to the State Governments you handle these
up to the limit of your capacity. If it is beyond your
capacity then let us know, and we will do our best to help.
/ 2 
2.
Now, put in terms of pounds, shillings and pence, we say
to the various State Governments,' all right, you handle
these droughts anid other tradegies up to a certain limit,
and above that, providing we agree with you as to the
conditions that exist, then we'll find the finance for
the rest of it.
So the position today is that, if the Labor Government
in Western Australia, think that there is a drought existing
there of severe proportions that they can't handle themselves,
and was beyond the financial amount that has been agreed
upon between the two Governments, they can then make an
application to us for the funds.
Q Sir, will your Government intervene in the dispute
between Queensland and Papua/ New Guinea over the far north
of the Queensland border, and try to settle the dispute
while Papua/ New Guinea is still under Australian jurisdiction
or take the matter to the International Court that was
mentioned by MR Whitlam, I think
PM Could you go through that again for me, please Just
read it again if you don't mind.
UQQ ueenslWailnl dt hea ndG oPvaeprunam/ eNnetw inGtueirnveean eo veirn tthhee dFiasr puNtoer thbeertnw een pluV&amp;
Queensland border, and try to settle the dispute while
Papua/ New Guinea is still under Australian jurisdiction
rather than wait till Papua/ New Guinea gets independence,
and then take the matter to the International Court?
PM At the moment, it's clear without any doubt that the
jurisdiction over the areas there are with the Queensland
Govenrment. It is a matter that we could naturally talk
to the Queensland Government about, but it is one that
does not, I think, justify any action by the International
Court of Justice.
Q Prime Minister, in the light of the happenings of
this week do you consider the way in which the war in
Vietnam is conducted, say two or three years ago, was a
waste of time
PM No I don't. I do not. I think we gave the Vietnamese,
through the joint operations of our allies and ourselves,
the opportunity to defend themselves, and to complete
their policy of Vietnamisation. What I have to admit is
that it does appear as though the attack by the North
Vietnamese strongly supported in arms and equipment by
the Russians, has created a dangerous situation there.
I don't concede it was a mistake to intervene. I think
it was proper, providing we accept that the basic
principle was to help that country defend itself, and keep
its own independence. I hope they continue to be successful.
I hope they do.
Q Are you still in close contact with * Mr Nixon about our
policy in Vietnam
PM No, not in close contact with him: Not as close as I was
during the period that we had troops at Phuoc Tuy Province. ./ 3 
33.*
Q But this would mean that we would discover our own
policy irrespective of the policy of the United States
at the present time
PM What do you mean by that -because we have no troops
there, and I have already stat~ d that we won't be permitting
troops to return, combat troop Is so there is very little
of our policy involved here.
Q We would not act in any othe'rway
PM No.
Q Prime Minister, could I revert back to the statement.
Mr Calwell seems to think that there is evidence that
the settlement of non-Europeans in this city is notsuccessful.
Your statement here says that obviously
the policy and its administration has been successful.
What do you have to say about MIR Calwell's mment?
PM From the information given to me as late as today
the number of non-European, or people of partial non-
European stock coming to Australia, is not very great.
But percentage-wise, there is a bigger number coming into
Western Australia than to other parts of Australia. But
the second point that I want to make is that they seem to
be being integrated fairly well, and so far as we are
concerned, looking at it from a totally Australian point
of view, there have been very little difficulties. But
nonetheless we recognise that there are more coming here,
percentage-wise, and consequently it's a matter which we
have and will continue to give very close attention.
I don't regard it as an insuperable or difficult problem
to manage.
QMr Whitlamd has accused you of not giving voting rights to
18 year olds becauseyou might be afra:. d of how young
Australians might express themselves at the polls. What
answer do you have to this and what is the reason why _ jou
have rejected the proposition of ' 18 year * old voting rights?
PM Well, the answer to the first part is that I take very
little notice of what Mr Whitlam says, ever, and I'll
continueto adopt that policy while I remain the Prime Minister,
and I hope that will be a long time. And it's a political
question, therefore, that I have to answer. But I made it
clear in the House that we would not be giving a vote to
the 18 year olds during the forthcoming election. And
I believe that to be correct for several reasons.
The first one is that if you look -at our Constitution
itself, you will find that there is a clause in it that
requires the person to be of adult age. I know that there
is a great deal of difficulty in various interpretations
that can be based upon . the words. But until they are at a
stage throughout Australia where they are given complete
adult status with all the rights and responsibilities,
then I feel we are correct in maintaining the correct
position. The second pointis that if you test Australian opinion,
./ 4 
PM conf lict
Q PM and the gallup polls are helpful here, although I don't
necessarily say that we look at the gallup polls under
all sets of circumstances; But if you test the gallup
polls, I think you'll find that a pretty healthy majority
of people feel that it's bett-er to wait until you feel
that they have these responsibilities and privileges,
full adulthood, before we move to give them the vote in
the Commonwealth Parliament.
And don't forget, under our Constitution, you can't
be a member of the Commonwealth Parliament unless you're
21 years of age.
Mr McMahon, on the financial scene, do you expect
to be able to announce the results of your enquiry into
the State taxation system before the next Federal election
No. Will the Federal Government consider taking over
Company legislation in Australia
What I hiive said during the course of the last dy
or two, in fact I said it last night, published in today's
papers, that what we are doing immediately is to look at
the Restrictive Practices Act and we will considerably
strengthen= t. But bfore-we move to legislation, we will
table a statement in the Senate and the House of Representatives;
we will throw it open to full debate there, and we will invite
discussions from commercial, industrial and other interests,
before we put it down in terms of a BILL. We feel that this
is what is necessary. And of course, if we legislate, and we
believe we have proper power under the Constitution to
legislate, then of course to the extent to which there is any
between State and Commonwealth legislation, our legislation
will prevail. That is number one. The other one that I
mentioned which is relevant, but not necessarily relevant
to the question you asked, but also we'll be ta. b. ling a paper
round about the same time on capital inflow into this country,
and of course foreign takeovers, or attempted takeovers
will be considered in the context of both those statements.
Sir, you were met at the airport by a group of de
strators whose theme seemed to be unemployment. Would you
care to comment on how you feel abouEttisparticularly
in Western Australia an increase or a decrease
WEll, first of all, I saw a small group, but I didn't
know what they were yelling out about. And last time I
was here, I remember up to one of them and saying ' Aren't
you the son of so-and-so, a pretty good Liberal?' And he
said ' Yes'. I said ' What are you doing here?' He said
' I get $ 10 for this'. So I've forgotten it. I've never
heard that before anywhere. I hope it doesn't spread too
far. But what do I feel * personally about the unemployment
position, on a general plane? I think that any reasonable
person, knowing that we have to absorb 180,000 young people
leaving school or tertiary education over the Christmas
NEW Year period, must know that the figure we've got the
enemployment down to now, by the end of March, was pretty good.
") dly S-/ 4 
I dont' want to enter the field here of making forecasts
in front of my colleague, the Minister for Labour and
National Service, because he takes the responsibility
and when the figures become available, I think he should
announce them, and if they've fallen substantially, get
the credit for it.
But of this I can assure you, that on thebasis of a
general overall look, and knowing the trends, and loo]~ ing
at them as he and he alone could look at them on the advice
of his advisers, he feels the outlook is pretty good.
Naturally, I'll be waiting until the next figures comes
out, and I think if I can just fall in with his optimism,
I think it's the right way to look at it without mak~ ing
any positive forecasts.
As to the specific position of Western Australia,
of course you have your difficulties other than the one
of school leavers and people leaving tertiary education.
What you had is the end of the mining boom, and consequently,
you must have felt a more severe rise in unemployment than
you have in any other state. But what have we done We
gave you money for rural unemployment, and rural unemployment
is pretty sound now. If you look at the March figures, you
will see that percentage wise you've-done better than in
March of other years, and certainly for the last two.
Thirdly, we gave pretty substantial votes to your
Government in order to improve economic conditions.
And so you'll find gradually a greater feeling of
confidence, and I'm sure it is here now rate of demand
for labour, and I know that that regular demand is
improving, particularly in the vacancies position, is
improving very strongly. So we hope, the Government hopes,
and I particula-rly hope that as a result of what we've done
at Loan Council and Premiers' Conference, and later on with
the mini-Budget, that we'll find the kind of result that we
need, and we'll get the figures that we think are satisfactory.
But, if we don't get them, the economy isn't moving
along the way we-want. And, as we've done so frequently,
we will move again. I don't think we'll have to, but as
my Government doesn't believe in the old fashioned idea
of moving only at budget time. we've shown that we don't
stick to that hold and I can assure you that if we find
it necessary to move again, we most certainly will do so.
Q On that tack, Sir, Mr Gorton is quoted as suggesting
that the Liberal/ Coun-' ry Party coalition could do with
revitalising and new ideas. Do you have anything to say?
PM No. I have never commented about Mr Gorton or any of
his statements.
Q Then the suggestion from me that there could be
revitalising and new ideas
PM Well, I don't put you in the same class as Mr Gorton.
If you don't mind, I'd rather answer him direct.
Q. Then an idea which is old in the Liberal Party.
Do you see room in the Liberal Party for continuing rights
of the individual and free enterprise In a growing
nation, can that principle be pursued 
/ 6.71
PM I've lived for those two ideals that you've mentioned.
I wouldn't have gone into Parliament if I'd not thought I
could make a contribution to maintaining the rights of the
individual to feedorn and independence within the law.
And I'll do everything I can in the time that I am there
to see that those rights and those privileges are kept
in tact. And that's why I'll do my best to defeat the
Labor Party that is socialist in outlook, and if you get
to know them as I know them, you'll know that they're not
only socialist, but centralist, but they want their will
to be enforced upon the people rather than think of
themselves as there in the interests of the people and
the liberties of the people themselves. And that's why
all so frequently we do come along and want the people to
live within the law. That's why we try to strengthen it
whenever we can as for example in our industrial relations.
As to free enterprise, free enterprise has made us the
great country we are. You in Western Australia know what
it's meant to the development of this country, the developof
the mining interests. And of course I'll protect it all
I can; of course I should have praised-it much more than I
have in the past few months. But I can assure you, that now
that you've raised it, tomorrow at the meeting with Industry
and Commerce I'll priase them,-and let you know exactly
what I think of them..
Q Mr McMahon, on the question of inflation how important
does the Government think it is to Keep these brakes on the
economy in order to control inflation during the next few
months? And secondly, in view of the high level of
liquidity on the surface at the moment, will the Government
consider a prices and incomes policy to prevent a further
growth of inflation?
PM There's obviously misconception in what you've stated.
And the second part of your question, the conclusion doesn't
follow from your premises. So that's the easiest and most
definite ~ ay in which I can answer your question. Would you
mind then if I give my impression of what you mean. There
are two ways of looking at an economy today. The first one
is to look at the question of inflation and ask yourself.
how is it caused. Is it due to demand or is it due to wages?
Our inflation as we know now, is fundamentally due to wage
inflation. And if you've seen wages rising at about 11% or
more, and you've got productivity rising at the raeof 2
then, without any doubt whatsoever, as to the difference
between the two, you will have an inflationary pressure
which sooner or later must manifest itself. So that is
there, and it depends on the wage fixing tribunals as to
the extent of inflation. This sort of wage cost inflation
will go on. But, as I tried to say a few minutes ago,
we in the Liberal Party don't live with the old fashioned
ideas that everything is created by a single cause. And we
don't believe in the old theory that demand inflation is the
only cause of inflation. So what we've shown pretty clearly
since November of last year, is that we would when we realised
that demand was not growing as rapidly as we wanted it to, 
we knew that cost inflation would go on for some
time if our policies turned out to be successful,
inflation would be gradually reined in under control
we decided that demand wasn't high enough so we
stimulated through monetary policy.
WE then had the Premiers Conference I believe the
most successful I've known in 22 years and we then gave
the States aditional ability to spend, and that created
further demand. Later on, we approved, in the field of
education. a large grant for the building of schools.
And in the mini-budget we again boosted demand to a
considerable extent by about $ 180 million, which by
indirect effect wouldt probably increase demand over
a period by as much as a minimum of $ 350 m.
So that we've shown that we are prepared to move in
terms of assisting demand, but at the same time we have
taken action to rein in cost wage inflation if we can.
An importarlit decis:. on willbe that of the Commission in the
National Wage Case when it appears early next week.
As to the last part of your question, I said it did't
follow. It was a non sequitur, or the conclusion that you
came to wasn't a logical one based on the facts that you'vye
mentioned. But if you could tell me exactly what it is
that you want me to answer, I'll give you the precise answer
to it.
Q IN VIEW of the extent of wage costs causing inflation,
in order to prevent this happening again, will the Government
consider implementing some kind of prices and incomes
policy?
PM I've given the ans-.' er to this in the House on several
occasions. We frankly do not believe, not at the moment
anyhow, that a wage price tribunal can be successful.
We've not seen it successful in any other country. And
we know of no good reason why we think that there should
be something novel about it in the case of Australia.
But what I have done is ask the Treasury to prepare a
paper for me it would be another form of white paper
showing the actio~ n taken in other countries, and the
results or the consequence of theaction that has been taken.
THis will be debated, and if we felt that, after the debate
had occurred in the House, we were justified in making some
changes, we would do so. But I can assure you of this-that
unless wages themselves are brough) t under control by the
tribunals, then it would be extremely difficult to get a
prices and incomes policy that would be satisfactory or
would give an appearance of being able to work reasonably.
Q Mr Prime Minister, our Wooldgrowers will express ( 61_
unhappiness if they've got to wait any longer for their
wool acquisition plan. They say that the RAndall Report
should have been completed in time for legislation to be
introduced this session. The situation is quite acute.
Can you offer them any hope?
PM First of all I dispute your words; the last word that
you've used.-But secondly, I ask. you people this question.
We appointed the RAndall Committee, and Sir Richard is a
very talented civil servant, and we asked him if he would
report to us on what should be done, particularly with
regard to the deficiency payments in the 1972/ 73 woolgrowing
season. That report is very nearly ready I belio-ve / 8 
8. L
it will be ready within the next two or three weeks.
I don't belive that a Government should be called upon
to make adEcision for the 1972/ 73 season until that report
is in our hands. I believe it would be wrong, having asked
that Committee to make it; it has spent a lot of time and
a tremendous amount of effort; if we were to turn round
and we were to foreclose any of the options of that
Committee or any other recommendations that had been made
to us. Thiey'll come to us very quickly, and we'll certainly
be mna position to act well before the next wool-selling
season commences so that the closing part of your statement
is correct.
Q MR Prime Minister, it has been suggested from Country
Party members that the LIberal Party members are opposed
to an acquisition scheme, particularly those members in
Sydney, in that area
PM I have given you the answer to the question which
follows on the one that was immediately asked. I see
no reason in the wwrld why we should foreclose any of
our options before the Randall Committee Report. it
will be reporting to us within fourteen days or not
much later and until that stage is reached, neither I
nor any of my colleagues will be prepared to make any
kind of statement publicly about acquisition.
Aansd t. h t1e part of your statement about
a difference of opinion on that aspect you are wrong.
Q Last month, it was announced that there would be a
review of the taxation system. What chance is there of
us seeing any reforms in this year's budget
PM I've answered that questirn already based upon the
findings of the Committee.
Q Prime Minister, do you think it's fair the intervention
of the Government particularly State Governmentsin
business as we've experienced in the last few days
or week or so, to do with the Ansett takeover.
PM Forgive me, for saying this is one question I don't
want to answer. The first reason is that it was an
action taken by Sir Henry Bolte himself at a time whe~ n
I had stated what the attitude of the Government was,
and it was a clear one. I would not have permitted
Ansett to be taken over or to be controlled by any foreign
interests.. Secondly I would have ensured that our own
securities over the assets of Ansett, the money we'd
lent them, would be protected. And thirdly, I thought
it right that market forces should operate because they
were two Australian corporations acting under Australian
management, and very largely under Australian ownership.
But, this has happened. I don't want to become involved
in these circumstances with Sir Henry Bolte.
Q In to the general principle would it mean that
Australia would eventually have to have, again, tighter
controls on foreign investments and foreign ownership in
this country.
PM I have said a few moments ago that we have already / 9 
initiated two sets of enquiries one related to private
capital movements and I stated in my statement that I
made yesterday, that that could lead to greater control
or greater regulation of private capital inflow into
Australia so consequently, we've got to consider this
question of whether we'll have and in what way and to
what extent we'll permit ownership of Australian assets
by overseas interests.
And the other one relates to the retiiv prcies.
This will involve takeovers by internatinal or overseas
corporations as well as local and domestic ones. So
these are well in my mind. I want the-nfiaximum of Australian
ownership. I want the maximum of Australian control.
I want Australians to participate in management and this
is a goal we've set and this is a goal we'll be looking
to achieve when we get these reports. But we'll do it
on a basis of knowing the facts knowing where Australia's
best interests lie. Because we are not going to do anything
foolish that is going to work agianst your interests,
or the interests of average Australians. We are not going
to work against the interest of full employment, rapid
growth and a better standard of living amld better educat;. c-n.
These are the tests that we'll face and these are the questions
that we'll have to answer.
Q ( Inaudible)
PM Of course I've regretted it. But, of course, part
of it had to be expected because of the fall-off there
had been in international trade. I regret I'm not fully
briefed on this question, but I do know that my Minister
for W~ atiocnal ! Development was -,--illing to live all the
assistance that he was able to give.
Q The elections, Prime Minister is there anything
you could indicate that will show how your Party will
tackle the election? in the next few months
PM No, there isn't because I think you can go too
soon, just like a horse that jumps over the barrier
before the barriers have gone up, and is apt to get
his mouth caught in the strands. I believe, certainly,
that the Labor Party has gone off twice already
and what more it's got to say, I don't know, and I
believe people are rapidly losing confidence in them.
So let them go on this way. The more they do it, the
happier I'll be. What we are doing is acting. We will
keep on acting When we make our decisions we will let
the Australian people know what they are. And then when
we feel the time is right to start animouncing policy for
an election, we'll do so. But I can assure you of this.
We won't hold any of decisions pending a policy speech.
We'll make them as and when we make them.
Q Could I ask whether Mr Chipp's call for a multiracial
society in 1980 is at all reconcilable with
the stipulation for true precautions on the volume and
type of migration 
~~ bs
PM THis is our policy, as I have stated it in the
statement. And it is the one that will be applied
by my Government. Mr Chipp has stated that he agrees
with that wholeheartedly and I know he does.
Q Sir, have you given any consideration at this
to the export of natural gas, from the North West
PM I haven't come into this question of the export
of natural gas. I've looked at it on a very broad
plane. I've looked at the proposals associated with
the production and export of natural gac;, but I can't
explain it so far as it applies in a specific way to
Western Australia.
Q Mr McMahon have you set a date for the election
yet
PM No, no.
On the way over, just before I cam here, I thought
I'd get a question on Garden Island. And I asked my
colleague, the Mini*, ster for the Navy, whether we could
have some good news for you about what we could do.
Q Prime Minister, Garden 7S land has been much in the
minds of West Australians over the past few years. How
much land will people be allowed to enter when the
Naval Base is completed Can you tell us if anything
more has been decided
PM WEll, I've personally taken a very deep interest
in Garden Island because I knew that the local people here,
or a large number of them, particularly the yachting
experts, wanted to have continued access to Garden
Island. So I cave instructions to the Navy that they
ought to begin to be as generous as they possibly could.
We had the Commonwealth Public Works Committee examining
-the problem, and they will shortly be submitting a
report to us. And I also got the Minister for the Navy
himself who became directly involved, and we have
decided in the last few days, without actually moving
to a final decision to increase the size of the coastline
that could be used, from seven to ten miles out of the
total fourteen miles. And we've also decided to increase
the acreage that could be used by civilians under the
control of the Navy from 1,250 acres to 1,800 acres.
In other words, we've taken another step forward
and I believe this will meet with a great deal of
satisfaction from the people of Perth.
Q On the general question of defence, and in relation
particularly to Western Australia, we've seen the
planning for Learmonth, the air base, and now the
planning for H. M. A. S. Stirling at Garden Island. Has
there been any advance on the pos 3ibility of an Army
Base in Western Australia 
c4 -7
PM As well as the two points you've mentioned, we
do, of course, carry out maritime surveillance f4 e4*
Western Austral~ ia, and we also have exercises, and
have recently had one exercise with the United Kingdom
Government fleet, part of the United Kingdom Government
fleet, in Western Australian waters.
As to establishing an Army Base here, the
decision has not yet been made. But what I can say
is that we have not ruled out establishing an Army
Base in Western Austra'!. ia
Q ( Inaudible)
PM Mr Chipp referred to a multi-racial society.
You are referring to a more homogeneous society; is
there
PM Essentially homogeneous society with the
emphasis on homogeneous, and Mr Chipp falls in with
that policy omple_ E6ly. He has no difference of
opinion , cth me nor with the Government.
Q Do you envisage any increase in the number of
non-European migrants in this country
PM No, but I'm looking at policy now and not at
the details of that policy. If you wanted to ask me
if there was any contemplated increase relating to
the 1973 year, it's too early to make any forecast
at the moment, but I don't anticipate any.
Q Do you think there's any racism in Australia
PM I don't think there is and I've made in abundantly
clear that I DON'T like racism. And I do believe
in having a-homogeneous society, and I don't believe
in introducing elements that can cause us problems in
the future. So let me answer it in two ways.
One, I believe, and Australians I beltc;:,-e
go along with me; we want one nation and one people.
So we want people who can integrate, and fairly
quickly. Two, it couldn't be racist because we do allow
u * p to 9,000 non-Europeans, or people of partial non-
European descent. If you have a policy like that, you
couldn't be racist. But we are selective. We don't
want to create little enclaves.
Q Well why do you think there was such a furore
over Mr Chipp's statement
PM I'm not going to answer why there was such a
furore. I'm telling you what our policy is, and I've
explained it twice already today.
Q You were reported at being angry at Mr Chipp's
statement originally ./ 12 
12
P14 Well, I'm not going to answer to wha. t people
think I am without asking me. Nobody asked me
whether I was annoyed or not.
Q Is it true that non-European migrants do not
get the same treatment as European or white migrants
to this country for example in such things as hostels
PM I am not the Minister for Migration, but what I
can say is that of course in terms of assisted migration,
we only give assisted passages to those we need and those
we want. So that we have to be very selective about it.
If we feel we don't have a real need-for them, we don't
provide assisted passages.
Q So you don't give assisted passages to non-
Europeans
PM No.
Q Do you contemplate doing this at all
PM No.
Q Mr Snedden, the Treasurer, today made mention
of the national policy on foreign investment and made
references to tile Victorian thing Do you intend
to take action against the Victorian Government's
attitude towards the takeover bids Ne,
PM My only answer to this I personally, and my
Government, never act hastily when we don't know what
the consequences are likely to be. In Government, where
it affects the long-term interests of the Australian
people, we don't make hasty judgments. So, I've stated
and Mr Snedden with confirm this, we are both of a
single mincq, that what we have done is to ask the
Treasury to prepare papers relating to overseas capital
inflow into this country. And that will involve the
capacity of overseas concerns to take over or to control
Australian corporations.
Q Is there any intention.........
PM So that paper will ) 5e coming up before us. At
the same time we will be considering papers on
restricted practices and that will involve the same
conditions. In other words we will give very thorough
consideration to the problem of the ownership or control
of Australian industries. Ourattitude is a clear one.
We want maximum Australian ownership. We want, equall~ y
importantly, Australian management. We want Australian
technocrats to be able to join in and assure the
development of this country. And above all, we want
to do all these things in the interests of Australia.
We want a growing economy, we want full employment, and
we want policies that will ensure that the Australian
people are entitled to and will in fact, increase their
standards of living. That's our poli-* cy, and whatever
we do, it will be directed toward achieving those
objectives. / 13 
13
Q Do you approve of the Victorian Government's moves
to control the takeover bid by I. T. T. and T. N. T.
PM That is an exceptional case. I stated our policy
quite clearly, and it &amp;-as this. WE would not have
permitted overseas corporations to have taken over or
to obtain control of Ansett. We would not have permitted
it. We would have protected our own securities. Now
Sir Henry has intervened as he has a legal right to do,
and a constitutional right, and for the moment, I have
not come to any final conclusion about it so I can say
no more. 
pp ' q
A Segment from Prime Minister's Press Conference, BUNBURY. W. A.
6 MAY 1972
Q Could we just have confirmation In a Conference today
one of the motions that was passed was that the Commonwealth
Development Bank, the Rural Reconstruction Scheme, and the
Marginal Dairy Farmers Scheme be controlled by one existing
body and to delete all others
PM I have long thought that we needed to consider the
desirability of having a national rural bank that would
cover a wide area of operation. And this proposal, this
idea is being examined very very carefully, by the
Treasury OFFICIALS and they will look at it in the widest
context. I can't go any further than to say that I like
the idea. I do not know whether or not it is administratively
sound, but at least we are investigating it.
The only other comment I can make about this is that
frankly we have so many matters that we have to give
consideration to these days, more than I've ever known
in the whole time I've been in political life, that when
we'll get around to making a decision on this matter is
in the lap of the Gods. But I'll do my best to see that
it's pursued, and that we try and get a decision on it
as quickly as we can. 



MVEETING OF CHAMBERS OF COMME RCE, MANUFACTURE RS, MINES
AND THE EMPLOYERS' FEDERATION
PERTH, W. A.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, C. H., M. P. MAY, 1972.
Mr. Britten, Mr. Brodie-Hall, Mr. Hammond, Mr. Pullan
Ladies and Gentlemen,
You will notice I kept those introductions very strictly inalphabetical
order because, in mentioning the distinguished
Presidents of the four very important groups which are sponsoring
this occasion, I would not want to attempt to differentiate between
them in the status, or importance that we in the Government attach
to them. They are all important organisations and provide a-good and
effective representation of the business spectrum here in Western
Australia. i want to assure you, as the members of these important
business groups that your views occupy a. n important priority in
our decision-making. I am also delighted to note that, to use a
common expression, " the place is packed out". If attendance is any
guide then I can say we are a very good bet indeed in Western
Australia when the election comes around. Thank you for coming.
During our generation of national government in Canberra with
our coalition partners, we in the Liberal Party have always seen our
role as having a central theme and a commitment to the concent of
individual rights, and support for free enterprise. I want to
emphasise these last five words. We have always believed in the
value and the real benefits of consultation with business groups in
considering economic policy measures. I will go further and assure
you that there is going to be no change in this attitude in this
very strong commitment of ours to private enterprise; or to our
continuing efforts to create and maintain the right type of climate
in which private enterprise can continue to make its magnificent
contribution to the growth and development of this country: An
effort which has resulted in our gross national product multiplying
by a factor in money terms of eight since we came to power in 1949,
from about 4,000 million dollars then to well over 30,000 million
dollars in the early seventies. / 2 
All the other indicators tell the same story of the fantastic
growth of this nation. Whether you look at public. investment,
private investment figures or the record of exports and international
trade which place us up near the top of the list of the world's
trading nations. No matter which way you look at it you must come
to the same inescapable conclusion that our generation of government
has been one in which the energies and initiative and dynamism of
private enterprise have been encouraged and released to make possible
the exciting story of Australia's postwar developnment.
I think our period in Government to date can fairly be called
the " growth generation".-Australia's great leap forward. Western
Australia has played a significant role in this development, thanks
to managers and entrepreneurs like yourselves: And thanks to men
like David Brand and Charles Court, and all those others at the
state level who have done so much. I pay my Government's tribute
to them all.
You have had the minerals boom and the great boost to
prosperity that went with it. You had your own local " population
explosion" and the great growth that came with it here in Perth,
a really attractive city. It is true that there has been a
temporary pause in the great growth of the mining industry here,
caused mainly as a consequence of the world currency crisis and the
slowing down of the Japanese economy in its very rapid rate of
growth, but the biggest part of the big projects are going on. I
refer to the Japanese economy. I am confident that these
characteristics of the Japanese people strong, vigorous and
efficient will be reflected before long in a resurgence of the
Japanese economic growth and n resumption of the hiah level demand
and of the kind of orders we previously enjoyed from them. In the
meantime, growth and development Jhere in Australia are going on.
Only this week you cpened the new alumina plant here at
Pinjara. This plant will lift Australia into number two position in
the world as a producer of alumina. That is something you in the
" west" and all Australians can be proud of. We have been and are
still facing something of an economic challenga, today. That is true.
But I wonder sometimes whether many Australians stop for a moment
to remember the stark economic challonges that faced us when Robert
Gordon Menzies led us so brilliantly into Government
In the late forties and early fifties the problems were
really renacing. We had a virulent form of inflation. The Labor
Government had just about given up in despair of doing anything
about it and was in its dying days. When we assumed the
responsibilities of Government, we diagnosed the situation quickly
as one of under-production, too much money chasing too few goods,
shortage of manpower, and a coal and power famine. In those days
of the " battle for prdcin as it was called, we had a three
pronged approach, against communist influence in the unions,
against inflation, and towards development.
In three to four years, we had transformed the situation: We
literally produced our way to prosperity. Many Australians would
hardly remember that time. ./ 3 
After all, half the population today is under 30 years of age: And
of course, our economy is far stronger, more complex, and more
diversified than in those days. We no longer face recurrent balance
of payments problems: And thanks for that are due in no small
measure to the great contribution of the mining industry, and we
all know of the West Australian contribution to this success story.
But as our economy and other western economies here become
more complex, the problems they can pose for economic mangers have
become the more difficult. This is true of ourselves as well as
other nations. We have found that new problems are not necessarily
amenable to the more traditional responses. And so we here had to
be prepared to be more flexible than we have ever been. We have
had to be ready to correct trends as they emerge and if necessary,
to frankly acknowledge where our predictions have not been borne out.
It is true too that we have been through a period of some pessimism,
but I think we passed through the trough over the Christmas and New
Year period. In the last couple of months there has been a
resurgence of business and community confidence.
I think you will find that is fairly readily acknowledged in
Canberra and the rest of Australia too. It reflects of course, the
realisation that our basic long term prospects for growth and rising
standards of living are aood. But it also reflects some favourable
short term developments w.-ich I want to mention to you today.
To illustrate my point let us have a look at the various
sectors of the economy. I first mention what we have done in
monetary policy. Financial conditions are very easy, with funds
readily available to the private sector. The reductions in interest
rates we induced have now spread fairly generally throughout the
financial system, and rates are well below those prevailing in the
early part of this financial year. The banks are very liquid, and
their new lending commitments are rising very strongly. The
normal winter rundown in liquidity will not put a strain on
financial markets this year. To sum up on the monetary side,
financial and credit conditions are very conducive to increased
activity in the economy. We believe we have helped significantly to
create the right climate in this way, for a return of business
confidence. Late last year, we removed restrictions on bank
lending. We followed this up later with a large release from the
statutory reserve deposits and lower interests rates.
That was only one part of our flexible response at the
Premiers' Conference in February and I believe it was the most
successful I have attended in all my time in politics. We
stimulated the economy further through the provision of extra funds
for the states, we approved a big lift in unemployment benefits,
and we stepped up the scheme of job creating grants for rural areas
which we had begun in February. But the major decision directed to
overcoming the lack of business confidence at that time was the
restoration of the investment allowance. We did this in response
to very strong representations that it would be the single most
important action by the Government in boosting business confidence.
I think this was a clear indication of my views and those of the
Government, in relation to our strong commitment to private
enterprise to which I referred earlier. / 4 
We also decided to continue for a. second five year-period the
industrial research grants scheme, and we have-reviewed the
conditions which apply to it, and we expect that the total--amountof
grants will show a significant increase in this-second.. stage of
the scheme which begins.. in July,
We have taken other decisions which will help in stimulating"
activity. In December for. example, I announced an emergency grant
of twenty million dollars over eighteen months to be used for
primary and secondary school class.. room construction. in the states.
About 6.7 million dollars of that amount will be used before June
Then there are our-recent decisions, which are known as " the mini-
Budget". These-decisions on taxation . and'pensions will stimulate
activity directly to the-extent of 180 million dollars, and in
indirect-terms we expect the total.. stimulus will be of the order of
350 million dollars. Public spending on goods and services i one
of the strong areas of demand at the moment. Between the first
halves of 1970/ 71. and this financial year, the increase in this. area
was 15%. Continued strong growth can be expected-here because of
the-extra money we gave to the states in February for their works
and housing programme and the continual pressure for many quarters
for increased commonwealth spending generally.
There are other reasons for optimism I want to mention to you:
Particularly the recovery in the rural economy. Our best judgement
is that farm output is going to go up by about 4% this financial year.
Farm prices, particularly for wool, have improved considerably and
the result is that farm incomes should rise by as much as 11% this
year. This is encouraging, and we believe it should help to stimulate
business conditions. The private housing sector is very strong.
Motor vehicle industry spokesmen are confident about improved export
prospects and a lift in domestic demand. Some of them have already
stepped up recruiting of labour. The steel industry has also gained
substantial export orders.
So you can see that we have been prepared to take action to
stimulate the economy and boost business confidence without delay
when we believed action was required. Actual unemployment have
fallen sharply from the peak of 130 thousand at the end of January
to less than 98 thousand at present. Under the scheme rural employment
grants, 12,600 jobs were created up till the end of .' arch.
We expect the employment position will continue to improve, but as I
said to the press when I arrived here yesterday, we stand ready to
take further action at any time we believe it is necessary tc
provide extra stimulation.
I think you will agree, even from this necessarily brief outline
of our actions in recent months that we have adopted a very
responsive and flexible stance. We have been on the job continuously
in keeping our finger on the economic pulse and we have at no stage
hesitated in deciding what should be done. To us, the way ahead is
one of steadily returning confidence in the short term, and the
resumption in the long term of the very strong growth and development
which this country has enjoyed for so long under Liberal and Country
Party governments. 
We havo-beon working hard on a num~ ber of fronts to overcome
the serious problem which havc been that of inflation. This is no
doubt that wage costs are clearly the prime element in the
inflationary process when you have average weekly-earnings rising
as they did by more than eleven per cent last year and productivity
rising by only 2 5 or 3 per cent then it is inevitable that you are
going to get a strong inflationary pressure. In the March quarters
the rate of increase moderated as was indicated by the rate of
increase in the consumer price index.
Amongst the steps we have taken are the amendments to the
arbitration act introduced to Parliament in Canberra only a few
days ago. These amendments are designed to curb the militant
use of union power to extort unreasonable wage increases and to
ensure that the community's interest is preserved in wage settlements.,
We have also made certain that there has been continued commonwealth
intervention in important wage cases to impress on wage tribunals
the economic consequences of their decisions. We have also acted
to stress the desirability of wage moderation in wage increases
wherever this has been practicable. And lastly, we are moving to
promote a more competitive environment in the business community
itself. we are doing this by our actions in deciding to strengthen
the restrictive trade practices legislation.
We are also moving to review the overall levol of tariff
protection. I think we can say with somo justification that our
efforts in trying to restrain wage cost inflation arez beginning
to bear fruit. This was shown in the recent Commonwealth Public
Service pay decision and it was also shown in the decision of the
arbitration commission announced this morning. The commission's
decision on the national wage case was for an increase of two
dollars in the total wage and an increase of four dollars 70 cents
in the minimum wage for adult -males. National wage case decisicons
always provide debate, but all round, I think this is a well balanced
decision. On the one hand it provides a sizeable lift in the wages
of those in the work force who have been left furthiest behind in
the race for ever higher and higher wages those on the minimum
wvage and, I might add, it conforms with the submissions the
Commonwealth mado to the commnission on their situation. On the other
hand, by exercising moderation in adding further to rapidly increasing
wages in general, the commission has given the economy a real chance
to make some headway against inflation. That is in the interest of
every wage earner and of the people generally.
Ladies and Gentlemen, it has been a Pleasure to be here
today and to outline to you how we in Canberra see cconomic
conditions moving at the moment. I can assure you that we are
determined to improve employment and contain inflation, and I hope
that my remarks today have shnwn you that we are winning the battle
to, achieve these objectives. Thank you. 



INTERVIEW
With Messrs Bob Baudino and Brian Johns, Perth, 7 May 1972
PM The Leaders of the Federal Parties in the Commonwealth
Parliament to find out if they would take part in a convention.
I wrote to the Leaders of the Country Party, the Labor
Party and the D. L. P. and I havenow received letters from
each of them expressing their willingness to take part in a
Conference. But the Government also made a decision, at
least we made a decision, as the Government, that we would be
represented. Shortly afterwards, on 19 April to be precise,
we considered a submission by the Attorney-General., and I
was given authority to convey the decision to Sir Henry, to
make an announcement at the appropriate time
Q You have done that
PM I think a letter is ready now. I had to wait until we
got one additional letter at that time, and I received tlat
just before I came here. I think I can stress the importance
of. this Convention because of the rapid change in conditions in
Australia, and the need to develop a Constitution that is
appropriate to the times, both from the point of view of the
Commonwealth and the States, and the desirability of giving
some voice to Local Government Authorities.
We took our de6ision against the background that the
fundamental Constitutional role must lie with the Commonwealth
Parliament because only the Commonwealth can take the necessary
action to have a referendum presented to the Australian people.
So that whilst we are willing and anxious to participate, we
must do so on the basis that the convention could not bind the
Commonwealth. Shortly I will be submitting a paper to the Leaders ol.
the other Parties so that we can have preliminary discussions
. prior to having the proposals submitted to the members of
each Party for consideration. I've already told the States,
after receiving a question in the House, that there was a
strong-feeling that Local Government should be represented.
Q Can you tell us in the Sir Henry Bolte letter,-the
points he made
PM Well, fundamentally, we would ask the Leaders of the
various Parties in the Parliament....
Q Would you spel out where he would like thd Constitution
altered
PM No, so far it's only in a preparatory stage. I'd like
very much if subsequent matters could be dealt with in depth.
Q You don't expect anything this year
PM We'll have meetings, yes, but to establish the kind of
forum, to establish the rules and the framwork and the number
of representatives from the States and Commonwealth, I. doubt
whether we can get on to the subject this year. ./ 2 
2.
Q So this is a long term -it will be right at the
top level?
PM Yes.
Q It will be yourself, and the State Premiers
PM Yes.
Q All State Premiers involved
PM Yes. I think we will find though there will be
Parliamentary Delegations, for example, we have been
thinking of this Preliminary Conference that there should
be probably as many as fifteen or eighteen representatives
from the Commonwealth Parliament, but th~ at would be-witliout
prejudice to larger representations, at a later date.
Q Eighteen representatives from the Commonwealth
Parliament
PM Fifteen to eighteen
From the Comm*' nwealth alorie
PM Yes. We are thinking of it. I'm not saying we are
committed to it yet.
Q This is designed to cover all avenues of the Constitution-
All possible points of discussion.
PM Well, that's going too far yet. I think we wouldn't
touching subsequent matters just at the moment, but this is
the number of peoplethat we think we could cope with at a
preliminary conference.
Q Well, could I ask what would be the breakdown on this
party would it be Ministerial or official levels?
PM No, it would be members of both Houses, and members
of each of the Parliamentary groups, each of the Parliameneary
Parties: drawn from each of-the Parliamentary Parties.
QWhen do you think this meeting might take place
PM I could not tell you when it's. likely to be, but I
~ understand, THIS PART IS OFF THE RECORD, I rang Greenwood
yesterday, because he had been at a conference sbme time in
April, and he'd written to meq telling what happened at
the Conference and making several recommendations to me.
Q That was the Conference in Adelaide -Attorney-Generals.
just looking at Constitution review
PM Yes.
Q And this follows on from that I take it -obviously
Sir Henry's Attorney-General has gone back and briefed him?
./ 3 
PM This followed this must have happened in the last
few weeks because this is the Attorney-General's meeting
and I have not yet recehived I've seen the press release
made by the Attorney-General, but I haven't yet got a report
from the Attorney as to what happened, or any recommendations
that he m ay have made.
Q What I'm questioning is the timing of Sir Henry Bolte's
letter. Sir Henry Bolte wrote to you after the Attorney-
Generals' Meeting?
PM No, before. He wrote to me on the 22nd March.
I don't have the date the Attorneys met, but it would have
been in the lastcouple of weeks. U
Ad 



7L7
PRIME MINISTER
OPENING OF RICHARD CLEAVER LODGE
PERTH, W. A.
Speech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William
McMahon, M. P. MAY 7, 1972.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you for your welcome and for the opportunity to
be here today. This occasion is an important one for every one who
has the welfare of old and handicapped people close to their hearts.
But most of all it is important to those elderly people who will
move into this new lodge to live. This new building is to be their
home, and in it I know they will find security and care as well
as contentment and happiness. In it they will find friendships and
associations which will do much to remove fear and loneliness from
their lives. I do not believe that any nation . can be at ease with
its conscience while there are old, and frail, and handicapp~ d
people in our midst who are without proper care.
The problems of modern governments are many and complex,
but there must still be in the forefront of our policies, the
welfare of the people whose life's work is done., and who are without
the means to look nfter themselves. In one way or another,
every elderly person in our community played a part in making'
Australia a favoured country in the world.
Just think for a moment of the events in our history
through which a person of seventy years of age has lived. They
saw the foundation years of this commonwealth, and saw us grow and
mature from a rural to an industrialised society: Two world wars
and other conflicts7 droughts, depression, flood and fire; progress,
development, achievement and prosperity. All these things good
and bad have given Australians many reasons to be proud. They
have made us a nation. Let us not forget, then, that today's old
people were the young people of those yesterdays of our history.
They were part of the pioneering force in our community. They
worked hard and they rcarcd families and gave real m-aning to the
old song " Advance Australia Fair". Those of them who are in need
should not be forgotten now, and here at Swan Cottage Homes they
are not forgotten. 
This is one of the leading institutions of its kind in
Australia. Nearly twelve years ago, it was founded by my friend
Dick Cleaver to provide modern low cost housing for elderly people.
At that time he opened a bank account of ten dollars. Today the
Swan Cottage Homes organisation controls assets valued at two and
three quarter million dollars. There are now 401 units providing
accommodation for 531 people with a later potential for 617 people.
I think you will all agree that this is a magnificent result of the
dedication and inspiration of Dick Cleaver and Mrs. Cleaver, and I
pay my tribute to them now.
I think it is appropriate that this new block, which I will
officially name shortly, is called after him. One of its impressive
aspects is the effort made and one which is obviously succeeding
to treat elderly people as individuals and not as numbers in an
anonymous group. This is tremendously important because each one
of us, whatever our station in life, has pride and self-respect.
If our needy old people cannot have these things because of our
neglect then the nation will have a stain on its record which will
be to its eternal shame. This village protects the pride and selfrespect
of all who come under its roof. It offers constant care for
those who must have it. It offers a home for those who need one.
My Government regards its sgial welfare policies as among
our highest priorities. We have been actively reviewing, revising
and extending them and each year has seen some now assistance being
given or existing benefits increased. This will go on. The
business of looking after those in need is " unfinished business",
so far as my Government is concerned. It may be a task without end,
but we are determined that the Government will play its part and
play it in a significant way. Under the Aged Persons Homes Act
which I had the pleasure of introducing into Parliament the
Commonwealth government has given substantial assistance towards
this project. Much has also been provided by dedicated fund-raising
efforts. My Government does depend heavily on community effort and
interests: For the identification of the needs of old people and the
areas where help is most wanted.
Governments can act against p xe only with the guidance
and help of their own citizensand when help is given, it is the
personal touch of the local groups of welfare workers and the staffs
of the institutions themselves which makes the old and the frail and
infirm feel that human beings ar: helping them not an anonymous,
remote and impersonal government. Today marks the completion of
another project in the proud record of Swan Cottage Homes. They have
have served a noble purpose and have set an example to the nation
i: so many of their activities. The development of their resources
is not at an end by any means. We need to spend very substantial
sums to help our elderly citizens who cannot help themselves.
Since the Aged Persons Homes Act came into force in 1954,
Commonwealth grants have totalled about 131 million dollars and when
all subsidised projects have been completed, accommodation will have
been n-ovided for over 41,000 old people. / 3 
3.
This is a fine community effort, and I don't want to appear
to be suggesting that it is mostly the Government that has done
all this. The Government is a substantial contributor, it is true,
and will go on providing as much as it can, but this is, in fact,
a co-operative effort by Government, by people, by institutions and
companies. I want to see it continue throughout the whole range
of our social services. My Government is pledged to help and help
it will. Our record in the past is, I believe, a good one. But
we are not satisfied. We want to do better and we intend to do
better. We want to see our old and needy people all of them
secure, remembered, and at peace in the evening of their lives.
I believe this is a national duty for us all and one we must and
will fulfil. 



LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
CIVIC CENTRE
SOUTH PERTH
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William M4cMahon, CH, MP
May 7, 1972.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This is my second visit to the " W'est" in ten months and I
can assure you that both occasions have been rewarding. I have
been delighted by the warmth and strength of support for the
Liberal Party and the coalition government generally. I have found
this warm support everywhere I have gone during this five day visit
to Western Australia. There is undoubtedly a wave of enthusiasm
for liberalism running for us here. I think there are ' a number of
good reasons for this. There is the steadily rising tide of
business and economic confidence including the strong recovery of
the rural economy. There is a widespread and accurate impression
that the worst is well behind us economically. The economy " bottomed
out" in the first months of the year and the recovery is well and
truly underway. I think we are also getting some be nefit from
disillusionment at the state level.
West Australians are always prepared to give even a Labcr
Government a fair go. But I think-the resurgence of Liberal Party
membership and the great warmth I have encountered here indicate
very clearly which way the political tide is running now. I don't
think doctrinaire attempts to impose bureaucratic and cumbersome
controls do anything but downgrade individual freedom and interfere
with individual initiative. It's clear that West Australians
recognise this in relation to price control plans. At -the Foderal
level, there has been a fair amount ofl discussion about price control.
We have responded initially by commissioning a document which will
review the operation of price control attempts both in Australia
and overseas. When it is complete, we will present that document
to the Parliament and allow debate on it. In that way, people can
be fully informed about the consequences of prices control. We are
opposed to it, at this stage at least. We believe it leads to
distortions and economic bottlenecks and that real headway against
inflation is more likely to come through an attack on its root causes.
Here I refer to the ccmbination of industrial lawlessness and
excessive and unremitting wage demands that we have experienced. / 2 
During the year the end cf Decamber average weekly
earnings went up by 11 Per cent, and during the year up-to the end
of March, prices went up by 7 per cent. Productivity or the actual
increase in real production and income from the economy was around
2 or 3 per cent. The inescapable result of that situation is an
inflationary pressure which sooner or later breaks out in a.
of price increases. Rising prices affect evorybody especially do
they make life hardenfor fixed income earners and others who have
limited influence over the level of their own income. That aspect
of this problem is particularly on my mind today, as I have just
come from a ceremony where I openod a new section of a home for old
people, and I am also glad to see that in tho national wage decision
the Arbitration Commission placed the major emphasis on the increase
in the minimum wage. But of course, others have been doing quite
well through the exercise of industrial muscle by militant and
powerful unions groups, and this is the question that lies at the
heart of the inflationary problem. This is the issue which must be
dealt with before we can be confident of restoring price stability.
The time lost in strikes last year increased very strongly
over the previous year. The total increase in the time lost was
28 per cent and the total of wages lost was 45 million dollars. We
have not just been standing idly by in this situation. We have
made decisions on a whole package of measures to fight inflation.
They can -, mmarised unde,-r four major decision areas:-
There was our decision to make the most significant changes
to the industrial laws since 1947. We brought these amendments
into Parli&amp; ment only a few days ago, and they will be debated this
week. They will provide for secret ballots and they will strengthen
the arbitration system which has served this nation so well for so
long. Next, there was our decision. to-promote grecat competition
in business. We are going : Eo do this by strengthening the
restrictive trade practices laws and reviewing the level of tariff
protection. This wil~ l make it harder to pass on wage increases too
readily given, by simply raising prices. Next, there was cur
decision to exercise our influence before the wage tribunal to
exercise moderation in wage increases in the C.-omomqalth's Iwn
area of influence. Lastly, there was our decision for continuous
Commonwealth intervention in important wage cases oefore the
Arbitration Commission. tc-iiwnress on the arbitration tribunals
as strongly as we were capable of doing what the economic
consequences of their decisions would be.
For months until the carpenters case we had very indifferent
success in this. But in recent weeks, and in the national wage
decision only on Friday, our policy of wage restraint is starting to
bear fruit. We have a balanced and sensible decision in the
national wage case. It presents us with a nationai opportunity to
make further real headway against inflation. We need now a period
of industrial peace and Price stability. Union leaders should
realise that the best interests of their own members lie in
curbing inflation. Employers too, must not use this wage decision
as an excuse for further price rises. Let's have a bit of oi~ a
fashioned commonsense, moderation and restraint. 
aI
4 3.
I have outlined our major areas of decision in combating
inflation. There are many other areas of national life where we
have shown a willingness to act boldly and decisively in matters
calling for public decisions. We have implemented a whole string of
economic management decisions from action on interest rates and
bank lending in the secona nalf of last year through to the mini-
Budget", just a couple of weeks ago. Throughout that period we
have not hesitated to make a decision to further stimulate the
economy. We will not hesitate to do so in the future. We have
made many other decisions and taken initiatives right across the
spectrum of national policies; whether it be in land rights for
aboriginals in defence aid to Indonesia and Malaysia or in our
early recognition of, and support for, Bangla Desh: whether it be
in our initiative to establish the Australian Environment Council
of Commonwealth and State ministers. And I will be making a
further statement of national policy on environmental policy quite
soon. In the defence area we have recognised the importance of the
Indian Ocean to cur strategy. We have gone ahead with the: second
stage of Cockburn Sound. We are spending twelve and a half million
upgrading Learmonth Airfield as a base for long range reconnaissance.
Take education as another example. In December, we made a
decision that 20 million dollars would be given to the states for
classroom ccnstruction and some of that money is already being
used to replace or refurbish old schools in inner suburban areas.
We made a decision to increase the grants to independent schools
and we liberalised tax deduction provision for education. We
decided on an extensive programme of support for the arts. We are
nep ng the wool industry: We have a programme of rural
reconstruction. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have a list here which covers over
pages describing our nolicv decisions I will not list them
all, but I will say that as these aecisions work through the
community; as they become more widely known; as economic confidence
grows stronger; as Australians come to understand the serious
defects and consequences of the policies of our opponents, then I
have complete confidence that policies of the Liberal Party and the
decisions and actions of this coalition Government will ensure our
safe return as a Government. We are in a particularly strong
position here in the " West" and I ask you to do all you can to
help return the Liberal candidate in your electorate. 



OPENING OF THF 4TH ANNUAL CONFERENCE
OF
THE CONFEDERATION OF ASIAN
CHAMBERS OF COMM-ERCE AND INDUSTRY
A. C. C. I.)
PERTH, W. A. MAY 8, 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William. McMahon, CH, 14P
President Park of the Confederation of Asian Chambers of
Commerce, Delegates and Ladies and Gentlemen,
Welcome to Australia and in particular a welcome to Perth
one of our most attractive cities; and thank you, Mr. Blyton, for
your warm introduction, and your kind remarks; and thanks to
C. A. C. C. I. for holding its fourth conference here in Australia.
It is a source of pride to the Australian Government to have this
meeting here as a tangible demonstration of the importance of our
relations with Asia and of the role of Chambers of Commerce in
complementing the activities of Governments in the business and
communercial are
It is not really necessary to stress to you, as distinguished
Asian business leaders, the vital connection between trade and
development. All of our countries are linked together in the search
for greater growth and development, and for growing and worthwhile
mutual trade. But as you know these matters have to be seen against
the background of the world economy as it exists and as we expect
it to develop. In the last twelve months, international economic
relationships have been disorganised and distorted by the monetary
crises; established trade patterns have been distrubed.
As a result of the Smithsonian Agreement late last December,
the immediate threat relating to parity realignments has passed.
But, clearly, not all of our Problems have been resolved. There
remains the problem of whether, -and if so to what extent, longer term
reform of the international monetary system is necessary. There
remains the problem of maintaining a high rate of growth of output
in the major industrialised countries. There is also the related
world wide problem of the increase in the rate of inflation. Unless
the advanced countries succeed in resolving these problems of
stability and growth, they are not going to contribute in the most
effective way to helping the problems of the developing countries. / 2 
Not only could aid policies be nullified, hut advanced
nations would be oreoccupied by their own problems, rather than
those of the It is obvious that in some of the rich
countries there has been disenchantment with foreign aid, and there
has been a sense of weariness that the problems of development are
more intractable than had been widely supposed. I am happy to assure
you that this is not the case in Australia. I believe the
Australian people fully support the Government's view that we must
have a strong foreign aid programme, and evidence of our goodwill
is clearly established by the facts. The cumulative total of
Australia's bilateral economic aid to Asia now is close to 400
million dollars, But a sound and increasing aid programme does not
mean that we cannot learn from the exoerience of others. Part of
the disenchantment about aid has arisen from exaggerated expectations
about its effect. Some have seen foreign aid as a kind of magic
panacea to close the gap in living standards between countries.
In reality, the problems of growth are much more complex;
and foreign aid should properly be seen as a supplement to the
efforts of the less developed countries. There should be an element
not only of trust but also of modesty in our expectations for
foreign aid. As well, I hope, as being modest we must be practical
about what we can do. I do not want to exaggerate the role Australia
can play. Australia does not presume to tell Asian countries how
to run their economies. We leave such advice, if it is to be given
at all, to the international institutions, if and when Asian
countries ask them for it. Advice is much more easily taken from a
relatively anonymous multilateral institution than from an
individual country, however friedly and even indulgent. Here
and nQw I want to mention the Asian Development Bank, which is
growing steadily as an important influence in the region.
Australia is giving the bank full support and legislative
steps are now being taken to enable us to take up our share of the
increase in the bank's authorised capital. Associated with this is
another point I wish to emphasise strongly about our aid policy. It
is that we have long been conscious of the debt problems of less
developed countries in Asia, and so we have provided essentially
grant aid. We have not asked for the payment of interest and we
have not asked for our money back.
The basic problem confronting donors remains. It is to
adjust the terms of their aid to the repayment ca t. es of
individual recipients. I find it distrubing th:. nnu:'. average
growth rate of 10 per cent in debt service payl: ts is coni. erably
higher than the rate of growth of the export earnings of the less
developed countries. This means that debt repayments are mopping
up an increasing share of hard-earned export revenue. It is not an
irretrievable situation, but we have the impression that mnny
countries have not really faced up to it. In too many cases the
countries of the Asian and Pacific region face more inward looking
trading policies by the industrialised countries and they face
the development of trading blocs and the growth of tariff and
non-tariff barriers to traditional products. / 3 
3.
Turning to markets and trade, Asia offers an expanding
market for certain raw materials and capital equipment, essential
to the continued growth and diversification of its economies. Its
imports twenty years ago were 6,750 million dollars Australian.
In 1970 they were worth 40,700 million dollars Australian. This
growth in import demand has brought an increased interest by
Australian businessmen. Australian exporters once looked almost
exclusively to the United Kingdom and Europe. But since the early
1950' s there has been a pronounced trend towards increasing trade
between Australia and Asia. In 1948/ 49, total two-way trade was
only 310 million dollars Australian. Last year it was more than
nine times greater. We now sell over 43% of our exports to Asia
against only 15% in the late 1940' s.
Almost a quarter of Australia's total imports now come
from Asia, compared with less than a fifth in 1948/ 49. Japan is
Australia's major overseas customer. Whilst we recognise that
whilst aid has an important role to play in the development of the
region, in the final analysis trade is preferred to aid as a means
of attaining economic maturity. To help two-way trade, the
Australian Government has entered into some bilateral trade
agreements which recognise special features of trade between
signatories and provide for Government-to-Government trade.
Agreements are current with Japan, Malaysia, and the Republics of
China, Indonesia, Korea and The Philippines.
We have also supported realistic world commodity
arrangements for many products which provide the bulk of export
earnings for Asian countries. Within the total trade complex and
the desirability of world commodity arrangements, we recognise that
the nations of Asia are dependent on expanding exports of primary
products to developed countries, and we share the concern of many
Asian countries about the need for improved access to international
markets for them. But commodity agreements are not in themselves
enough . to solve the problems of the primary producing countries.
A greater liberalisation of trade in agricultural
products is required and this has been sadly lacking up t. ill now.
I add that Australia warmly welcomed the declarations in February
this year by the United States, the E. E, C. and Jctp.: n to work for
freer trade in agricultural as well as industrial podcts. We are
also aware that expanded trade with Asia will cpE. ldn i..-e.~ gly-upon
the ability of the region to export profitably. hve . n
prepared to back our beliefs and as early as we a system
of non-reciprocal tariff preferences for manufact;:" red End semimanufactured
goods and handicrafts from developing countries.
A review has recently been completed and my colleague,
the Minister for Trade and Industry, has recently announced at the
UNCTAD Confecsnce in Santiago that some 200 additional items are
to be added to the list of manufactures which benefit from this
system as well as a number of other handicrafts. Providentially the
countries of Asia have proved to be the major beneficiaries of this
system. Last year some 80% of the imports entering under the
preferential arrangements came from the region. 
4.
I emphasise, however, that the quotas are not being
filled and that you as businessmen ensure that maximum
advantage is taken of the system by the exporters of your countries.
Equally, you should be aware that the Australian Government is
willing to look at requests for existing quotas to be extended and
for additional products to be included in the system.
May I turn now to investment. I am pleased to note
that the conference is devoting some time to the question of
investment in Asia, which necessarily goes hand in hand with any
discussion of trade and development. From our own experience,
we in Australia, recognise the importance of foreign investment as
a means of promoting growth, and even though Australia is still a
net capital importer, we readily give approval for Australian firms
to make direct investments in developing countries, especially in
Asia, and I hope to see more firms doing so.
We believe that direct investment accompanied by exports
of technical know-how and managerial skills is a major means by
which we can contribute to the development of the region. We
recognise the natural preference of host countries for joint
ventures as distinct from wholly foreign owned investments, and we
must strengthen the transpcrt links and means of communication.
Like some of our northern neighbours, Australia is an island nation.
Our international commerce is carried almost entirely by sea. It is
appropriate therefore that delegates to this conference should be
examining this subject. Shipping technology has made tremendous
advances in recent years. Mew types of ships, improved methods of
Shandling cargoes and new concepts in transportation have been
developed. You will be reviewing these requirements, assessing
the role of both the Government and private sector in developing
these facilities. It is from the decisions of business that these
needs arise. I am sure we can expect a continued and accelerating
growth in trade within the region and increasing contact between
the businessme. of Asia and of Australia.
There are already business co-ooeration committees
involving Australian businessmen and those of Japan, Korea an3
Indonesia. Exchanges of ideas within these committees and at
conferences such as this will lead to a greater understanding of
the trading problems confronting us in the 1970' s. Thank you again
for inviting me and I have much pleasure in now declaring open the
4th annual' eonference of the Confederation of Asian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH. MP, IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, CANBERRA
PRESIDENT NIXON'S DECISIONS ON VIETNAM
9 MAY, 1972
I refer to the important decisions which President Nixon
has been obliged to take in the present very serious situation in
Vietnam. These decisions were taker because of the blatant invasion
of South Vietnam by the North Vietnamese, supported by outside
Governments. Not only has there been this invasion of South Vietnam
across the Demilitarized Zone, but the North Vietnamese forces have
been carrying on offensive military operations in Laos and the Khmer
Republic for a period of years.
The Australian Government strongly condemns North Vietnam and
its associates. It is they who must take the complete moral
responsibility for these actions.
The United States has made with full Australian supportevery
effort to bring about a negotiated settlement of the present
conflict. These efforts have met with an absolute refusal by North
Vietnam to negotiate seriously. The United States has also tried to
de-escalate the fighting by progressively withdrawing its forces from
Vietnam. The response from Hanoi has been the launching of a
long and carefully planned invasion.
The Australian Government understands and supports the
decisions which the President has fel-t compelled to take.
in our view, the United States had done everything in its
power t'' o ensure a negotiated settlement and to maintain the independen,
of South Vietnam and not to abandon the people of that country. The
present decisions by the United States reflect its determination to
stand by its international obligations and alliances. The United
States must also avoid endangering the lives of its own forces in
Vietnam. 



CHECK AGAINST' DLLIV_ Y
PRIME MINISTER
INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. WILLIA4 McAhHON
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, CAIBERPA 1AY 10, 1972.
Mr Speaker, as my colleague the Minister for Labour and
National Service said when introducing this Bill, it contains the
most significant amendments to the Act since 1947. I think it is
timely to remind the House and indeed the community of the long
history of significant legislation that Liberal-Country Party
Governments have passed over the years since coalition came to
power in 1949. Just as the Rill now before the House has two broad
reasons concern for the community and concern for the individual
worker so has all of the legislation introduced by successive
Liberal-Country Party Governments since 1949. It was Liberal-Country
Governments which really made workable the secret ballot legislation
which had been introduced by our predecessors.
The legislation that we brought down in the early fifties put
into the hands of rank and file unionists the opportunity of ensuring
good Government in their organisations. By legislation, they have
been able to ask for elections to be conducted by independent
officials. They have been able to have the Court enquire into
irregularities in ballots. It is a Liberal-Country Party Government
which ensures a viable sanctions process under the Conciliation
and Arbitration Act.
Whilst over the years we have stood firm on the principle that
there must be sanctions or fines to deal with industrial lawlessness,
we have been realistic enough to make changes in that process as
the need to do so has arisen. We have approached the question of
sanctions or fines with resolution but we have sought to provide under
the Act every opportunity for parties to resolve their differences
by the traditional processes of conciliation and arbitration. We
have sought to give every opportunity to a union to resile from
strike action and so avoid a penalty being imposed on it. However,
as the Minister pointed out in his second reading speecn, if that
opportunity is not taken then a union must face the conscu. vnces
under the Law. It has been said that the sanctions process . Las fallen
into disrepute. At one point of time there might have been some
truth in that statement. However, that is no longer the We
are determined to ensure that if fines are imposed under the socalled
penal clauses of the Act those fines will be collected. That
is a firm statement of intention by this Government. / 2 
Mr. Speaker one must, of course, refer to the historic
amendments to the Act of 1956. These were introduced by the
Minister for Labour and National Service of that time, the late
Harold Holt. As Honourable Members know, the real thrust of those
amendments was to separate the administrative and judicial functions
of the old Court of Conciliation and Arbitration. This meant that
the administrative function of the prevention and settlement of
disputes became the responsibility of the new body, the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, whilst the judicial functions
have been the responsibility of the Commonwealth Industrial Court.
Those amendments removed a lot of the legalisms of the system as it
had existed. They resulted in the new commission adopting a more
flexible approach to its responsible task of prevention and settlement
of disputes. I, for one, believe that over the years, the
Commission has carried out its very onerous role in a responsible
and painstaking manner. It has served the community well. I think
perhaps the community does not always realise the very great value
to the community of our system of conciliation and arbitration.
Save for that which operates in New Zealand, there is no other system
comparable with it.
One of the great benefits of it has been that, by and large,
this country has not had inflicted upon it the very long drawn out
disputes that characterise industrial relations in a number of other
countries in the world. Relatively speaking, strikes in this country
are of short duration. This is largely because parties are able to
take their differences to the appropriate tribunal and indeed that
tribunal has power to step in of its own volition when disputes occur.
It would be a mistake, however, to see our system of conciliation
and arbitration as an institution merely existing to serve the
interests of management and labour the parties to industrial
disputes. Employers and unions simply cannot be permitted to resolve
their differences without regard to the effect on those groups who
are not themselves directly involved. The Government has a
significant role because it has a responsibility for the management
of an increasingly sophisticated economy. Government is itself
perhaps the most important party in industrial relations. It
represents the community. This has always been recognized by the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act in a variety of ways. It has long
given government the right to intervene in certain prodeedings:
It envisages Ministers notifying disputes. It has long contained
provision for the " public interest" to be taken into account in the
prevention and settlement of industrial disputes.
We are proposing in the Bill now before the House to enhance
the protection of the public interest. It is the factor uppermost
in our minds whenever we have come to consider alterations to the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act. It is what the community is
entitled to expect of government.
I have sketched very briefly some of the principal changes that
have been made to the Act over the years, but it is not only the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act itself that we have given a great
deal of attention to over the years. Honourable Members will recall
that when this country was faced with perhaps one of the most serious
periods of disturbance on the Australian waterfront we were not
slow to act. / 3
/ 3 
conclued at that time that strong leqislation
,-as needed and we introduced it in .1^ 65. That legislation had a
most salutary effect on the Taterside ' r; Ter'-F' Federation as indeed
it was intended to have.
Nlow, Speaer, that leads me to sneak of the
importance attached to this current bill as part of our total
fight against inflation in this country.
7e are concerned to ensure that the parties to industrial
disputes settle their differences within the arbitraton system where
the public interest factor is an all important one. Ve have
included in the bill, for example, a provision that the Commission
must have full regard to the economic consequences of what it might
decided. We have included in the bill provisions widening the
particular matters which are reserved for determination by a Full
Bench of the Commission
! e believe this is particularly imoortant because these
are matters that ought not to be considered on a piecemeal basis.
They demand a co-ordinated approach by the Commission. They demand
that every opportunity is given to government and to the widest
possible range of interested parties to put their views to the
Commission when matters of this nature are being determined by
the Commission. As part of our total planning in our fight against
inflation, we are also strengthening provisions of the Act to deal
with irresponsibilities of trade union power. we are convinced that
certain powerful elements in the trade union movement have exercised
their strength on too many occasions in a totally irresrpnsible
fashion. Unfair and undue pressure has been placed upon employers
by the use of the strike weapon. This has resulted in excessive
rises in wages and salaries relative to national productivity.
We have long held that it is important to the community
that there be a strong trade union movement. We do not wish to see
a weak trade union movement but, by the same token, we have to see a
balance of power between employers and unions in the settlement of
industrial disputes. Over the last twelve months, consumer prices have risen
by 7 per cent a marked acceleration on the rate of 2 per cent
to 3k per cent which Australia experienced throughout most of the
1960' s. I believe it is recognised by most economists that this
increase in inflationary pressures has been largely due to excessive
rises in wages and salaries to which I have already referred.
Inflation is a pernicious economic and social evil.
The losers in the inflationary struggle are people often least able
to afford it retired people, small savers, the unemoloyed, and
less organised groups of workers. / 4 
4-
It is for these reasons that the Government has " een
seriously concerned about ' inflation, and has taken action on
several fronts. to deal with the problem.
First, we have recognised the importance of greater
competition in the economy. The Attorney-General w'ill be making
a statement to Parliament shortly outlining proposals for some
important changes to trade piactices legislation.
We have also indicated our intention to carry out a
systematic review of the tariff structure.
Second, we have taken an active part in promoting higher
productivity in Australia through the assistance we have given
to inter-firm comparisons, productivity groups, and productivity
promotion. Third and here we come closer to the crux of the
problem we are intervening actively in Arbitration Commission
hearings whenever these have general economic significance. And
we are seeking to ensure that restraint is exercised within the areas
of the Government's own responsibility the Public Service and the
various Conmonwealth statutory bodies. It is ,'' ithin this total
context that the extensive amendments proposed by this bill must be
seen. And this is not the only piece of legislation that we
have brought forward in this Session to deal with the problem of
industrial unrest that has dogged this country in recent times.
Parliament has just recently passed an amendment to the
Public Service Arbitration Act which is specifically designed to deal
with industrial situations arising in the area of Commonwealth
employment. We have strengthened that Act bv making available to
management and the unions the traditional means of conciliation
and arbitration to resolve industrial situations as they arise. I am
sure this is a provisions which has been widely welcomed.
There is absolutely no reason why organisations with
members in Commonwealth employment should need to engage in
industrial disturbance. The Public Service Arbi. tration Act as it has
now been amended, will ensure that Constitutional means are
available if and when industrial situations emerge in the Commonwealth
area of employment. I spoke earlier of the extent to which this Government
over the years has strengthened the Act to ensure every opportunity
for democratic control in organisations registered under the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act. There is a wide range of provisions
included in this Act to extend further those opportunities.
Tie firmly believe th. t unions and employer bodies should
not be the playthings of those who sit upon executives. A heavy
responsibility rests upon executives to see that the affairs of those
organisations are conducted scrupulously and with respect to the
views of the members. 
The members should have the widest possible opportunity
for expressing their views and for seeing to it that their
organisations are properly controlled. Surely no-one can disagree
with any of this. Surely no-one can disagree ' ith the provisns
of the hill which are designed to achieve this.
If the Opposition is going to argue against these
provisions, then all any reasonable person can say is that they
are merely the sookesmen of those union bosses who must have
something to fear by these provisions being brought into law.
There has been much said in recent months about the
amalgamation of organisations in particular the amalgamation
of unions. je recognise that amalgamation of unions is a
characteristic of industrialised societies.
We recognise that there can be benefits to the members
of organisations in combining their resources to undertake more
effectively their responsibilities. We believe, however, that
because amalgamation of organisations is such an important step
that it should be clearly authorised by the membership of the
organisations which pronose to amalgamate. " e do not wish to see
amalgamations take place unless the widest possible opportunity is
given to members to voice their opinion about an amalgamation
proposal. We do not want to see organisations grow so large that
the members of them see themselves to be so minute in the total scheme
of things that they lose all real contact with the officials whose
taks it is to run the affairs of the organi-stion.
The bill now before the House does not simply consist of
a whole range of unconnected proposals for change in the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act. It is, as I have poiated out, a
cohesive document. It is designed to ensure that the interests
of the community are not lost sight of when parties sit down to
settle disputes. It is designed to ensure that the organisations
involved in the settlement of disputes faithfully reflect the views
of their members. There is a single nhilosophy running through the whole of
it. That philosophy may be summed up as one which aims to protect
the commlunity and the individual in the total area of industrial
relations. And that is vital to our success and prosperity as a
nation. 



E: BARGO. NOT FOR RELEAS2 BEFO-RE 6. 3 " 1 m. ( EAS1')
PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTERr THE RT HON.
WILLIAM McPIAHON, CH, MP. MAY 1972
W A G E S, P R I C E S A N D INFLATION
Last week I spoke to you about our arbitration system.
Tonight i want to soeak, to you about a related problem.
We have now reached a crucial point in our campaign to
dampen down the inflationary pressures in the national economy. The
decisions of the Arbitration Commission in the National Wage Case
which was made public only last Friday, was a balanced and sensible
decision. On the one hand the National Wage decision gave a sizeable
increase in the wages of those members of the work force who have been
left furthest behind in the race for higher and higher wages. I am
referring to the increase for people on the minimum wage. The Arbitration
Commission gave this section of the community the greatest assistance.
The National Wage decision is consistent with the submissions
made by the Australian Govern-ent to the Arbitration Commission. I am
glad the Commission adopted the needs approach to these people on the
minimum wage. On the other hand, the Commission came down on the
side of moderation and restraint in its general wage decision. So the
Commission has set us a national example, and it has also given us the
chance to place some brake on inflationary forces.
Let me emphasise there can be absolutely no doubt whatsoever
that wage costs are the biggest factor in the inflationary process. In
the twelve months up till last Christmas, wages went up by an average
of about eleven per cent. We got the inevitable and inescapable result.
Inflationary pressures broke out in a rash of increased prices. In
the twelve months to the end of March this year, the official figures
show that prices went u by seven per cent. This was alright for the
big unions using industrial muscle and strikes to force big wage increases
at the expense of other ' people. And it was at the expense of people on
fixed incomes and people on low incomes who do not have a great influence
over the level of their wages. These sort of excessive and unremitting
demands for higher and higher wages are one of the root causes of.
inflation and in turn high prices. ./ 2 
The other root cause is closely linked to it. And I refer
to the industrial trouble that goes with itese wage demands. In the
last two or three years some trade unionists have got so involved in
their own power and political struggles that they seem to have
forgotten the main interests of their own nimbers lies in curbing
inflation. And in legitimately obtaining through arbitration,
improvements in : ages and conditions in proportion to the'actual and
real increase in production of the national economy. This is the
familiar story of trying to squeeze a quart out of a pint pot. It
just won't work.
In facing up to these causes of inflation, we in the
Government have been determined to put a stop to this sort of thing
in four ways. We have made the biggest changes in the industrial laws
since 1947 to blunt the militant use of union power and to democratise
the unions. The debate on these changes is going on in the National
Parliament today.
We will also promote more competition between businesses by
making the restrictive trade practices laws stronger and by overhauling
the levels of tariffs. The Attorney-General is now preparing
a statement for the Parliament on restrictive trade practices.
I have told you what the Government is doing in the fight
against inflation. I appeal to both union leaders and employers to
show restraint and comnionsense. Union leaders know that the best
interests of their members lie in curbing inflation. And employers,
too, must not use this National Wage decision as an excuse for
further price rises.
I can assure you that inflation works against your best
interests. That is why we in the Government are taking the leadership
to control it and are taking the decisive action to ensure sound
development and rogress in Australia. 



FOR PRESSL PM. No 46/ 1972.
VISIT BY THE PRIXE MTINISTER OF FIJI
Statement by the Prime m.-inister, the Rt. Hon. William
cMahon, C. H. M. P.
The Prime Mlinister of Fiji, the Honourable Ratu Sir
Kamisese Mara, and lvii Lady Lale. T! ara w: rill make an official
visit to ustrali3 from 22 Nay to 1 June.
The visit will begin in Cnbrra Aitb a morning arrival on
IMonday, 22 May. Th2 Prime " inister and his wife will leave for
. tllTourne on the morning of VWdn sday, 24 ! ny, and later visit
Quensland from Thursday, 25 M* Tay to Monday, 29 Mq-y, and New: South
Wales from Tuesday, 30 May to Thursday, I June. They will leave
Australia from Sydney on the T'Jursday.
Commonwealth and State !. uthorities are working on a
programme of engagements for the Prime Minister and Lady 14ara and
when all appointments are settled, a further announcement will be
made. CI-NBERRA
12 1972. 



" PHILLIP EL7CTOPATE GARDEN Pl. RTY
ROSF BAY, N. S. W
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. WTJilliam McMahori
CH, 4MP
Thanks! Dr Derek Freeman for your very kind welcome, and
thanks Frank Theeman and your charming wife for your kindness and
generosity and for inviting us all to enjoy your hospitality this
afternoon. I am delighted to see so many of you here today. Like you,
my main purpose is to lend the strongest support I can to Bill
Aston and the Liberal Party in Phillip.
Bill has been an outstanding Liberal and has occupied the
high office of Speaker with distinction and authority for so long.
So we are all here this afternoon to make sure that when our
Speaker is returned, it will be with the kind of majority he richly
deserves. Amongst us today, there are representatives of the Liberal
Party as a whole Federal and State politicians, officials of the
Liberal Party organisations, "-nch officers, Party members and
strong supporters. I am glad, too, that this Garden Party is
being held in Leslie Bury's territory. Because this is teamwork
in operation and that is one of the great contrasts between the
Liberal Party and our opponents. Unity, loyalty and teamwork are
our insurance policy for success.
In the past few days, we have seen the confirmation of the
swing back of support to the Government. Our support is rising,
and it will be much higher later on in the year as confidence
srrgcs ahead. I ask you to redouble your efforts at the Branch and
organisational level in the coming months. Now is the time to
spread our campaigning and our support throughout the community.
Our policy positions are sound. We have a first--rate story
to tell. It is a story of constructive achievement and imaginative
action. I say let's get on with it as one team and with one voice.
Don't let us be diverted or distracted by side issues or irrelevancies.
We must fight and win on our grounds on the the-nes of our
choice with our timing and with complete unity of purpose.
By way of contrast, our opponents are uniquely vulnerable
this year on just about every main issue that Australiais are
concerned about.
On the other hand, we are strengthened by our policies and
accumulated practical experience of many years of proven record in
government. / 2 
-2
We-lal know there -ar. very real and unbridgeable differences
between our policies and the aressed-up impractical proposals of-..
Labor. Ours arc the practical-policies of a Government which
knows how to implement and finance them.
The Labor Party is completely confused, even on agreeing
what their own policies are, let alone on how they would implement,
administer and finance them.
Let me illustrate this today in three vital areas of
community and national life in our management of the nAtional
economy, in the vital area of education, and in CommonY4-lth/
State relations. First of all, the economy. In common with many nations,
we have in the rast few years, faced new types of economic
problems, problems which have not been as amenable to the traditional
responses and adjustments f previous years.
In the face of this, wc have been prepared to be more
flexible than we have ever been before. We had to frvoL!-
acknowledge where predictions wgere not being borne out, to be
ready to correct trends as they emerged and to adjust our
economic strategy accordingly. We adopted a flexible and very
responsive stance and T think it is now paying off.
We took a series of actions in the second half of last
year, starting with monetary pclicy. Most recently, there
was the mini-Budget which will 2rovide a big li: t in deas'. d, and
in confidence. This was active . nd positive decision-making
in the highest area of government.
Then there is education, and with it the desire to help
in a very substantial way both Government and independent
schools. Last December, I announced a special 120 million emergency
grant to the States. it was the first time the Commonwealth had
moved specifically to provide grants for classroom construction at
primary and secondary schools.
Then at the beginning of the year, we announced increases
in the per capita grants to indep'endent schools. Then a few
days ago, details were given to the Parliament of what I called
imaginative proposals to introduce certainty in planning as between
the Commonwealth, the States and the schools, and to make both
grants for capital construction and per capita assistance part of
permanent Commonwealth/ State education policy.
We announced a fivee-year programme of $ 215 million for
school building, and with it arrangements that are designed to
meet up to 40 per cent of independent school running costs.
This continued a policy our Government started in 1963, when
the Commonwealth first approved the science laboratory plan for
Government and non-Government schools. / 3 I 
-3-
I am p~ roud to s.-av that right frorr th-a beginning, I have
tae nv. part in tho-fo--ruation of1 this scheme. Our
obiective thcn was -~ 4gvio0-oa d and -adequato education
to all Austrailian ch6, ildren in all Australian scho-ols. It is
still my own and the Liberal Party's objective and I think We
are getting a great deal closer to our goals3.
Last, let me mention Cormonwealth/ State relationships.
We apnroached the most recent Premiers' Confercnce at three
levels 1. A very substantial increase in financial assistance
to thec State Governments and to local and sem. 4-
Government autho~ rities. New South Wales was particularly
Wol). treated.
2. Substantial inCreases in uncmpioymcnt benefits and
for unemployment in rural areas.
3. A71ssistanco to the free entcr-risc systom. We restored
thi( iLnvestmcnt -lol~~ anteer aonnd a nnounced a new
and better research a-nd investment sc~ ierne for industry.
These three illustratirins are -ocsitivo cxamoles of an
active Government a G3overnment -f decisi ) n in tho areas that
count, in tho are. as that meian much to us all.
This is the message we; c must get across. With teamleork
we can. Members arc not sitting in Canberra watching opinion
rolls. We are imnroving and introducing -practical policies,
policies designed to makc this a stronger, richer, more3 Australian
and exciting nation. 



FOR PRESS: PM. Io. 47/ 1972.
DESIGN COMPETITION FOR HIGH COURT
Statement by the Prime :' i; nister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, M. P.
On 4th Anril, I announced the siting of the Figh Court in
Canberra and indicated that a design competition would be conducted
for the building. Following thi3, the National Capital Development
Commission has proceeded with preliminary arrangements for the
conduct of the competition.
I am now pleased to announce that the following five people
have agreed to act as assessors for the competition which will be
conducted on a national basis
SSir Garfield Barwick, Chief Justice of the High Court
Sir John Overall, Chairman of the National Capital
Planning Committee
Professor P. H. Karmel, Chairman of the Australian
Universities Commission
Mr. E. H. Farmer, the Government Architect of New
South Wales
SMr. Daryl Jach-son, Architect ( Melbourne)
Details of the competition will te announced shortly in
the press and professional journals.
CANBERRA, 14 May, 1972. 



FOR PPRESS: PM. No. 48/ 1972
VISIT BY PRINCESS fMARGARET
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, M. P.
The following statement has been released from Kensington
Palace today:-" The Princess Nargaret Countess of Snowdon and the
Earl of Snowdon have accepted with very much pleasure
invitations from the Australian Government and the
State Government of Western Australia to visit Western
Australia in October next.
Her Royal Highness has not before visited Australia
and is expected to spend about a week in Western
Australia following her visit to the Seychelles".
The Princess Margaret and the Earl of Snowdon are expected
to arrive in Perth in the early part of the second week of October.
Consultations will now take place to prepare a programme of
engagements for the visit and these details will be publicly
announced when an approved programme has been decided.
The Princess Margaret has always had a high place in the
affections of the Australian people and her visit with her husband
will be widely and warmly welcomed. I am delighted that they are
able to come.
From among her many interests in Au3tralia, the Princess is
Colonl-in-Chief of the Women's Royal Australian Army Corps,
President of the Girl Guides' Association, the Dr. Barnardo's Homes
and the Victoria League for Commonwealth Friendship, and Grand
President of the St. John Association and Drigade.
There will be disappointment that the visit by Her Royal
Highness and her husband will not extend beyond Western Australia.
But as is well known, the pattern in recent years has been to aim
for shorter and less formal Royal Visits.
CANBERRA, 14 May, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 49/ 1972.
CONFERENCE ON THE HUtAN ENVIRONMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, M. P.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Mcahon today announce that a highlevel
delegation from Australia would attend the first United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment, to be held at Stockholm,
Sweden from 5-16 June, 1972.
The delegation will consist of:-
The Hon. Peter Hcwson ( Leader)
The Hon. J. G. Beale, A. L. A.
( Representative)
The Hon. V. O. Dickie, M. L. C.,
( Representative)
Sir Lenox Hewitt, O. D. E..
( Representative)
Sir James Plimsoll, C. B. E.
( Representative)
Sir William Refshauge, C. B. E.
( Representative)
14r. W. K. Pilz
( Alternate Representative)
Mr. J. C. Fraser
( Alternate Representative)
Mr. C. N. Barton, O. B. E.
( Alternate Representative) MSi nister for the Environment,
Aborigines and the Arts.
N. S. W. Minister for
Environment Control.
Victorian Minister for
State Development
Secretary, Department of the
Environment, Aborgincs and
the Arts.
Australian Ambassador to
the U. S. A.
Director-Gereral of Health
Under-Secretary, Department
of Environment Control. HSW
Chairman, Environment
Protection Authority, Vic.
Co-ordinator-General,
Queensland. 
Dr. W. G. Inglis
( Allternate Rc~ presentativa)
Dr. B. J. O'B~ rien,
( Alternate Represontative)
Mr. J. F. Pottinger
( Alternate Represi: ntative)
Mr. H. J. Higgs,
( Alternate R e* oe3cnt-ative)
A I. lMcCutchan
( Alt-. rnatc Rcnresontative)
Dr. J. B. .7. len
( 47l. tern-ate Renres,-: ntativa)
Z'r. G. Unkles
( Adviser) G. L. V. Hooton,
( Advi sor)
Dr. R. S. Merrilces
( Adviser) Director of En7vironment and
Consorvation, South Australia.
Director of Environment
Protection, Western Australia.
Director of Environmental Control
Tasmania. First 7-ssistant Secretary,
Detnartnient of tho Environment,
Aboriqinos and the Arts.
Senior 1' ssistant Secretary,
Donpartment of National Development.
i~ ssistant Secretary,
C. S. I. R. O.
Fir~ t As:. istant Sccretary,
enartment of Shirnping and
Tr ansrnort.
A ss is tant Si-crotary, Department
of Trade and Industr-y.
First Secretary, Australian ' Mission
to tho Uni t-ed Nations New7 York.
The A-ltralian ; Ajbassador
designate to Sw. eden, Pir. J. D.
P.. thrbridgea, ; swill join the
delegation in Stockholm.
M-r. IMahion said that Australia had boen one of the first
countries-to support the Swedish initiative to hold the Conferencc
and Australia has becn closely involved in all aspec-ts of preparations
for the Ccnferancc. Australian observers had narticinated in all
sossions of t-he Conferonck P-reparatory Conumittoo. Australian
experts h~ id attended all irc--: ting3 of intergovernmental working grouns
which hnad beer, convencd to prenare material for considercation at the
Conferonce. The Conference wil~ l consider recommndat ions on n rlyidc range
of onvirornmantal issucs, including the feasibility of a glob-al
monitoring system, environmental implications of development and
industrialisation, natural resources mpnagement, conservation and
the establishment of parmanent machinery to co-ordinate future
international action. / 3 
Mr. McMahon explained that the Conference was an intergovernmental
meeting and that the Australian dclegation-had been
chosen from Commonwealth and State representatives covering a wide
range of environmental activites. The decision to include eight
State reoresentatives had been made in view of the important role . of
the States in environmental matters. The States had also
participated in the preparation of the Brief for the delegation.
Mr. !: cMahon said that the Government believed the
Conference to be of greatest importance. The problems of managing
the environment were among the most complx to confront mankind and
the Conference could not be expected to find instant or immediate
solutions for them. It would however be a first important step
in a long and challenging process.
CANBERRA, 14 May, 1972. 



EMBAR-O 8.00 p. m. 1S/ 5/ 72 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
PRIME MINISTER
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
DEAKIN ELECTORATE , Vic. M4AY 1972
Spee ch by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon.
William M~ ctahon, M. P.
Mr President, J-! r Alain Jarman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you for comning along tonight and for gi'ing me the
chance to talk to you for a few minut~ es, and to join forces with my
colleague, Alan Jarman, in getting the Liberal message across to the
people in this election year.
We depend Qfl you to heln us do that. You are closest to
the voting public and therefore in a good position to " sell" the
Government's policies, and also give us in Canberra a " feedback" on
what people are thinking.
I see the Labor Party has got a haberdiasher slogan called-
" It's Time" Well, true enough it is time time for the mask to
be ripped off Labor pretensions and policies. Time for Liberals to
be out in the market place telling the Australian pEiple what they
have been doing as the major party in Government in the last twelve
months or'so. If we all get down to this task and press on with it,
enthusiastically and energetically, then later in the year I have no
doubt it will be the Labor Party " for whom the bell tolls" 9
I am confident that the policies we are putting forward are
honest, open for all to see, and in the best interests of the people
of Australia. Now, Mr President, the-: re is one theme that I want to
give some time to tonight, because it is importanit to all Liberals,
important to the Government as the voice of the people, and imrnortant
to the people themselves as individuals in a free society. I refer
to " freedom within the law' in our community.
Most Australians are " fed up to the back teeth" with disorderly
demonstrations like those in Melbourne and other cities last
week. This isn't freedom of sneech and of assembly two ideals
Liberals hold dear. Those disorderly demonstrati. ons involve unbridled
licence by the few illegal in therrselves but dangerous to all. It
is anarchy by a militant, subversive few who inflame thoughtless
people and are encouraged too much by some sections of the L~ abor Party.
/ 2 
Last week's events were more than just another demonstration
that got out of hand. They were a symntod of a sickness in some parts of
our society which left wing elements and Labor politicians are promoting.
Naturally, I was delighted to see Henry Boltetaking a firm stand about
these events. As Liberals we have a duty to take our stand in support
of the law. Demonstrations in Melbourne were once promoted only by the
hard-core communists and a few fellow= travellers, but in the last year
or two the left-wing unions and Labor noliticians have added their weight.
This, now, is exploding into a serious challenge to the authority of the law
keener-+* h ~ viice-and the authority of Covernments-Gommonwealth and State
The clearest demonstration of this occurred during the recent Springboks
Tour when the A. C. T. U. President and certain Labor Politicians openly
inspired mass disruption. There was no industrial motive for their actions.
Indeed there was no really genuine nolitical . motive. It was attemoted.
anarchy for anarchy's sake.
We in the Liberal Party stand for the freedom of the individual
and for free enterprise. We believe it is the duty of the Government to
exercise the authority within the law I repeat within the law vested
in it by the Australian people.
That is why, for example, we have taken action against draft
dodgers We believe Australian citizens have the right to go about
their business. In Melbourne, or Blackburn or anywhere else in Australia
without being interfered with by dangerous demonstrations. Ordinary
decent people, the great majority of Australians have every right to
expect their Government to act in their interests.
I want to put this matter in perspective. I am sure that the
majority of people like my Government, respect absolutely the right of
dissenters to dissent, and the right of demonstrators to demonstate.
But it must be within the Law We support South Vietnam. Our soldiers
fought there with great courage. We are still helping with training
even though our troops are home. We support the latest action by the
United States. Why? because it is honourable and right, and because
we are opposed to aggression. Yet what do we see on the other side of
the political fence?
Support for North Vietnam has been given by the Labor Party
here in this state. Support for an aggressor, ecposed for all to see.
No longer can the Labor Party talk nonsense about the war being an
internal rebellion or civil war and therefore nobody's business.
Let's look at another exaxple of the false and dangerous values
of our opponents. They have declared themselves against compulsory
National Service. We, the Liberals are for it because there is no other
way of keeping our armed forces up to the strength required to meet our
defence obligations to the Australian people. The Labor Party has always
said it would scrap National Service. That would be mark you a
political not a defence decision. But in the last day or two they have
started to talk with two voices and adopt two standards. Perhaps they
wouldn't scrap it right away. Or perhaps they would. Who knows? And
perhaps they wouldn't pull out of the five-power defence arrangements in
Singapore-Malaysia; Or perhaps they would. They have always said so
until recently! Well, who knows? / 3 
I mention these matters because these are at the heart
of the demonstrations which have been bringing chaos to the streets
of our capital cities. The Australian people must judge for
themselves, the degree to whichi demonstration and violence would
grow worse with a Labor Government looking with a benevolent eye on
the law-breakers the draft resisters the violent demonstators
and the aggressors against friendly countries.
My Government wants to minimise the divisions within the
Australian community not to enlarge and inflame them. We want the
Australian people to know we stand for respect for the Law. In the
face of the challenge that is so clearly aimed at the Government by
militants and some Labor-inspired agitators.
We have had economic difficulties as a major preoccupation
in this past year. We have been quick to react to changing condition.
In the months ahead I am confident we will make steady, solid progress
which will prove to be the justification of everything we have done
in the past year. I ask you to join me now in nreparing apd working
for a handsome election win. You have your part to play in securing
that victory. Let us do it together. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELFFASE BEFORE, 6.30 pm ( EA. ST)
PRIM AMTAIAISTE
% VACQLTARIE NETWORK~ WEFKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME f1I1-IS-vER, THE RT HON.
WILLINNI 1McMiAHON, CN, MP, 17 MAY 19 72
U N E I P 1 -Y JP N T
Yesterday the Govornment announced thDe A-) ril figurcs for
unemployment i -n ZAustralia. R-ighitly, -,, rious unemrnloyment is a probLDm
we all feel deep~ ly about. Txis-is n view I havc li, 1d av( r r'unck. I have
been in political life. It is a d -nly held conviction of mine that
every Liberal Gov-rnmc~ nt should do evznrything n its power to ons!,-Z1
the fullest employment of our monpower ind r!.-source--s. I w--Tant to rcepeat
that policy to you now. And we; c have , over thi: v~ nars, beccn unbzeli vably
successful with.-thes--prlicics.
We must a--lso remember that over the Cl-ristmas/ New Year neriod
a large number of school lc2avers and those who. finishe; d their tertiary
education, entered the work force for the first time. This year thlere
wiere about 180,0,31. Please ac this in mind.
At the and of January there were about 130,00T) registered
unempl oyed.~ VThese figures wer-a re duced considera'Oly in February, Marchn
and 17nril. For the third month in a row, uncraployrment fell this
t -i-mec to about 93,40,0, a fairly big dron -frcm 1-30,0-, 0 in January.
Just as imnortant and looking to the,-future, healthy trcend
developed in job vacancies in all St,-ates. T. 11 these! facts arr-important
not only becauae of th-e vital fact that many mr -re pennol, have found
jobs, but be: causo2 thf-. se are facts -not cnniolis,; but facts which confirm
predictions my Ministers have bee n makIng of the-: imnroving trend
of the economy and thAe grc, 7ath of businc-ss cnnfidence, T. h-y giv the
lie , dire-ct to the ness; imists in tho Labor Party who have made -gild and
irresponsible foreca3ts of unomployment figura s as high as 200,000.
Back in January, when many.,. ooole, including myself, were very
worried about the level of un-' mploymnnt, the Leader of the Ounnsition
stapped off a plane and immodiately mad--the7-prediction th t and I
quote " There would 1) a another 50,000 unaninloy d witi. 1in three mcriths".
If-Mr Whitlam' s guess had come true, it would haJve brought the? total
of un -rnployed to 173,000. In fact it is now a little~ over 93,000. Once
aaain the facts thems-i v, . s destroy the Labor Party's forecasts. 
Five days later, with time for sober reflection, he repeated
exactly the same dangerous forecast. His spokesman on Industrial and
Labour matters, Mr Clyde Cameron, was making the same sort of anguished
cries to any reporter or television interviewer who would listen, that
there would be 200,000 people out of work.
There is only one conclusion to be drawn from these statements.
Both these leaders of the Labor movement treated unemployment as a
political issue. They wanted greater uncertainty and more unemployed.
The more people who were out of work the more votes for them. I think
most Australians will agree with me that people who try to make politics
out of unemployment really do not care about the people themselves. This
c-lies to Mr Hawks of the A. C. T. U. as well. If, and I emphasise if, it
was not a deliberate and premeditated political tactic, then it was
negligent and downright dangerous.
The employment position we are now in is pretty good under the
circumstances. Now let me talk to you about the positive decisions we have
taken to live up to our promise of full employment. We did not hesitate
to take faction to fight unemployment. We will not hesitate in the
future. We do not think unemployment is a nolitical issue. And don't
want it to be.
We believe that all Australians want unemployment to be. t. e. ated
with seriousness and with sincerity and that the Liberal policy of . ll
employment be sustained. I assure you that is what the Government has
done. I assure you that is what we will do. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE Until 6.00 n. m. Sunday 21/ 5/ 72
FOR PRESS. PM/ No 50/ 1972.
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister
The Rt iHon. William McMahon, CH, MP.
Invitations have been extended for the next annual series
of economi. c consultations between 7? inisters and the renresentatives
of national organisations to be held in Sydney from 31 M-ay to 2 June
inclusive. As agreed last year the consultations will extend over
three days so that more time will be available for discussion of
issues of particular concern.
On 31 May Ministers will meet national organisations
representing the Primary Industry Grouo and later the Manufacturing
Industry Group.
On 1 June reoresentatives of the ' anufacturing Industries
Advisory Council, the Export Development Council and the Australian
Mining Industry Council will have discussions with Ministers.
On 2 June Ministers will meet with representatives of the
Australian Council of Trade Unions and later with organisations
representing the Commerce Group.
Attached is a timetable showing national organisations to
be represented.
Canberra 19 May 1972 
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
3 1 I-ay
1 June Primary Industry Group
Australian Farmers' Federation
Australian Woolgrowers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Wheatgrowers' Federation
Manufacturing Industry Croup.
The Associated Chambers of Manufacturers of
Australia
The National Building and Construction Council
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council 11
Export Development Council:
Australian Mining Industry Council 0.00 a. m.
2.30 p. m.
0.00 a. m.
2.30 p. m.
4.30 p. m.
2 June Australian Council of Trade Unions 10.00 a. m.
Commerce Group 2.30 ip. m.
The Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers 



EV4BARGO: Not for RELEASE" UE70R17 9.10 rm on 19/ 5/ 7?
CHECK( AGAINST D2LIVFRY PRIME MINISTER
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
HjOLT EILECTORATE. Vic. 19 ~ 197 2
Speech by tY7 e Prime ! Minister, the at Hon.
William cI ahon, CH, MP.
Ladies anr2 Gentlemen,
To start with I think you woTculm like me to thank rr and M1. rs
Bill MontaguLe f or providinag us with thie opportunity to be here. It
is a real gathiering of the% la. t
We are here not only to meet and have a happy time; we are
here to heln in every way we can to ensure that L1EN REID, is going to
come back into the Government at the next election with the thumping
majority he deserves. This function is a tiut to him. I t is a
tribute to -tnie Libarals in the Division of Nolt who have helped make
it a success. Hiolt is rather uniaue and unusual. In a mi-nute I wdill tell1 you
why it has a rat-her uniaue and unusual membcr in Len Reid. MTh-i s
electoral division w-as namecd after a mar, who was an outstanding
Australian, an outstanding Victorian, ancl an outstanding Liberal Prime
Liinister. I refer of course. to the Lato IFarold Fio'] t.
I'm told tt~ sdivision is in fact one of the fastest growing
electorat3R in Australia, after Mitchell, on the Western. outskirts of
Sydney and Diamond Valloy.. which covers thgrowing N'orth-eastern
s uburban fringe of iMcrlbourne. The point about these t*. iree elactorateos
is that they arc, all in~ ra-nidly deveoi e suburban areas, anrd t-hey
are all held 1, y Liberals.
Ele-: ctora. tes; like this are truly a part of the suburban oxnlosion
t-hatinas been going on around the edges of Irga ciisfrsm
years now. :, anv of the peonlc who are moving into these areas aroe
young couples with young feirilies, who are zstablishing their first h1-ome.
They have particular needs in housing, in hatin education, in roads,
In power, sewerage and in othor conmunity facilitie-fmnykns ./ 2 
2.
So you find tocharacteristics neculiar to the7, e new areas3
growth and youth which pose speci al orobl. orr, to be solved, and these
need special remcdies anQ solutions. The effort to meetk. the problems
of community development is one for all c-1 us at all levels of gove--rnment
at the local govern~ ment level and I believe it is fundamental
to Persevere and co-opsrate wi-t1h local gc-verrment.
This afternoon, on the way here, I atte-nded a civic reception
at Springvale in this electorate. Springvale is one of the:, fastust
growing districts in Victoria, or in Australia for that matter, arnd it
is, I would say, a good example of tlle grow)., th explosion I have roferred
to. The second love], of government invinlvnd is ofE course, tho Statte
government with its multitude of specific rcs * nnsibilities. The third
link in the chain if3, of course, my own government in Canbcrra. Now the
problecms and needs oif this rapid urban grcwth rainge across th-e thrt-! r
lcvels of govcrnment and in soma places thay inelvita-bly overlao). Put
it should be remenmberced that thesce ara nroblems which are a-nnratad by
grow.-th and orogress thzi sel--ve9. Thoy occur cgzainst a backdrop) of a
developing, diversifying and continuousl! y xan:. gnationa. l economy.
Thc-y are nroblems whaich will not ba swernt av-ay-by finae nhrases or
fulsome promises in f~ loction year. Tile-' 11il. only lbeovrmey ain
and intelligent co-opra~~ tic'n between all of the thiree tiors of our*
Australian systrem of go'verniment.
Our opponents think it is fashionablo thc--se days to claim we have
a crisis" in our cites imilar to--th ose srome comnoar-11. la cities
overseas. That, cf course, is wi,-ldly inaccurat--. IkovrtheLe-ss we in
thea Commonwealth Goverrnnt know).. you are corncoried, cand righ-tly so. We
know,-you want actiJon now to imprfove today's living conditions and to
avoid the greater nrnolems of tomorrow. No ono. c,-n nretend taat the
citiescb not have oroblems such as high lani costs,' atmospheric
pollution, traffic ccongeton, long distance commuting, recreational
congestion, * Lack rf coirxiinity centres in the outer suburbs, and an
increased crime ratze, violence and other srcial prob,-, lems.
Basically, these are tasks for the tiers of our government
structure which arc closest to them, and they are-the local and state
governments. But this d -os not any means indicate that we in Canberra
do not * h-ave, a very strong indirect interost, nor does it mean we ara
not 3ympathetic. Let meolan
Ile i n Canberra sc-, onen of our vitally important dutie(-s as the
management of the national economy. Success in national economic areas
is fun-famental to the growth wh7' 1ich the suburban explosion iimn.. lies. It
is fundamo-ntal that. national ceconomny be kapt h:! althy and . crntiniuo-usly
expanding. I hope I say this modestly.
I h-ave had a good deal of di-rect exnerienca in financial and
economic management as Treaourcr and now% in my nresent portfolio. On
that score I think th-. at we can faiirlv claim that our own flexible and
sensitive approach to the difficult economic nroblems we have be'en
confronted with, and our willingnl. s-7 to act boldy and without delay to
take positive decisions in stimulating the-ieconorny arc now, paying off
4n the return of business confir,! nce, and the continuing improvement in
the employment situation. 
Only on Tuesday, my colleague, the Minister for Labour and
National Service, announced the April figures for employment. They
showed unemployment . was down by nearly another 5,000 to about 93,400.
This was a far cry from the anguished cries and the fear predictions
of the Leader of the Opposition and his Lieutenants. It is no thanks
to him, or his industrial snokesman, tr. Cylde Cameron, or to Mr. Hawke
for that matter. They saw unemployment as a fear issue, as something
to be exploited. The more unemployed, the more votes.
Well, that one has blown up in their faces. So have others
where they have sought to pull the wool over the eyes of the electorate.
Remember the " reform" and I have that word in inverted commas of the
Victorian Labor Party? That exnloded when the " reformed" Victorian
Labor Party broke out in cheers for the North Vietnamese aggression
against South Vietnam. The support of the Labor movement for
demonstrators and even violence, has grown in strength. That blew up as
well. I am glad to hear that some Labor politicians are now adding
their voices to the call to observe the law in the streets, even if it
is belated. I look forward to them extending their call to observe
the law on draft dodging as well.
But to return to my main theme here tonight on the question of
urban development: The second area of our involvement this is interconnected
with our overall role of economic management is in our
continually increasing financial allocations to the states. Before
people become too carried away with labels like urbanisation, or urban
affairs, or phrases like the challenge of the cities, they should stop
to consider the billions of dollars for housing, for roads, for water,
for sewerage, for hospitals, and for many, many other facilities that
have resulted from the long years of practical co-operation between
Commonwealth and State Governments under Liberal and Country Party
Governments. For the current financial year, the states works and housing
allocation alone is 92 million dollars. It is left to state
Governments tc decide how they spend those allocations and most other
capital and revenue assistance from us. We believe it is right that
they should have this right. They are closer to these problems than we
are. They have the administrative experience.
Lastly there are the ways in which the Commonwealth directly
assists in coping with the snrecial needs and nroblems of the new, urban
areas. Health and education are two areas where we have made specific
decisions within the nast few days and weeks. Example the most common
fee has been increased in Victoria and accepted by doctors here without
further cost to fund contributors. We have in education moved directly
and for the first time into providing money to build school classrooms.
Previously, we wre ::. elping with science blocks and libraries.
Now we will be building the schools themselves, for both government and
independent schools for all Australian children in all Australian schools.
/ 4 
We will also shortly he making an imnr-ortant * policy statement on
the Commonwealth's apnroach to,. enviro~ nmental questions, and of course,
there is the other large area of dire--ct commonwealtii assistance. That
is social wefr. This is an aro. a in which Led Raid hais shown himself
to bc a man of great compassion and &amp;--termination in both-',* a national
and international sense. His concern knows no borders and no limitationo.
That is why he was such a strong advocate of our help for Bangladesh.
Lilco him, I am proud that Australia was one of thea first to go
to the aid of Dangladosh and one of the first to recognise that new
nation and new member of the Commonwealth. On the home scene hc has been
a determine~ d advocate of certain important reforms in our non7, ions and
social welfare structure.
Well Chairman, I do not want to int(*_ rrot the proceedings
and furthicr, But I did want to indicato to you and those who are Iicre
this evoning how we in Canberra and w,, e in the Liberal Party are thinking
on these problems: How' we aro ore'pared to heir) co-oneratively axvi
constructively in urban develcomont; and' hnow we do not favour an
impractical and unworkable rystem of long-. range bureaucracy to C'.&amp; al with
essentially local problems such as that favoured by the Labor Party. 



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBA. RGO: Not for release before
6.30 p. m. 19 May 1972
PRIME MINISTER
CIVIC RECEPTION
SPRINGVALE TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE, VIC._ 19 May 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon.
William McMahon, CF., MP.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you Councillor Marriott ( Mayor), Mrs Marriott
and all Councillors. There are two fac-ts about your municipality that
have attracted my attention. Yours is a growth area which can
match any other part of Victoria and probably any other part
of Australia. You are truly a part of the suburban explosion
that is going on around the edges cf Australia's great cities.
The second is that Springvale is a young area, Where there
were farms a few years ago, you now have over 60,000 people in
Springvale municipality alone. Many of them are young couples
with their young families. M4any of them are new settlers
taking advantage of the very large migrant hostel in this area.
These two features growth and youth pose special
poroblems to be solved and special needis to be met by
government at all levels whether it be here with you at the
local government level and I believe it is fundamental to
preserve and co-operate with local government, or whether it
be at the State Government lev,: AL, or w*,. ether it be a problem
that may be placed in my " In T. ray" in the Federal Government
in Canberra. When I mention the importance -e attach to local
government in the Australian system, I am not just being
complimentary. only last month, the Cabinet decided as a
matter of principle that local government ought to be
involved in " the convention" which has been proposed to
review the Australian constitution. That demonstrates our
serious intent when we speak about the role of local government.
./ 2 
These special needs and problems I have mentioned
involve all three levels of government. And inevitably there
will be areas where they overlap. But it should be remembered
that these are problems of growth which occur against the
background of a developing, diversifying and expanding national
economy. These are problems which will not be swept away by
words and promises. They will be overcome only by patient and
intelligent co-operation between the three-tiers of our
Australian system of government. There are some people in
public life who find it fashionable these days to say that we
have a " crisis" in our cities, and that our problems are
similar to those of comparable cities overseas. Such claims
are, of course, wildly inaccurate. Nevertheless, we in the
Federal Government think there is a good reason for concern
that action should be taken now to improve current living
conditions, and to avoid greater problems in the future.
No one would try to pretend that the cities do not
have their problems: such matters as high land costs,
atmospheric pollution, traffic congasion, long distance
commuting, recreational congestion, lack of community centres
in outer suburbs and the increased crime rate, violence and
other similar problems. These matters are basically the
direct responsibility of the two tiers of our government
structure closest to the people, that is, the state and local
governments. The Commonwealth Government sees as one of its
first duties the management of the national economy. On that
score I think I can claim here and now that our very flexible
and responsive stance, and our willingness to act boldly and
decide positively in stimulating the economy, is now paying
off in the return of business confidence and the continuing
improvement in employment.
Secondly, we have, within this area of national
economic policy, continually increased and improved our
allocations to state and local governments. Before people
become carried away with labels like " urbanisation" or
" urban affairs" or the " challenge of the cities", they should
stop for a moment to consider the billions for schools, for
housing, for roads, for sewerage, for hospitals that has coyr. e
out of the many years of practical co-operation between
Commonwealth and State Governments under a Liberal Country
Party Government. Thirdly, there are the ways in which we are giving
direct assistance. Health and education are two areas where
we have just made further improvements.
But, Mr Mayor, I don't want to speak for too long
as I want to meet personally as many of those who are here
today. But I did want to tell you that we in Canberra and we
in the Liberal Party see these matters in a sympathetic way,
and how we are prepared to help co-operatively and constructively
and without imposing long distance bureaucracy from local
problems. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 51/ l72
PRODUCTION OF PROJECT " N"
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William Mcahon,
CH, MP
The Prime Minister announced in Canberra today that the
Government had approved the production of an initial batch of twenty
Project aircraft, at a cost of $ 13M, including the cost of
completing development work and establishing production.
In January 1970, the Government approved expenditure of
$ 3.2M for the design, development and construction of two flying
prototypes and a structural teqt airframe. A further $ 1.1M, for the
second phase of the project was approved last year.
The Prime Minister said " Eleven of the first production
batch will be used by Army Aviation to replace their Cessna aircraft.
These aircraft will be used for command liaison and observation task&amp;
in close support of the Army."
" The remaining nine aircraft of the initial batch will be
produced for sale to commercial or other users."
" It is Government policy to maintain a small but viable and
effective aircraft industry in Australia. To this end, the Government
is actively considering a rationalisation of the existing facilitics
in the aircraft industry."
" Employment in the industry had risen to high levels withthe
Mirage and Macchi projects and workload in the industry has
declined with the end of these two projects. This experience has
highlighted that the industry has so far been unable to establish a
significant market outside the dcfence area."
" The Government's concern for the future of the industry
had led it to initiate efforts to establish an improved workload
for the industry." " Project had been conceived to maintain essential ddsign
teams intact for defence purposes and oroduce a product that had both
military and civil potential. The Government had also embarked in
1971 upon a comprehensive programme of local production of light
observation helicooters for both military and civil use." / 2 
" In addition, the Government had initiated a programme ofseeking
offsets to overseas Government purchases aimed at diversifying
the industry's market and bringing it into close commercial contact
with overseas industries. The development of Project has proceeded
remarkably well. This augurs very well for its success."
" The Government is confident that the widespread interest
being expressed in Project IN' will mean a successful commercial future
for the project in addition to the Australian military requirements 16
the aircraft. The combination of a military and a civil demand for
the aircraft should provide a long term and steady workload."
" The light utility aircraft, powered by two Allison 250
series 400 HP turbo-prop engines, was designed at the Department of
Supply's Government Aircraft Factories in Melbourne for use in military
and civil versions. Two prototypes have flown more than 280* hours and
have met or exceeded their design parameters."
" The aircraft shows great pComise as a low-cost easily
operated utility vehicle. It is widely adaptable in a range of both
military and civil ab-lications. Its outstanding short take-off and
landing ( STOL) characteristics, with its rugged performance in operating
from rough fields should ensure its sales success. A novel lateral.
control system, providing safe operation at or near the stalling speed,
overcomes one of the major hazards in STOL operation".
" These factors together with the combination of a relatively
high crubing speed with a good rate of climb and excellent rangepayload
capabilities puts this aircraft in a market slot in which there
is no present competitor."
" Project IN' represents a significant design achievement by
Australians and the team at GAF is to be congratulated."
The characteristics of Project are
All-up weight ( AUW) for take-off and landing 8,000 lbs
Rate of climb on two engines at AUW 1700 ft/ mmn.
Rate of climb on single engine at AUW 450 ft/ mmn.
Service ceiling at AUW 25000 ft
Cruise speed at AUW 175 kt.
Stall speed at AUW 47 kt.
Maximum range at normal cruise 950 n. miles
Maximum endurance 10 hrs.
Take-off and landing distances over 50 ft
obstacle at AMW using STOL characteristics
Normal temperature and) 960 ft. ( take-off) 960 ft
conditions ( ISA) 690 ft. ( landing) 690 ft.
High ambient temperature) 1400 ft. ( take-off) 1400 ft,
( ISA 250) 750 ft. ( landing) 750 ft.
Dimensions: Wing span 54 ft
Length 41 ft 2 in.
Height 17 ft 11 in.
Typical passenger/ range capacities:
12 passengers over 150 n. miles
9 passengers over 450 n. miles
6 passengers over 750 n. miles
CANBERRA, 23 May 1972 



EMBA--GO~ 1,7T FOR RBhLEASF BEFORW 5. 30 m.( EST) ~~ 17
L I Btpal
PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK T'I-I( LY BPOArJCAST
By the P-rime -M-is ter, The Pt lion.
William " Ar111hon, C11, MP. 2.4 " AY 19 07 2
FREEDO1,1 tINDE',-R THE LAW
Of late, we have heard a great deal a&amp;-out the problem of
freedom under the law, and what it means.
Democracy and the guarantee of individlual human ri-ghts to
freedom and inderendence dernend on two concents. They are: the rule of
law and thne maintenance of p~ ubli'% c ord! er;-and kegu] Lar free Parliamentary
elections. The rule of law means that everybody has equal freedom and
equal rights under Jlavs t-hich are administered fairly, impartially and
honestly. That mcans freedom for ' cvcry*) ody, without any sort of discrimination.
To be effective' the rule of law requires discipline and the
use of sanctions which, in turn, require legal enforcement. That is what
the maintenance of nublic order means.
It is truly said that witi-out law is without liberty. When w,-
speak of freedom we mean your freedom under the It is not a licence
to do as you please without reastraint, or without respect for the rights
of othe-rs. For some, particularly zsore young neo ple, these ideas may now
seem dull and boring. For somo*. it may seoem fashionable or exciting to
becom3 involved with the' so-callad conscientious breaking of tho law,
through civil disobedience. Such * po'le are easily exploited and
manipulated by a small hard-core group of militant activists hecause of
their relatively innocent Political idealism. Thi. s hard--core group
makes no pretence whatsoevor of rcsnect for t'he law or concern for
democracy, although as -most of us know, thcy ful. ly exp~ loit democratic
fre; e doms to oreach their own nronacaanda.
Our political op~ ponents try to ridicule and degrade froedom
undcir the law with a smokescreen of self righteousncss, or wvith attacks
on the nolice. Let11 us look at the facts about this kind of civil dis.-
obedionce. In 19i79, thore wer 18 such i4ncide--nts throughout Australia,
In 19170, total was 3A. In 1971, it morc than doubled to 88. 1972
is going to be much worse:. This month alono, there have:_ boen 16 incidents,
almost as many as for the 171olce of 1969. ./ 2 
Of these at least 25 per cent are claimed by self-styled
" liberation army" groups. These grouns have a distinct terrorist flavour
and their aim is destruction rather than dissent.
The foremost objective of the Liberal Party platform is " An
Australian Nation Dedicated to Political Liberty and the Freedom and
Dignity of Man". We believe in the right of dissent. But dissent must
be within the law. Repeated campaigns of civil disobedience of the kind
I have mentioned tend to weaken the authority of the law. It is the
old story of dripping water. Each particular act may not be important
in itself but each one does its bit to bring the whole notion of the
rule of law into contempt, and each act encourages the idea that the
law can be brushed aside or crushed if it interferes with political
objectives of others. That is where we differ so strongly from today's
Labor Party. So I want to emphasise that Labor deliberately promotes and
oublicises the notion that if a law interferes with oolitical purposes,
it can be brushed aside. What a contrast between today's Labor leadership
and when John Cur-in led the Labor Party He said it would be
treading on dangerous soil to set the Labor Party up as a non lawobserving
party by accepting a policy of revolt against the law.
Many Australians must wonder why, and how, the Labor Party
abandoned John Curtin's principles.
Last year we amended the Commonwealth law about -public order,
and one of Australia's leading constitutional lawyers an acknowledged
expert commented " The underlying theory of all these provisions is that neaceful
assembly and procession should be allowed, but not to the
extent of nersistent occunation or sit-in.
" This", he said, " Won't please the many contemporary'civil
libertarians who are prepared to give the demonstration
priority over all other public occupations, but I should
think it corresponds to the majority view on the proper
limits of civil nrotest.'
We think the same way that is why we strengthened the law.
These principles are the guarantee of your freedom.
That is why we stand for freedom and liberty within the
authority of the law.
The law is there to protect you. 



NFOR
P'ESSPM.' s No 52/ 1972
Death of the Duke of Windsor
Statement by the Prime Minister, the ? t Hon. William McMahon,
C' _ P
My colleagues and I have learned-with a sense of deep sadness
of . the death of His Royal . Highness, the Duke of Windsor.
Many will recall thebrilliant success of his visit-to
Australia more than fifty years ago. le. captivated this country -withhis
youth and charm.
His decision to abdicate so shortly after succeeding his father,
King George V, was the result of-events which greatly moved all members
of the British Commonwealth..
Since that time he has, by the dignity of his bearing~ and his
personal qualities, retained and attracted wide-s-rread respect and
affection. On behalf of the Government, I have expressed to Her Majesty
The Queen, to his widow the Duchess of Windsor and to all members ofthe
Royal Family, our. sincere synmathy.
CANBERRA. 28 ! Uay 1972. LI BRAl^ 



k
EMBARGO : Not for Release until 8.30 p. m.
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY_ PRIME MINISTER
LIBERAL PARTY FEDERAL COUNCIL MEETING
CANBERRA 29 May 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister,
The Rt lion. William McMahon, M. P.
INTRODUCTION
Just 12 months ago, I addressed you for the
first time as your Federal Parliamentary Leader and
Prime Minister. It was then a troubled party. Not only
were we going through the fires, ( if I can put it that
way), but there were great, complex and difficult questions
facing the People of Australia and particularly the people
of our own Party.
As I interpreted that situation, there was
nothing else to do but to get straight down to work,
producing new ideas, new approaches and new policies which
would be to thc Nation's benefit and rejuvenate our
political fortunes. This was urgent. Not because we
lacked ideas and approaches attuned to the times but because,
for understandable reasons, we were not getting action
quickly enough. We had to adjust, deliberately and rapidly, our
political life style and identity to the challenges and
choices of social and political change in Australian
society. My job was to see that this was done.
As Le~ ader of the Government, it is my dut to
translate Liberal policy into effective action. And to
make each and every decision subject to one single overriding
consideration. That consideration was the national
interest, the welfare, the security and the progress of
Australia and all Australians. 
THE SPECIAL COMMITTEES
As you will know, new policies of lasting value cannot be
produced overnight. Individual effort was not enough. There had to
be a co-operative effort. And so, as the Federal Parliamentary Leader
and as Chairman of our Joint Standing Committee on Federal Policy, I
set the Party as a whole to work. They got down to it and did
the job. Quietly, with teamwork and patient determination the Liberal
Party set out to adapt its policy-thinking to the changing oattern of
attitudes and values, which were, and are, pervading Australian society.
We set a premium on new ideas. We set up fourteen specialised
sub-committees to review, renew and develop the whole range of our
policies. Mr 9octhey has already referred to these committees. The
Joint Standing Committee of our Party has now considered final reports
from the Party Committees on nine nolicy issues on education, on
health, the rule of law, urban notblems, the rural sector, defence,
national. goals, immigration, and laour and industrial law.
Reports and recommendations from the Standing Committee will
also be presented soon on the quality of life, on social services,
and on foreign affairs, as well as on nolitical matters such as
who runs the Labor Party ( You can be sure the answer will not be
Mr Whitlam), and the socialist alternative.
What are the results of the Committee's decisions to date
A number of Committee recommendations have already become Government
policy because we decided they should not be hoarded. The nature of
the policy-thinking that has gone on, and the results that are now
flowing through, reflecting, as they do, Party thinking and ideas,
show that the Liberal Party is a Party of the seventies. I think an
important result is that the Liberal Party of Australia today is at
least as productive of ideas and policy-thinking as at any time in the
Party's history probably more so.
Mr President, I turn now to three and only three of the
many important subjects that I mentioned before which have been through
the refining process of these policy committees.
First, let me speak about Education. We are a literate society
and education is crucially important in Liberal policy reviews and in
Government actions. Education is a world where the humanities vie with
the sciences and where technology, for the present, tends to dominate
the scene. We accent this, but we must not let technology overwhelm us.
We must so research and manage our educatinnal systems, that men and
women are adequately equiopcd to fuitili ' themselves in their chosen
spheres in a balanced society. We. must increase the opportunities for
education, and we must improve its quality. Our testament on this
philosophy was recently published in pamphlet form. And since then we
have announced new and stimulating policies designed to help all
Australian children in all Australian schools, Government and
independent. I am sure the action we have taken opens up a new era
in education in Australia. I know all Liberals will agree with me. / 3 
THE ECONOMIC BASE
Mr President, before going further, I want to mention one
essential precondition to the success of this strategy of new nolicy
innovation, new xolicy formulation, and new policy presentation. And
that precondition is, of course, a strong, diversified and structurally
sound economy. This is fundamental to our success and to the realisation of
our vision of the future. I don't need to tell you that we have had
extremely difficult economic, industrial, and social problems to
wrestle with. Our troubles have been aggravated by the end of the
mining boom, problems with the primary industries, excessive rises in
income and difficulties with international currency management and
with world trade.
The difficulties were compounded by the fact that today's
economic problems are not necessarily as amenable to traditional
analysis and resnonse as before. We were one of the leaders in the
new thinking that has developed about changing and more complex
economic conditions. As a consequence we have been deliberately more
flexible in national economic management than ever before. Above all,
we had to acknowledge frankly where predictions were wrong and act
quickly to apply remedial action.
Sir, with some experience in economic management, may t say
I know that the flexible and resnonsive economic stance we t6ok un
as early as last September is paying off. These measures all taken
in very recent months have included
Reductions in interest rates, public and private
Increased grants to the States
Increases in nensions and in aid for persons in nursing homes
Special assistance to the wool industry
Restoration of the investment allowance
A mini-budget which included a reduction in personal taxation
Increased grants for education, and
A reduction in excise duty on wine.
This is an impressive list.
All these measures were directed towards reducing unemployment,
encouraging sensible consumer spending, assisting needy sectors in
industry, and securing a balanced growth economy. And we have never
let up in our fight against inflation.
I also want to refer to other matters bearing on the economy
and the industrial scene in which the zovernment has made tremendous
progress in less than a year. I mention
1) The review of the arbitration and conciliation system ard the
changes in the public service acts to enable the rule of no
work no pay to apply amongst nostal workers.
2) The decisions on trade nractices and the intention to establish
a monopolies commission.
3j The Treasury paner on foreign investment recently presented to
Parliament. / 4 
4) The wide-ranging taxation review which is to be held.
The white paper on defence.
6) The impending survey of prices and incomes policies.
I am sure that all this is contributing to a resurgence of
confidence in Australia today in business, in industry and in
Government. Next, let me refer to Health.
The national health scheme is voluntary and therefore differs
fundamentally fran Labor's p~ roposed compulsory scheme. It is based on
one fundamental principle and that is -the interests of the patient
must come first at all times. We have estbalished the principle that
the amount insured patients pay to their doctors will be lim-ited. The
amounts are small indeed compared with the normal cost of medical
treatment. We want to keep it that way. That is -why we accepted the
recommendations in the Mason Rep~ ort and why we are negotiating at present
with the Australian Medical Association about the common fee.
I would also remind you that under the existing health scheme
the burden of large hospital bills has been lifted from the patient.
Cabinet is now giving special attention to the problem of the chronically
ill in nursing homes and nursing attention in Drivate homes. And we
hope to be able to make known our decision soon.
So too, with child care. There is a shortage of child care
centres in Australia, and we are now considering what we can do about
that problem. As well, we have been active over a wide range of public health
We have taken warning action relating to the hazards to
health of smoking by our requirements for TV advertising.
We have made substantially increased grants for heart and cancer
research, and we are prepared to support more extensively the work of
the National Health and medical Research Council. 
THE EIT, 7IRONVENT
Now, let me turn to the environment.
For each individual we seek a quality of life which must
satisfy his needs in material, cultural and spiritual terms. A basic
essential i3 to secure his environment so that the things necessary
to fulfil those needs can germinate and flourish.
The scientist and the sociologist have sounded their warnings
around the world. Their voice is clearly heard here in Australia.
They remind us that the destructive nolltion of our physical environment
flows from the very successes of our industrial civilisation.
A few days ago my Government outlined to the nation the measures
it has in hand to protect the Australian environment. We stressed that
this was a beginning. And it is just that. There is still much to be
done. The challenge to free our society from the strangling grip
of overcrowded cities is being taken up.
So is the challenge of the changing balance of life in our
rural areas.
For an effective solution in a federation like ours, of course,
this problem has to be dealt with on the basis of the most intimate
co-operation with the Australian States.
Urban renewal, the elimination of slums, the reduction of
congestion, the planning of new cities and towns are at the heart of
Liberal policy for the seventies.
This is the basis of our approach to the future Australian
environment and we will say much more about it as the year goes by. 
6-
Mr President, nay I turn to the domestic and international
principles on which our policies are based.
I am sure I don't need to emphasise to you that at home
we are committed to sustaining the growth and development of this
country. Believe me, we are succeeding, despite the temporary
dI fficulties of the last year or two.
We see national development as directed to growth, in
the people's interest, in a climate of free enterprise and with
incentives to individual initiatives.
A full-scale examination is now being made to see whether
any action is desirable in the national interest in circumstances
where international corporations propose the takeover of Australian
companies. We will not allow monopolies to destroy the healthy
competition which Liberals believe is part of a free society and
wholly beneficial to that society. We have already announced our
intention to legislate for a Monopolies Commnission which among other
things will examine proposed takeovers by other Australian or overseas
companies which could result in monopolies or monopoly condition.
Now, Mr President, let me say something about foreign
investment in Australia. We have recently received the latest
assessment of the impact such investment has made and is making in
Australia. Shortly, several submissions will be made to Cabinet
relating to the problems associated with cap~ ital inflows and the
wisdom or otherwise of the need for regulation and control.
But lot me strike one note ofl caution here. Foreign
investment in Atralian industry has become an emotional issue as
well as a matter for serious examination and some regulation. I ask
you to all look at this matter in a commonsense way.
The criterion which must determine our actions is what
is in the best national interests of this country. And actions must
be based on a hardheaded appreciation of benefits and costs. That
is the attitude we, as Liberals, will take.
The other great responsibility we bear is in our
international relations. There is much of this that needs no
emphasis. Lot me summrarise : We have become a moderately-sized
power; we have become an industrialised nation; we are a good ally;
we are respected and trusted; other nations want us to join them in
co-operative efforts.
So far so good, but what does the future hold?
We have ties with Britain, and a crucial alliance with America. We
have mutual ties and arrangements with our friends in Asia, in
trade and aid, in cultural exchange, and in do-fence. We have mature
relationships with the old world and the new world. We are deeply
involved and deeply committed in Asia.
As liberals, you will recognise the commonsense and
value of such outward-looking and multilateral policies. They have 
4 0. -7
been, in large part, the product of liberal initiative. We must
sustain these principles in the national interest. We must increase
our own capability in both '~ ecivil and defence spheres.
Shortly, I will visit three of our friends in the
South-East Asian region in Indonesia, in Singapore and in Malaysia.
It will be a goodwill visit to neighbours, a return of courtesies and
the refreshment of old friendships.
These visits will be made in the midst of momentous
changes in the contemporary world. The journeys of President Nixon
bear witness to this. Britain will soon be in the Common Market;
Japan has become our best customer; the pattern of world trade is
changing, and we are pursuing genuine efforts to develop a dialogue
with China, and at the same time we remain unwilling to abandon our
friends in Taiwan. These approaches demonstrate both the will anO the
willingness to play our part in a world of interdependence, and to
play it in a healthy, vigorous independent Liberal and Australian
way. THE LABOR ALTERNATIVE
Mr President, I come now to the alternative being
presented to the Australian people in this election year. It is
absolutely essential that we must take the mask off Labor policy
as often as we can. it is time the people know the dangers of
a Labor alternative. Let me make these points crf comparison and difference.
1) On liberty.
We stand for the individual for his freedom, his initiatives
and his opportunities.
Labcr stands for socialism, for the all-powerful state,
bureaucratic, anonymous, unfeeling.
2) On the law.
We believe in freedom of speech and assembly, and of dissent
within the law.
Labor tolerates disrespect for, and oven breaches of, the law.
3) On Australia's security.
We beieve that treaties involve responsibilities and we stand
ready to h'rnour them. The ANZUS Treaty is the cornerstone
of our security.
The Labor Party stands for isolation in defence it scorns
meaningful treaties and arrangements with friendly powers.
It gives lip service only to an ANZUS Treaty with the
heart and soul torn out of it. 
4) On responsibility. We arc~ free to act and interuret our Policies and
platform without duress or interference.
The Labor Party in the Parliament is dictated
to by the Party outside. It is a Party in chains.
We have great responsibilities to Protect the
nation from being locked in a straitjacket of socialism. We
must safeguard the future of this great nation.
Post-war progress of the Australian nation is
our inheritance and its future safety and prosperity is
our destiny. It is our job as Liberals to fulfil these
responsibilities with vigour, with honestY and with imagination.
I know we are equipped to do it and to do it in
a manner and with a purpose that matches the times in which
we live. I thank you. 8 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE UNTIL 6.30 p. m.
PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
Bv the Prime Minister,
The Rt Hon. William McMahon, M. P. 31 May 1972
HEALTH
Your health is of over-riding importance.
That is why I want to talk to you now about the quality
and the cost of our National Health Services Scheme.
It is in your interests to know just what the
National Health Scheme does for you. You should also know
the differences between our practical health policies and
the nationalised Labor blueprints. The two schemes are
radically different.
We, as Liberals, put the patient first in our
working scheme. Labor, puts the system first in its
grandiose theorising. We know, from overseas experience
with so-called " free" health schemes, how easily the
patient can be lost in the machine.
We must start from the basis that good health
is a priceless asset.
Your health deserves the best medical and
hospital care that can be provided. We have evolved a
working Australian T-htional Health Scheme suited to
Australian conditions and based on many years of
practical. exnerience. What does'this scheme give you? It is
voluntary you are free to join or not. You can choose
any doctor, or change to any other doctor if you want to.
Women know the absolutely vital personal value of this
freedom of choice.
The amount of the doctor's bill you have to pay,
whether for surgery or home visits, is limited. Where
doctors participate under the common fee plan your cost
is 80 cents for a surgery visit and $ 1.20 for a home visit. 
I have already stressed that Australians are
entitled to expect the best medical attention there is.
This requires the closest co-operation of the medical
profession if it is to succeed. Under our voluntary
scheme, the doctor : imself has freedom. He is not and
cannot under the constitution be compulsorily made to
provide his service for a fixed amount. Nor can he be
compelled to accept a quota of patients under a salaried
or nationalised health scheme. We do not want that in
any event. With notable excentions, especially with
some sections in New South Wales, the medical profession
does co-operate. In the mid-sixties, the voluntary health system
came under considerable stress because of the growing
need for better medical and hospital care. How did we
resoond? In 1968-69, we began to reconstruct the
hospital and nursing home benefit arrangement. We also
established the Nimmo Committee to make an in-depth
study of health insurance. As a result, we made a lot
of changes and reforms. These are not promises or
pie-in-the-sky. But actual improvements bringing you
bigger benefits and better services. They are all
available to you today. Not maybe next year, maybe
sometime, maybe never. But right now.
I mention just a few reforms:
Full hospital benefits without conditions,
Simplified hospital insurance arrangements,
A single medical table,
The five dollar limit on cost to you where
the common fee applies,
Higher specialist benefits,
No limitations for nre-existing ailments
And so on.
These benefits arc substantial and tangible. They protect
you. I repeat. Under the Liberal scheme the interests
of the patient come first. We will do all in our power to
improve the scheme and further lessen the burden on you.
We want a practical working scheme. But we can't get
well or remain healthy on promises or theories.
So think carefully before giving unthinking
support to something labelled " free health", but which in
reality will turn out to be a very expensive experiment
in nationalised medicine without real benefit to you.
That is why we want a National Health Scheme
that is efficiently organised and run. We want a scheme
that works and doesn't cost the earth, because, as you
know. the taxpayer in the end always pays the bill. 



PM. No. 52/ 1072
VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon,
C11, MP
The Prime Minister ( Mr McMahon) leaves Australia on
Monday 5 June by chartered Qantas 707 for a visit to Indonesia,
Singapore and Malaysia.
During his visit he will have discussions with President
Soeharto, Prime Minister Lee and Prime Minister Tun Abdul Razak.
Mr McMahon will also have talks with other senior Government leaders
and officials. Arrangements are being made for the Prime Minister
to see some Australian aid projects, and he will be briefed on
significant developments in each country.
Mr McMahon will be accompanied by members of his
personal staff. On this occasion, he will not be accompanied by
Mrs McMahon. The Hon. JoD. M.. Dobie, tMP, Assistant Minister, will
accompany the Prime Minister.
An advising team travelling with the Prime Minister will
include the Secretary to the D: artment of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet, Sir John Bunting, the Secretary to the Department of
Defence, Sir Arthur Tange, Mr HD. Anderson, First Assistant
Secretary to the Department of Foreign Affairs, Mr R. S. Livingston,
Deputy Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry, and
advisers from the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and
Foreign Affairs. Dr Marc Faunce will travel with the party as personal
physician to the Prime Minister.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Hon. Nigel Bowen,
MP, will be in Djakarta during the Prime Minister's visit to
Indonesia. Mr McMahon will visit Indonesia from 5 to 8 June,
Singapore from 8 to 11 June and Malaysia from 11 to 14 June.
He will return to Australia on 15 June.
CANBERRA, 1 June 1972 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 56/ 1972
PRESIDE'T i'IXOS VISIT TO THE U. S. S. R.
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William
McMahon, M. P.
The Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon, today described President
Nixon's recent visit to the Soviet Union as another massive
stride along the road toward-reducing international tensions and
another contribution towards making the world a more peaceful
place in which to live in freedom and peace of mind.
In Mr. Nixon's own words, " a foundation has been laid for a
new relationship between the two most powerful nations in the
world." Mr. McMahon said that the Australian Government welcomed
the agreements signed during the summit meeting and applauded
the President's initiative and the constructive approach that
both the United States and the Soviet Union has taken in their
discussions in Moscow. The agreements limited strategic arms
were clearly a signifi: Fai-t achievement.
They could well mark an historic turning point in the efforts
to halt the arms race aid to bring a'out a meaningful relaxation
of world tension.
Mr. McMahon also said he believed that the declaration of
basic principles between the U. S. A. and the U. S. S. R. was
significant both in substance and psychologically.
The declared principles opened up new avenues for the
development of the future relationship between the two super-powers
and must make a contribut-ion towards detente between east and west.
Of particular importance is the undertaking both nations have
given to exercise restraint in their mutual relations and to
negotiate and settle differences by peaceful means. Among these
were Vietnam and the Middle East.
The Prime Minister also sa'd that there are satisfying reasons
for expressing our gratitude to President Nixon for the initiatives
he had taken towards opening up consultations with Peking and Moscow.
/ 2 
92. A real contribution had been made towards reducing many of the
previously existing regid in i. ne: aticr. al : f; airs and
the tensions which have cxi . te. i cn ' tcse three great nations.
Whilst the long-term results o visits will be seen in the
future, the missions had achieved their main purpose.
They had given grounds for the hope that a new era has commenced
an era in which all nations can pursue their aspirations for social
and economic progress in an atmosphere of peaceful co-operation. 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS P o53/ lP72
ECONOPJ.' C CONSULTA. TIONS
Statement by the Prime ~ n is ter
The Pt Hon. Uili. Hcanr. kT ,7
The annual economi~ c co-nsultations 12etween ilinisters
and representatives of industry and commerce h ave been held
in Canlerra and Sydney over the past three days
These consultations, now' comn1eted, ,, ere most
informative and useful, and gave T.. inisters valuable insight
into the concerns arnd o-iinions o4 the various key rna~ onal
organizations parti cipatir.
~ inisters m~ et th'e renrez.-entatives of national
organizations concerned vwith major areas of the economy
primary industry, maz' ufacturinq iridustryi cor-=. erce and mining.
As well, t--hey had discussions with tne Advisory
Councils on manufacturing industry and excort developm~ ent,
arnd. with re-oresentatives of the T.' isItralian Co,) uncil of Trade
Unions. A, list of the organizations particirating in the
consultations is attached.
The rarticipatin n rganizati. ons put before the
Covern~ ment particular r.. atters of concern to their industries
at present, and~ qave thE-. ir vwson slanificart matters
affecting -the econory goner:-1ly. " Iiristers found it esnecially
helPful to have assessirents from organ_ 4z at ions of the presen~ t
state of their iridustrie-s and the cooy and the outlook as
thc-y see it for the eriod a-lie.-d.
The consultations were eoJ~ arlier this ye. ar than
in the oast. Thne '-' ovcrnment will Soon be commuencing its
detailed oreparations for t&gt; 2' 1072-73 Budact, and it is
particularly valuable for ,, in 4. sters to have had at this early
stage the viecws of orqanizaticn: representing a vc-ry wi, 71z:
cross section of ustralials oconorl" ic life. / 2. 
0 The ' overnment finds that these annual consultations
are increasingly useful and beneficial. They serve to aid
and guide the Government during the formulation of its
economic policies, especially in a situation where the
economy and its management is becoming more and more complex
each year as Australia develops.
These discussions have given the representatives
from various segments of Australian industry and commerce an
opportunity not only to acquaint 
on the economy and to respond to questioning but have also
given them an opportunity to hear from Ministers the policies
of the Government. The Government was most appreciative of the time and
energy that the various representatives and organizations spent
in Preparing detailed submissions and found the frank and open
discussions invaluable.
SYDNEY 2 June 1972 
FCONOM IC CONS UlTAT I 0! TS
PARTICIPAI\ TNGOP(' ANIZATIONS
PrimaryIndustry Group,,
Australian Farmers' Federation
Australian ; 1oolqrowers' and Graziers' Council
Australian 1, Jool and M!. eat Producers I Federation
Austral-Lan W~ heatarowers ' Federation
Manufacturing Industr. y Cr -oupz
Thie Associated Chambers of 1. anufacturers of
Au str ali a
The National Building and Construction Council
, Tnc Federal CP-tamber of Automotive. Industries
Comperce Group-.
The Associated Chiaie-rs~ f -CoTrrce-of--Australia
Australian.. 3larrkers I -As-sociation
ustxralian Co~ unc4I -cr Retailers
-Australian M ining IndustryCouncil.
Marfac'arna hdut'r-esA~ visorv Council.
-E3Mcrrt Develonent--C0omcil-
T. ustralian Counci-L-of Trades' Unions 



VISION VALLEY OPENING
N. S W.
Speech by the Prime tUinister, The Rt Hon. William McMahon, C. H. rM. P.
3 June, 1972.
The Reverend Alan Walker, Ladies and Gentlemen,
When Alan Walker asks me to do something for one of the
many projects which spring from his fertile mind, it isn't easy to say
no'. I have known him for a long time and I admire him in the work
he is doing in the name of his church for people in all walks of life.
So whien he asked me to open " The Vision Valley Project"
this afternoon, I could'nt say ' no' It is a great personal pleasure,
Alan, for my wife and me to be here and for me to say a few words about
this project. You have " reached for the stars", and here in this valley
you and your colleagues have built a " Country Club" with a difference.
This Centre will bring relief to young and old from the stifling life
of the crowded city of Sydney. And in this way it will help to refresh
the moral and spiritual values of our own community. In many ways I
believe we can look upon it as a pathfinder for others. Its conception
alone is inspiring and its practical value will be unlimited. It will
give direct expression to some of the things my Government wants to secure
for the Australian people. Among these is the development of a quality
of life in Australia which has as its symbol and slandard, excellence in
all things, and an end to oovcrty so far as it is within the power of
mortal men, to achieve.
There are tasks ahead in the seventies for all of us
tasks which require us to share in a concerted national effort to protect
the Australian environment not only from the man-made pollution of the
air and the water, and the desecration of our great and unique natural
assets, but from the diseascs of s) ciety which flow from crowded living
and the tensions and pressures of contemporary life. Vision Valley will
make a notable contribution to thlat effort.
I sooke the other day Df Government plans to expand the work
of the National Health and Mledi.: a2 Research Council, and of our wish to
do something more in the nursing home and home care fields. 
These are examples of a strong and continuing desire on the
part of my Government to join with others in dealing with the social
problems of the day, and to do our best to give to every man, woman
and child in the Australian community the security and dignity that is
theirs by right as citizens of this wonderful country.
We will not rest in this task. Some of what we do can be
measured in money terms and in the shape of buildings against the sky.
But a lot, too, depends on the research we make possible; on the
guidance we can give, and on the goodwill of the Central Missions of
many faiths which we can foster.
I think it is one of the remarkable aspects of Australian
life that so much is being achieved by voluntary effort and by the
gift of time and ideas and enthusiasms by a great legion of Australians
who are insnired to do things in humanity's name. I hope it will
always go on for it is one of the ennobling characteristics of any
nation. Alan, I congratulate you and your fellow workers of the
' ethodist Central Mission on the example you set and the leadership
you give. Some of you may ask " What is the Government giving in hard
cash to this project The honest answer is that it is not giving
anything directly, because under the acts of Parliament as they stand
we cannot spend the taxpayers' money in this way. But indirectly I
want to tell you that we are helping, and I believe, helping significantly.
We are doing this by tax deductability for donations of $ 2 and over to
the project, and our contributions to projects run by the Methodist
Central Mission which do qualify under existing acts of Parliament.
This, of course, does allow the Mission to divert more of its
own funds to exciting and original new projects like Vision Valley. And
so many of you will know the Central Methodist Mission supports many
socially significant and essential projects. There is its famous
Lifeline Service, its homes for the aged and chronically ill and its aid
to the physically and mentally handicapped so that they can be helped
to find a useful nlace with dignity in our society. Homes for the aged
and chronically ill and the handicapped do come under the acts I have
referred to. And over the years the Commonwealth Government has given
just over half a million dollars $ 574,000 to be precise to the
' lathodist Central Mission for its nursing homes, hostels and home units
for the aged. Now, under another act of Parliament under the Sheltered
Employment Assistance Act we propose to give another substantial sum
to the 1Methodist Central Mission.
Mr Chairman, I have pleasure in announcing that my Government
will grant the sum of $ 137,000 for the Mission's Sheltered Workshop at
the Lifeline Centre in Rydalmere. This will be for the direct assistance
of dibibled people. It will, as I explained before, also help to improve
the development of Vision Valley by freeing other funds for this project. / 3 
3.
M. r Chairman, many people who are sorely troubled will come
to this Valley and find comfort and hope. Others will find it a place
to rest from their labours, and others, too: will find it a olace to
refresh their spirit and body in healthy surroundings.
All of them, I am sure, will find a new communion in life
which will make them hapoier people.
It is for these reasons I feel privileged to be here today,
and to officially declare this Centre open. 



FOR PRESS No. 54/ 1972
VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINCAPORF AND MALAYSIA
BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, THE
RT. 11ON. WNILLIAM McDMAHON, C. M. P.
DEPARTURE STATEVENT SYDNEY
I will be leaving tomorrow morning for
Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia on my first visit to these
countries as Prime Minister. The main purpose of the visit will be to
improve our relations with our three nearest South-East Asian
neighbours, whose friendshiP and co-operation we welcome.
Asia remains a critical area of the world in
which the quest for peace and security will be concentrated in
the future. Indonesia, where my journey starts, is not
only our nearest neighbour, but the fifth largest nation in the
world and the only one with which we share a boundary.
A soundly-based and lasting Australian/
Indonesian relationship is of the greatest importance to us now
and in the future. I want to emphasise Australia's growing and
continuing interest in the South-East Asian region.
Australia is deeplyv interested in the wellbeing
of our Asian friends and we are anxiouis to assist them in their
search for economic growth and regional security.
I also want to extend my own understanding of
each of these countries and of the matters which affect our
security and our economic, trade and social ties and
relationships. 
I want to rovicw with Indonesia, Singapore and
Malaysia their thinking, at Mead of Gov rnnant and Ministerial
level, on the changing situation in the Asian and Pacific region.
In my discussions, I exn~ ect to take up such
subjects as the changing roles of the major powers in Asia and
the effects of these ch~ nging roles on South-East Asia.
In Indonesia, I shall be having discussions
with President Soeharto and a. number of his Ministers, including
the Minister-for Foreign Affairs, and I will he joined there by
Mr Bowen. I shall also bo addressing the indonosian Parliament.
In Singapore, I will Jbe having several
discussions with the Prime Ministte-r and the Ministers for
Defence andl for Foreign Tffa:'. rs, and wqill be calling on the
President and visiting thce Ju. rong Tcown Cc,: rporation in which a
number of Australian companies have invested.
I will also visit theD headqukirters of the
A24ZUK Brigade and address the Singaporo Press Club.
In Kuala Lumpur, discussions havc Nbeen arranged
with the Prime Minister, TVun Raz;: k . mid other Ministers. In
these discussions, I want to em phcasise the great: importance we
attach to our relations with Mat ,' ia.
An audience has been arranged with His
Majesty the Yang Di -Per-tuan X-gong and. arrangemants have been
made for a visit to the Buttcrworth Air Baso.
CANBERRA, 4 June 1972 
FOR INFORMATION PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE
AND MALAYSIA
OUTLINE PROGRAEIE
INDONESIA Monday, 5 June
Tuesday, 6 June
Wednesday, 7 June
Thursday, 8 June
SINGAPORE
Thursday, 8 June
Friday, 9 June
Saturday, 10 June
Sunday, 11 June 4.00 Dm
5.30 pm
9.00 am
10.00 am
1 1 Arrival Courtesy call on President
Call by Governor of Djakarta
noon Discussions with
President Ministers
3.30 pm Calls by Foreign Minister and
Finance Minister
5.30 pm Reception for Australian
community
8.00 pm State Dinner
8.30 am Wreath-laying ceremonies
0.00 am Lay foundation stone ACI joint
prnject site
8.00 om ReLurn Dinner
0.00 am Address to Parliament
3.00 pm Depart for Singapore
5.00 pm
10.00 am
Morning 2.30 pm
8.00 pm
8.30 am
Lunch 6.00 pm
8.00 pm
Rest day
4.10 pm Welcoming Ceremony
Call on President
Discussions with Prime Minister
and Ministers
Visit Jurong Town Corporatbn,
Vocational Institute and an
Australian firm. Tree planting.
State Dinner
Visit Australian Forces
Singapore Press Club
Reception for Australian Commqnity
Return Dinner
Depart for Kuala Lumpur 
MALAYSIA Sunday 11 June
Monday, 12 June
Tuesday 13 June
Wednesday 14 June
Thursday 15 June 5.30 pm Welcoming Ceremony
9.00 am Wreath-laying
10.00 am Tal} s with Prime Minister
and Ministers
12.45 pm Audience with Agong
3.30 pm Briefing on security situation
8.15 pm State Dinner
Visit Butter-wrth rluring morning
2.00 pm Inspc';:. vil aviation aid
proj rec
8.30 Dm Return Dinner
9.00 am Visit rubb) r research station
11.15 am National operation? room briefing
Lunch With Deputy Prime Minister
6.00 pm Pecc . tion for Australian community
9.00 pm Depart for Australia
7.20 am Arrive Sydney. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 57/ 1972
ASSISTANCE FOR NEW FIELDS OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
Statement by the Prime minister, the Rt Hon. William
McMahon, M. P.
The Government has approved substantially increased grants
for medical research. This includes special Provision for research
into diseases and conditions responsible for the death and chronic
illness of many Australians.
The total grants approved of $ 13.5 million over the next
three years represent a $ 6.5 million increase over the amount
granted to the National Health and Medical Research Council for
medical research in the last triennium.
The major innovation in this substantial expansion of the
Commonwealth's support for medical research is in the first of the
three major categories of research provided for.
Within this category of special needs which are not
currently supported, a total of $ 2.67 million is to be made
available to initiate research under the following headings:-
Psychiatric illness, which has become a major medical
problem in our community.
Cardia-vascular disease, the largest single health problem
confronting Australians.
Viral and renal diseases
Infectious hepatitis
Arthritis, which is a major cause of chronic illness
Asthma, bronchitis and hay fever, the most prevalent
respiratory conditions
Accidents, including traffic, domestic, occupational and
recreational accidents.
Addiction to drugs and alcohol. / 2 
a 2.
T7he second category relates -to support for certain medical
research institutes i--n Australia which have developed specialised,
in-depth programmes of notable achievement.
Thle Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of 1fAedica1 Research and
the Howard Florey Institute of Expkerimcntal Physiology and
Medicine have established outstanding world-wide reputations,
and contributed significantly to improve our knowledge in thei r
fields and we want to ensure that support for them is continued.
Finally, we have agreed. to continue support for traditional
areas of medical research through scholarships, overseas fellowships,
and equipment grants as well as the maintenance of current
research activities in universities, hospitals, institutes,
government departments, and by individual doctors and dentists.
In these last two cateqori the increase in assistance is
more than fifty per cent compared with the previous triennium.
The Government is confident that these grants will provide a real
stimulus for medical research.
It is another in a series of significant Government
initiatives over a wide range of public health problems.
The Commonwealth has already taken warning action related
to the hazards to health of smoking in new requirements for
television advertising. We have also recently announced
substantially increased grants for heakt and cancer research.
CANBERRA, June, 1972. 



STATE DINNER
DJAKARTA
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon.
William McMahon,' CH, MP JUU7E 5, 1972.
Your Excellencies, President Soeharto and MAadamne Soeharto,
Distinguished Guest1-s:
I am honoured and personally delighted to be here with you
tonight among friends. My delight is, however, tinged. with regret
at the unavoidable absence of my wife. But I sDeak for her, too,
when I express our personal friendship for you, Mr. President and
for Madame Soeharto. Your visit to Australia is still fresh in our
memories and I want to convey to you the warmest greetings from her
and from the mnany friends you met in Australia as well as from the
Australian people themselves. 1972 was the year in which you,
Mr. President, by your visit to Australia, gave a powerful stimulus
to enlightened co-operation between our two countries.
Mr. President, I believe our friendship now has firm foundations.
Increasing numbers of Australians share my interest and desire for
closer and direct contact with your large and fascinating country.
Part of this interest arises from our proximity. But much of the
interest arises from a sense of fresh discovery of something
different something that has ancient foundations but-which is, to
many ofr us, refreshingly new. I am sure, too, that in the last few
years you have become increasingly awara of us as a country with
another kind of economy and society.
So we are of interest to each other not just because we are
neighbours, but because we are different and have commonly shared
goals and commonly shared interests. These commonly-shared goals
and interests, I believe, and concerned with
security, stability and peace,
national development,
economic and cultural co-operation and
trade
41r. President I think you will agree that our private
conversations this morning have reinforced this. ./ 2 
From the very first days of your independence we sympathised with,
and supported you struggle. We were among the first to establish
diplomatic relations with your newly independent country: And even
when our relations were at a low point we maintained our embassies
in each other's capitals and continued a dialogue.
Mr. President, I am well aware that you have created stability
and maintained growth in your own country, and have contributed to
the stability and development of the South-East Asian region. I
now assure you that I, along with many other Australians, share a
deep and abiding interest in. your country, its culture and its
future. If two countries with such different cultural, ethnic
geographical and religious backgrounds can build the bridges of
co-operation and goodwill as we have, then Sir, we have a unique,
intimate and mutually rewarding relationship which is an example
that other countries troubled by conflict and tension can follow.
We are both members of a region composed, in a political sense, of
many newly-independent nations. We are both devoted to regional
development and to the concept of which you, Sir, are one of the
architects of national resilience. I speak of national resilience
as the will and the ability of each of us, so far as it is within
our capability, to defend our independence by our own efforts.
I believe, too, 1tr. President, that the Asian theatre will be
profoundly influenced by the changes now occurring in the
relationships among the major powers. President Nixon's visits to
Peking and Moscow have altered the balance away from confrontation,
and towards conciliation and detente. If these trends continue, and
we hope they will, the peoples of South-East Asia can look forward
with some hope to greater prospects of peace, stability and progress
This does not mean that we can relax our efforts to build up our
capability, regional co-operation and, in your own words, regional
resilience. Nor does it mean that in all circumstances we can go
it alone'. The conflict is still raging in Indo-China, and at a
higher level of violence. Other nations in the region are still
confronted with problems of subversion and, in some instances, armed
insurgency. These disturbances make it all the more imperative
that we should work actively and effectively together. As I have
already said, Mr. President, 1972 has been the year of enlightened
co-operation in many fields, including trade, development, cultural
and defence co-operation.
Our trade is growing but we want to ensure that it grows to
our mutual advantage, and we believe it is important to do more to
encourage your exports to Australia. You may recall that we
introduced in 1966 a system of preferential tariff quotas on
manufactured goods imported from developing countries. We were the
first to do so. These quotas have been expanded both in size and
numbers over the years. In fact at the recent UNCTAD conference in
Santiago, we announced that a further 200 items would be added to
the system. I feel that Indonesia has not yet taken up its fair
share of these quotas which are designed to help all developing
countries. / 2 
We are prepared to do whatever possible to provide your
traders with information on market proposals in Australia. I have
asked my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Trade and Industry, to visit Indonesia for trade talks on these
and other matters, including a review of our trade agreement which
was negotiated initially in 1959. I also expect Mr. Anthony to
discuss investment issues of mutual concern with your ministers.
Then there is economic development. This is a subject to
which your Government attaches the highest priority, and my
Government has been happy to assist in providing technical skills,
know-how and equipment. We have a common interest in the
development of the port of Tjilatjap, and we have been discussing a
new project in animal husbandry of which I will be saying more later
in this visit. This as you know, is a large project indeed.
As I have informed you, Mr. President, my Government plans a
substantial increase in Australian aid over the next three years.
Mr. President, we are also involved in cultural co-operation.
Our two governments signed a cultural agreement four years ago and
there has been a welcome increase in cultural contacts since then:
But more needs to be done. I have proposed, with the agreement
of your Government, to establish a cultural and language centre in
Djakarta. This centre will promote two-way cultural and language
exchanges. And, finally, in the field of defence co-operation, our armed
services are working closely together in a number of projects.
Neither of us wants a military pack of alliance. But there is much
e can do by giving assistance in a practical way and by sharing
experiences and knowledge and co-operating to our joint advantage.
We have arranged to provide sabre jet fighters and accompanying
equipment and technology and flight training, and very substantial
help in equipping an important military airfield at Iswahjudi.
Already your airmen including pilots and technicians are now being
trained in Australia: And we are willing to respond positively to
your wish to strengthen your coastal surveillance capacilities.
There are several other such projects under discussion between us
that I hope to see brought to fruition.
I am now able to say that my Government last week approved
increased financial provision for technical and military
co-operation with Indonesia to enable us to assist in these and
other ways.
Mr. President, I, and the vast majority of Australians, highly
esteem the wise, courageous and unifying leadership you have given
to Indonesia and the energetic role you have played in your
country's development. We are both fortunate that you assumed the
leadership of Indonesia at a moment in its history when your
qualities as a leader were most needed. Since then you have
continued to provide inspiration for your people. You have guided
your country through many difficult years, and have opened up
prospects for a better a much better future.
Mr. President, I now propose the toast to you and to the
continuing friendship of our two countries and our co-operation in
the pursuit of peace and progress for Indonesia Australia and
our friendly neighbours.
L 



CHECiK P,, GA1. LTsT DELI" VL Y
LMLARGO Not for release A-t fore 173 3mm 7/
PRIME MINISTER
2MAC!)[ A RIE NETWOP1.1 WEEKLY O2 DCAST
By the Prime ! ini; ter,
The Rt lion. William Mclahon, 1-. P. 7 June 2i072
VISIT TO SOIUTH EAST ASIA,
isreport is recorded in )-' akarta, thce caD:~. tal of
Indonesia is the first of our three nearest neiq~ h! bours I am
visiting during my ten-day South East Asian journey which star-ted on
!;' onday. Indono-sia is not only our nearest neighour; she is the fifth
largeast nation in thle world anid the only one wi. th 71iica we -Th; are a
boundary. A boundary based on lasting Australian/ indonesian relationshilp
i. s of the greatest importance to us, tth now and in the future.
Australia's friendship 14-th Indonesia groes back to the b) eginning's
of Indonesian nationhood, when e su-oported and sympathised wit;, the
struggles of Indonesian natriots. Ile were aiiong the first to estal. lish
dir'lomatic relations with1 Indoneiia as a nevily inderenderit na-tion. This
long f riendshir ') was reflected very vividly indeed in t. hei welcoraie my -narty
received on arrival i~ n Djakarta. 14any th-ousands of schoolchildrE~ n
lined the road from -the airnort, waving and clheering. This gave a
youthful and human touch to g. enerous official we72. come it the airport,
given my President and Madame Soeharto and leading Indonesian Minister.
It wzas a tri4bute to a!. ustraia a good neighbour and fric! 7-d.
And I was proud to receiAve it as an Australian on your behalf.
I have como. on -this journey to Indonoesia, Sing. aporc and IMalay!.-ia
becausa I want to empnasise Australia's3 growinig and continuing interest
in the South East Asi,. n region. As Australians we shoul1d be, and I believe
the very great m ajor-of yo are, Teply intorested lin t'he wellbeing of
our ksian fricnds. We arc. anxious to ha-, In tnem in their search for
increased economic growth and regional socurity.
Pnothor purnose of this journcy is to icnmy own per~ sonal
undeirstanding of -e: ach of thz~ se noighbour naticns, and thosc matters which
affoct both tham and us. Thoso inclu. 3..-thei whole range of our security,
economic, trade and social ties and relations',, ins. ./ 2 
2.
In my visit to Indonesia I am returning the visit to Australia
earlier this year by President Soeharto. I believe our excnange of
visits has given a powerful stimulus to the friendshio between Australia
and Indonesia. And I think it is true to say that 1972 has been a year
of enlightened co-operation between Australia and Indonesia. This is
true in trade, in development, in our civil aid, in our cultural
exchanges, and in our defence co-operation.
Australia and Indonesia have quite different cultural, ethnic,
geogra hic and religious backgrounds. If we can, as we have been able
to, build bridges of co-operation and goodwill, then , e have set an
examp~ le to other nations of ways in ,7hich to build a unique, intimate
and mutually rewaarding relationship between nations. I want to build
thes3e bridges to be strong and to last.
In Djakarta yesterday morning, I met and exchanged gifts with
the Governor of this axpanding and facinating city. Later I consulted
in private with the President and this was followed by talks with his
Senior 111inisters. Following these discussions I was able to touch on
a number of important new initiatives during my official speech here last
night. I was able to tell my Indonesian hosts that there would be a
substantial increase in Australian civil aid to Indonesia over the next
three years. I also announced, with the agreement of the Indonesian-
Government, we had decided to establish here~ in Djakarta an Australian
financed and conducted cultural and language centre. This centre is
the natural development of the cultural agreement signed by Australia
and Indonesia four years ago, an agreement which has led to a welcome
increase in cultural contacts between us.
I also spoke about the growing defence co-operation between
Australia and Indonesia, I said that while neither country wanted a
military pact or alliance of any kind, there was much we could do in
a practical way by sharing our experience and knowledge. We are going
to provide Indonesia with.. sabre jet fighters and the accompanyinq
necessary equipment and flight training. We are also going to help
substantially in equipping an immortant military airfield in Indonesia
at which the sabres will be based. Indonesian airmen and technicians
arrived in Australia to begin this training period just a few days ago.
In another aspect of defencez co-oneration -e will be helping
Indonesia to strengthen its coastal surveillance canabi lity. I took the
opportunity in my speech last night to announce that my Government last
week approved an increased financial provision for defence aid to
Indonesia to enable this type of assistance to go ahead.
Tomorrow I go to Singapore until Sunday, and then on to
Malaysia before returning to Australia on 15th June. I will be
reporting to you on my journey again next Wednesday. 



FOR PRESS: P! 7M's No. 5G/ 72
JOINT COMMUNIQUE
Issued at the Coniclusion of thne State Visit to Indonesia by the Prime
Minister Of Australia, The Rt f. Hon. Wi lliam, ? Ic4ahon, CH, MP.
From 5 to 8 June, 1972.
At the invitation of President Soeharto, the Prime Minister
of Australia, The Rt Hon. William : c ahon, CW, MP, made a State visit
from 5 to 3 June 19~ 72.
The Prime Mdinister was accomn-aniJed by thE! " Iinister for Foreign
Affairs, The Kon. Nigel Bokqe. n, QC, -IP, T:~ he A. 3si!-tant Minister Assisting
thle Prime Minister, The 11on. J. D. V. Dobie, MP, andi senior officials of
the Australian Government.
During his stay, '-inistear Wc-'-_ l. ahon held discussions with
President Soeharto. HeI also addressod th" e Indonesian Parliament.
The President and tihe: Prime ;' Minister had friendly and detailed
discussions on racasuras Nwhich. arE being tknby booth Indonesia and
Australia. to deopen the fric-: ndship b~ twa7, en the two countries and to
strengthen co-operation in,-th e conomic, cultural, def rice and political
fi 1ld S. T2he Prizesident and th,-e Prime Minister reaffirmed their recognition
of tie iit-ortanco for Indnoesia and k'ustraJlia of Pc: tablishing an
enduring and soundly ' bascd relationship as neighbours in thle Asia-Facific
region. Tney exnressed the belie f tha: t Indonesia and Australia. are
moving,, into a ph'ase where it is i -creasinqly possible to put substance
and content in-to that rzelationsh
The Pres-4idcnt and the Prima Minister agreed that their discussions
in Djakarta, following cn those they had previously hel. d in
Canberra., had cenable: d them to man out a programm~ e of co-opeDration
for the years im iteyahead. The2 basis of this relationshin was
a deepening mutual unzlerstandinq of the distinctive characteristics of
thea Indonesia.-and Australian nations and oeoriles, a realistic arpreciat'-
ion ofIL common inters;, os and an' increasing recognition of the ways
thev could complement a-: nd helr' each othcr. 
In thie fie: ld of e _ conomic co-operation, the Prime Minister
informed the President taat the u-. tralian Go~ vernment had deci-dead
that at thle end of the current thri-. e-ye ar prograr'me of economic and
technical ansqistance in June 1973, a furthor throe-year programme would
be c.-tablished -to valuce of $ A69million, on a grant basis, thus
assuring the Indonesian Govornment that Australian aid would continue
to carow as it had in the past. Details of the now programmew w.. ould be
det;; rmin A in close consultation between the Australian and Indonesian
Governmonts and would take, full account of the aid requirements of
Ixidone si. a. Tho President and the Prime Plinigter agreed to, exp~ lore ways
and means of further promotinq and expanding trado between the two
countries. The Prime Ainiste--r informed thoe President that the -Deputy
Primce Minister and " lnisfter for Trade and Industry, ilr. ANnthony,
would shrrtly be visiting Djakarta for dretaled trade discuss~-ons.
The PrC: sident and the Prime tMinistor further agrod. on the desira-. 1bility
of facilitating Australian private investment in Indonesia. Thr-
Pr-esident ex~ rossod his apprreciat1--ion of Austral~ ia' s efforts in the
field of c-onomic co-operation and assistance.
The Presidaz. t and tlv rime 7Udiistor discussed ,. ays of
developing cultural cxchang~ es betwt1: en their two countries as a meians
of promoting grcatar inutual undarstanding. One speacific proposal which
they agreed to follow uDi was the esta. blishment o-f a cultural and
language centre in Djakarta which would prcmotc cultural exchanges
botwoen the tw() cc.; u-tr~ i!. s anid pTr ovide library and language training
facilities. The-centr( e would he-lp ani support Colom-o Plan and student
programme~ zs and would be availabl-a for botA Australian and Indonesian
cultural purposas. The Prosid and the Prime tinister had p.. roduct-iveicsso:
on security questions of mutual concern and th-s. e were continued
: ewon tho Prime Miinister and his advisers and other members of -the
Indonesian Government. The President and the Prime Ulinistor reaffirmed
that Indonesia and 7Wst. ralia were not thinking in terms of any kind of
defence pact or alliance. The President and tePrime lf-inister agreed
that, in the fiold of defence co-o7peration, their approach wias to look
for sensible:, practical ways in which. two friendly neighbours could
share their experiences and technical exporti7, e -ind pursuc
specific common objectives in accordance tith their rs-spective national
interests. rLhe Prime Minister informed the President that where the
Au'sral:;, n Government was able to help, it would bec gTlad to do so. He
informed0 the President that for this nurnoso thre . stralian Govc,' rnment
had decided to establish a throo year programme of tccbnical and
defenco assistance, commuencing 1 July .1972, to a value of $ A20 million
for the financing of currentl and. future projects agreed between the
two govornmonts. The Presi % ant and theI rrinic Minister and other Indonesian
and istraliar. rniisters and officials ccncerned hold informative
and wide-ranging talks. Am. ong the subjects discussed were President
Nix-n' 7 recent visits to Peking and Moscow, and their impact on the
futurc. srscurity, devaleopmont an14. , welfare of the South-East Asian region. 
The talks underlined once agq: ain the closze identity of views between the
two governments on many rzeqIcn21 and intarnational questions, and
their common concern for the peace, stability and w. elfare of South-
L'ast Asia. The Prcsident and the Prime ! Ministar reaffirmed that both
governments will continua _-fforts to stILrengti* 1nn national and reqi onal
resilience, that is, -the will and the ability! of individual coiintrigs,
so far as It is, witinin th-eir capability, to rdefend their indreixc ndcnc.
by their own efforts, and in the spirit of regional co-opecratio-n.
The PrE.-sidant and the Prime &gt;. Iinister expressed thceir de
concern over thec continuing conflict in Indo-C. hina which could end~ anger
pfeace and stability within the region. Tho President and the Prime
Minister agreed upon the need for continued efforts to bring about a
just and peaceful settlement.
The President cxpri&amp;. ssed the Indonesi. an Governm-ent's viewi that
understanding and cordial rela2tions shoul. d bc developed batweren
Indonesia and Papua New Guinrea as tho peoope of the latter mov,. toward:,
internal self -government and indepcendanco, The Prime 11Uinister welcomed
this , expression of view by the President.
The Preside-_ nt and th Prime .', inister confirmed that j" ustralia
and Indonesia would support cachk-other's candidaturcs for the sec. urity
council of the Unitad NIations.
It was acyre. ed that o-litical consultation would continue both
through the Embhassies in Djakarta and Canberra and at the: first annual
talks between Foreign Affairs . officials to be held in Djakarta in the
latter part of August.
During his visit to tho Indone sian Parliament on 8 June, the
Prime., Hinister informed the Speaker thlat the ) rcsiding officers of the
A. ustralian Parliame. nt wo, uld welcome a visit to Austraia by the Speake r
and a delegat-i( on of the Indonesian Parliament at a date to b-e mutually
agreed. Tho President and tePrime M1inister exrressed their
s ati sf act ion that re2. ations between 1% ustralia and Indonesia are) on
excellent terms and now cover manv fioldi of common interest. They
reaffirmad thrat the,. Indoncsian and Australian Governmants and oreoplas
have the same basic goals and objectives for the region in which both
live. Before leaving, thec Prime Tiister inforned the Pre~ sident that,
as had becen aqrzu-d in Canberra during thfz President's visit,
negotiations would soon be resumed on the seabed boundaries which1 are
still unsettled and on the further settlemont of thce border betwen
Aest Irian and Papua New Guinea. The President and the Primii " inister
reaffirmed the agreement already signed between the two governments
concerning the delimination of cartain saabod boundaries, and the
result of the joint surveys regarding the border between West Irian and
Papua New Guinea.
Me-i Primc Ministcr e xnressed his deep gratitude and si ncere
appreciation for the warm and hosnitable rece * ption accorded to him
and the members of his party during their visit to Indcincsia by the
government and pecnolo of Indonesia. Be,, th Leaders -xressed their
satisfaction that this visit had further strengthened the friendship
and mutual understanding between the:-ir two countrice-s.
09 June, 1972. 



VISIT TOINDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA
Speech by the Prime M4inister, the RPt Hion.
William McMahon, CHI, HP.
AT DINNER GIVEN IN HIS HONOUR BY THE PRIM'E 1INISTER OF SINGAPORE,
LFE KUAN YFW. 9 JUNE 1972
Prime Minister, Excellencies, and Distinguished Guests:
It is a privilege to be the guest of the Singapore Covernment
and to return once more to a city I have visited many times, but not
until now as Prime &gt; ninister of Australia.
As you said, Mr Lee, I was last here as Foreign Minister in
1971 for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. On that
occasion, I was impressed by the admirable way Singapore rlayed host
to our Commonwealth colleagues and if you will permit me to say so,
Mr Lee, I admired your masterly handling of the proceedings as Chairman.
When Australians come to Singapore, Prime M~ inister, they do not
feel they walk among strangers. -They know they are among friends.
It is in that spirit I am he~ re tonight.
There arc bonds between our countries which I value and some
are the subject of ? olitical differences in Australia. But, as I said
this morning when we snoke together in private, it is not my intention
to export domestic ' olitical controversy.
The matters that concern us both, are, I bolieve, fundamental
in the social sense as thay affect relations between people and of
practical importance in our common effort to advance the fortunes of
our countries and do all-we can to secure peace and orogress in the
region. I speak for -a country that haz great natural resources but
which for a large part is a harsh, dry land which wo have tamed and
learnt to live with, and developed a society, getting on now to be
some two hundred years old. 
You, Sir, load n cou. 1, tr, 1 t-: Lat has not the natural re-, sources9
we posscss. But you,. too, . heve.-t ump'v 1 and : 11, vc &gt;-uilt up a
progressiv: e cnv. rornent,. w.-iose1 Uaorn_-e Iave culture: s cgoinq back to
ancienttis Th: sre are differences of magnitude of our haistories. But
thari-are also forco which . believe bring us togather -tnd which
today fund us with commofl intere, ts in South-East Psia at a time of
challenge and chalige.
You, Mr Primrt ? iinister. lavc spokan of the momentous nolitical
changes in the world in l.-: 3t eighteen Tronths, and I agree -oith
vou that we must not rush to firm conclusions as a result cf whlat has
take -n place, or as you so aptly said, to ' start changing our friends'.
It is about our frieridshin, Mr_ Le*, that I want to say something
tonig.' ht, becauso both know that all is not politics in lift, and
there are meeting poin-ts for our peopic in many ways w-hichl can lead
to rarc fulfilimonts in human relations.
1 ither counitry can iive alo p in th. I-o * latc y-aar3 of thetwantit
-th century. For our nart, the twin determinants of goograony
and hi: 5tory are involving us increasingly in South1--East ASiaC.
Geogranhy-l -ias nlacced us on the-southeorn rirm of that area.
As to hi-stor6tihe fall of Singapore in 1942 was a dramatic
catalyst for the future dovcelonrient of Singapore and for Australia
also. For your part, in the past 30 yzars, and more rapidly in tho
nast sevcn years, you have moved wita ' vigour and rnurnose to a
prosD2. rous, ordarlyi, 1,! ell-deav--_ 1:) red and indopendlent State in Asia,
with links to our rEuroncarn civiLlisation of e: nduring strength. You
have displaycd ruggod self-disciLpline, a vitality and an enthusiasm
of a remarkable order.
Teisonc thing ' iThi , cl. i irhprossos itself on me iwhene-ver your
cofu nSriy qarre cmesto ttention whether in the news or in
our minds. It i~ the w% Tcltho f goodw-. ill which auto-maetically extends
to i~-as if by nature.
I wonder whether, assit hzro tonight, ralise tha full
lengthA. ; 1-p-th and breadLth of th-at goodwill, or of the-optortunities
for co-omnration between us whicii -flow fro. it.
Wo k now, you cis an illluminating clemr: m-t in t. he. . society of Asia.
We know you also for* your en--tiusi. asm and -, uccess in youir dcevelooment
in many important directions. For instanco, in your exciting urban
ronew-al and in the tall buildings, I saw. reaching for the Sky as I
drove in from the air-Dort yetra. In all this the-re is a quality
in your country for ave,: ryone to se
A, i f I may, I would like to nnalyse-thie quality I speak of
a littl-a further. i't comr7s nartly, of courzse-, from your noople. Blut
there_ is ano-th1er sourcz! Icadc. er9hip.
In this your own innatc ca-pacity and instinct stand out. They
hFav,--1had very much to do '' ihthe: succcs: 3 of your country. You seck
quality in your society, as w.: do in ours. And in pursuit of -this
you havc bucen practical and far--eig You have bcen innovators and
pragrm:,.'
Singaqorc:. 
havo comov here on t'iis viit consciou3 that alreadyawbo
mutual in'r~; and cozn: tacts has broi: ght our ocetvstogetier. In
termns of rsc-_ curi;-! y : k p: art-or in t'i, ri _ vL!-owcr Dcf'encc Arran geiftcnts
with Singapoere, Falaysia, N" w ealarnd and Britain.
Under the arrangemonts, Austrealia hnas Uni1 -ts of it s thr-aC
services in Singapore. One Purpose of my visit has boen to sec
un11its of thcse: serviccs on thc ground ' or th. 2 first time.
As my tnl7.: s h(-ere today c-rnfiraod, thi--' ower De-fencO
Arranqernents, includinq the comoosition and disposition of ur forces,
continu..-to be r-garded as irrnortant by both our oenels hey
ar working l.
Y:-et me illustrato cur contacts a li~ ttle further in other ways.
I lh_-orvc in mind the relationshin that is now w e2. l -estab . sm-lod in
educatio~ ral mattar3 by thi facilitie _ s vue hav_ 130-o % ot e offer your
studcrits, and t. e incrca-3ing interchlange. o' ur University
administrators ardl scholars.
Wa have too j oi4 hancs pca 1rp rojec-3 being develonad
unde-r t'uhe; 7. ustr; 7l1ian--Asian Ti: riisCo-on'orratior Scheme. I am
conficnt, Primc 1-inist: c-r, tl the-,-futuro--7iils1 the veo I lt
of incrcasing links botwerc'n oi.-! Universitie. s, and mrorn-. go no(, rally
among the,-Universiti-as of ther rc7rf. nn.
! wI oul-3 al17o mentlon.. in the o tcx f'nwh each other
bettc-r t: ne growth in touri-, M ctio our -two com: itrics. We are
cro th-e t. h-resh; Iold new : Ln-. to Wha,. t T bealievc will br~ anweao
lowc-r farcs for air travzel. Thio il opoan " moagic casements" on naew
lands for thousands of our eien. This, too, will_ w7ork] its
ministry on our socictics.
No man, it is said, tav,',! s eith imopunity. A~ nd in, this
env~ ironmznt of South -East Aitravel communmLcatas ao'xtdill, creates
understanding, and has, of nccssity becausc! we live a riractical
wo~ l~, significant commercial ~ is
Prim X-inister, -oe in TAu7t1ralia-res-. c) ct Siliqalore as a trader.
We value your market '. and xxa r glad to s&amp; e, it grow. st thy: same
tiim. 7 cCf, l eIdwgee~ t"-a-t tl-balan-0e runs3 h~ aviiv in our favour.
Liko yoA. we support and follow a pclicy of libzeral, multilat-ral
trarlc. But we7k h., ooe it will 5epossible th; f. utura for yo-u to
hav morz opportunities0 in our mnurk,_: t.
Finally, Prime M~ in-Lt r, I must refer tk. o wh-at I believe was a
most su,_ ccessful export to ; Au--ra. lia. I have h. iad enthus-. astic reports
of the1-great success at t hd. e, laidca Festival in lrhof the Singapore
Cultural Trc'uno. The, Trounc was acclaimcti in Autaibecause it
was exciting, colourful and original. 7tL was good for cultural
relations. PAnd it--uas F. r-,. Tiin -Ior that in cultural exchanges, which
wo must encourage, we havc-. a rilch fertilisation of our friendship.
Prime Ministaor, I lndc my% T, .. arty arxe glad to bna here. I h-Ave
had an istructiva and, I constructive day wijth you and your
Senior 1-+ L. nisters. I havc! 1hcl a fasci. natIri afternoon at Jurong. And
in my dis: cussion_-s and in my '. ravols, I 1have seen examples of thos,
mnany qualitios in Sinqenorie to ~~ ac erwitnos:; to-night'.&amp; 
I I salute the " Lion City" of the twentieth century. And I say
to you, Sir, and all assembled here that Australia values Singapore's
friendship. We extend to each other our friendship and trust in full
measure. And we believe that our friendship and trust will have a
long life and be a rewarding one for all of us, and to the region
where cur destinies belong.
I thank you. 



VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MAPLAYSIA
By the Prime Minister of Australia, the
Rt. Hon. William McMahon, M. P.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF SINGAPORE
MR. LEE KUAN YEW
AT STATE DINNER 9 JUNE, 1972.
Mr. Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Gentlemen,
My colleagues and I extend you a warm welcome on this your first
visit to Singapore since you became Prime Minister. You are no
stranger to us, and we recall with pleasure your presence here during
the 1971 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
In the eighteen months since then, there have been momentous
political changes in the world. President Nixon's visits to Peking
in February, and to Moscow in May, made most countries re-examine
their positions, to assess what changes the future will now have in
store for them. The easy assumptions of cold war politics are no
longer valid. But it does not necessarily follow that there will be
any immediate or precipitate change in the political and security
climate which has so far kept South-East A-Isia, outside of Indo-China,
an area of relative tranquility.
Change there must be. For my own part, I would prefer the dust
stirred up by all these dramatic events to settle, before coming to
firm conclusions on which to base any changes in policies. Certainly
it is not necessary to start changing our friends, though nothing
is lost by making new friends of old adversaries of cold war days.
The recent series of accords between America and Russia reinforces
the trend towards the acceptance by the super powers of their desire
and now their declared policy to avoid confrontation against each
other. They have accepted the division in Europe, since the second
world war, as a fact of life for the foreseeable future. By the
recent series of agreements between the West Garmans and the Russians,
West Germans and the Poles, the agreements in Moscow and Berlin
Four Power Agreement, the Europeans have substantially cut down the
dangers of conflict in Europe itself. ./ 2 
Unfortunately, there have been no such accords over Asia. One
probable result of President Nixon's earlier discussions in Peking
is to lessen the likelihood of a collision between America and
China. There are other major powers with long term interests in Asia
and in the Indian and Pacific Ocean. They were not present at the
Peking discussions. Further, they have not yet reconciled their
different views of the shape of things to come. America, China, Japan
and Russia may take some time to agree what are the limits of their
respective capacities to influence events in the different countries
of Asia. Nor is it clear how much naval power can add to their
economic and political influence on the littoral states of Asia
adjoining the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and on the island nations
lying off the Asian continent..
Meanwhile, the war in Indo-China grinds on. We must hope there
can be a negotiated settlement that will enable American forces to
withdraw and not in disgrace, that the South Vietnam these forces
leave behind can be allowed to sort their future out by themselves
without external interference by forces. If this could happen, then
a confident Thailand will act as a buffer for Malaysia and Singaeore.
Then we can have more time to adjust ourselves to the changing forces
acting on Asia, the Pacif c and Indian Oceans.
Your visit, Mr. Prime Minister, comes at a time when this whole
region is preparing to adjust to the altered situations consequent
upon the dramatic changes in policy of the great powers. It is still
not altogether certain what these changes will be. There is nothing
alarming about uncertainty, provided the future is not placed in
jeopardy by hasty reaction.
Amidst all these uncertainties, it was a source of satisfaction
that we were able to maintain steady co-operation between Australia
and Singapore. They contributed to the climate of confidence which
helped us ride through some difficult times in the last few years.
Such progress as we have made, despite the adverse turn of events in
1965 and 1968 was due, in part, to the quiet understanding and
support of our friends, of which Australia was one. And the defence
arrangements of the Commonwealth Five have provided continuing
stability to an area important to us, the people who live in it,
and perhaps to you, in Australaqia. And there is no reason why we
should not make further progress in regional co-operation, to
consolidate the present stability of the region. With a little luck,
South-East Asia should be able to withstand drastic changes in the
Indo-Chinese situation. In these matters, we have common interests.
And now, Your Excellencies, Gentlemen, I ask you to rise and drink
a toast to the health of Her Majesty The Queen. 



Li~ iArO: Not for releas e *. efore 24n~ 0 ' ionay 1.2/ 16/ 72.
PRIME MINISTER
FOR PPXSS Pllis _ No._ 5V1/ 72
VISIT OF 11,1E RT HON. J. R. MARusS! H7ALL, M. P.
PRIMv-MITIS3TER OF NEW Z1EALATTD.
Statement bv the Prkw~ m instr The Rt IHon.-Killiam Mc_! ahori, CHiP
The Pt lion. J.. arh ll, Prime ." in. ister of 7ealanld,
accomrnanied bv' Mrs 1-1arshall-will arrive in Syilney on Thursday, 195
Juorna, n offeil it to Autrali Thyill1 stay in Australia
until the morninr-: Thursday, 22 June, visiting MIelbourne, A delai4de.
Canberra and Sy, 1hey.
In !-Aelbtourne Prime T inl.. ter's engagements include a call
on the Acting Premier, a luncheon with b-usiness men and a State
Government Recention. ." rs 7. arshall will visit th. e National flallery
and -Childr en ' s F0oS ta2..
The Prime :' iniister and &gt;, rs % Marshall A. fll 1 ave l-felbourne for
a-delaide on Saturdav 17 June. in Adelaide the Prime " inister's
engage~ ments will inclu(.' e a call on thie Preiir and Lord rayor ( Adelaide
arnd C11ristchurch being sister cities). -Mrs M." arsiall will visit h--, r
old school the Wilderness School at Ledindie and ' Ar-., arshall will
accompany hicr.
They willi fly to Caribcrra on Monday 19 J1-1aune, arnd on arrival
will 1: o we-lcomc d 1) y the Prime !' Inistcr. The R. 1A. Zh. F. will Provide a
cceremonial guard for the Primte Minister andt a 19 gun salute will be
fired, Th1e Prime ter's man Canb'crra engagemtents will be to
have tal'Ks witL-4 the: z ' Prime M'Hinistcr and discussions with th e Austrailian
Cabinet. The Prim. Mj'-iter and Mirs 1g1ars. hva. l will dine at Government
Houee and att1-en3 a 3overnme,: nt Receotion at Parliament House on Tuesday
June. Whilst in Canberra ,. r.': arshall will addres s th~ e National
Press Cluh. The Prime Minister and .1rs 11arsliall will leave Canberra for
Sydney at 10.00 am, on We3dnesday 21 June. In Sydney the Prime M14inister's
principal engage~ ment is t~ o addross the National Conference of the
In3titute of Dircctors.
The Primc ' iinistor and e'rs Mac-rshall will leave Australia for
New Zealand at 8.45 am, on Thursday,' 22 Junc.
Commontwealth. 1 Press Liaison off icor for the visit is ! Ar Murray
rcMillan o' the utrlan News -and Inf ormat-ion BureAu.
Canberra 9 June 1972' 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR~ PRESS: 1-L-s N'o 50/ 1972
FIVE POWER , RRMG!',' 1F-,. T
Statemen-t by tho P'rime Minister, Thie Rt
William M&amp; khnC71 -p.
I have read some pross reports originating from a -television
proctramme in Australia, to , z cffect that I considzr that the
exitene o a r-ten Fivze Powuer Trra-ngement was no' really necessary.
0I want to make-it clear that 7Australian -Government
considers the Five Power Ara; mnswith Singauorc, lialaysia, Neo-,
Zealan the United Kin( d~ ar fgetiprtance.
For their substance thanv n~ ce ssarily rely on the sense of
mutual intercst of the five. countries concernfz-d and their goodwill and
trust towards each oth-er.
The cxistence of a ' 7. ritt,-: n instrument iT, a n ce,. ssary framework
11-o ncrmit the nractical iction to arrang( c rining and disoosition
of forces and co-oporpation rumoncq those forces and wit:-i the
governrrnonts. In Djakarta Yyoste rdaay, 1 rake some remarks -about pacts in
generial the contoxt of thv , ruestion, put to mo by an intervie-wer
as to J~ te eshouldl have P. oact wit1-h Ind3onesia. I aoin-Led out
tlhat then historical backgrouncd1 t'-o Australian-Indon.&gt;. ian bilateral
rel. aticens was entirely different from tho long standi. n. j co-operation
in elefence matters w-1iich ha.-e xisted-ith Mal-aysia and Sincta~ oe
S sii1also made th: e ' joint tha-z4t what is vital in any relationship
istlietotality of it and that Pacts and agreaemsents are less
irt-nrtntthan the goodwill. and mutual trust on wich they miust be
based if are to be offect--ve-.
Canberra 9 June 1972. 



PRIME MINISTER
VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA
SINGAPCRE PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON
Soeech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon.
' illCiam Mchon, CH, MP. JUNE 1972
SMr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen of the Press and Guets
I am honoured to address the Singapore Press Club today. I am
your guest in opulent surroundings and I now believe what I have often
suspected that at least here pressmen live better than politicians
in Australia. Thank you for your welcome. It is good to be here. I do not
need to tell an audience of your experience that the world is moving
pretty fast under the impulso of technological, economic, social and
political changes. These changes are grist to the mills of the oress.
And through your craft, you mirror the times ir which we live.
The changes are new-. s for you. They are basic problems for the
politician. The factors external to one's country are among the most
difficult for a Prime Minister to contend with, so foreign affairs
and defence policies tend to be high on the list of my preoccupations.
And for that reason I have welcomed the talks I have had with
Mr Lee and his Ministers on these matters. They were frank and
free, and I found them tremendously helpful and informative. So, today,
I want to put to you some thoughts about recent international developments.
I want to define Australia's policies in the light of some df
these developments. It is a truism that the -ctions and policies of the larger
powers have, since the last ,. orld war, and particularly in the past
few years, brought about an extremely fluid political situation in
Asia. The European countries, and the military strength with which
they protected their colonial assets, have in large measure withdrawn.
China, consolidated under communist rule, and for long intent upon
internal problems, has rightly taken its place in the United Nations.
Peking has been visited by the Presi. e'nt of the United States. And
this has been followed by a visit by President Nixon to Moscow. / 2 
Japan is developing rapidly and has become a major industrial
and economic power. The Indian Sub-Continent remains beset with
unique problems, and a new member of the community of nations,
Bangladesh, has been born. Australia gave early recognition to
this new nation. The Soviet Union has shown increasing interest in
the Sub-Continent, in South-East Asia and the Indian Ocean.
The United States, beginning with the Guam Doctrine, and its
progressive withdrawal of ground forces from Vietnam, has given
clear notice to countries of the region that there is a limit to
the burden that American will carry alone. So we have to ask how
these developments affect Australia, where do we stand, and what
initiatives have we taken and what we will do.
Mr Chairman, it is hardly necessary for me to say that we encourage
and welcome the independence and freedom of countries of Asia and the
Pacific. That is a cardinal principle with us in our foreign relations.
I digress here, if I may, to emphasise two matters of special
importance to us.
One is that Australia has recently joined with several newly-
Sindependent South Pacific countries and New Zealand in the Pacific
Forum. Here, at the highest political level, the many problems of
the South Pacific area will h. regularly discussed and mutual solutions
devised. The other matter is that, in accordance with the wishes of its
people, Papua New Guinea ( which embraces an Australian Territory and
a United Nations Trust Territory will very shortly become internally
self-governed and, perhaps not much later, independent.
We hope that other countries will recognise the needs of this
emerging country and will be nreDared to assist the products of Papua
New Guinea to enter international markets more freely.
To return to my main theme, Australia has welcomed the signs of
some thaw in the relationship between China and the United States and
Sof China's readiness to play a fuller part in international affairs.
While Foreign Minister of Australia, and well before President
Nixon's significant and praiseworthy visit to Peking, I had made a
critical re-examination of Australia's China policy, and had announced
our objective of starting on the road to normalise our relations.
We welcomed the seating of China in the United Nations and supported
its accession to permanent membership of the Security Council. At
the same time, we made it clear we were not prepared to abandon our
friendship with Taiwan. l
We are, through various contacts, seeking to establish a dialogue
with China designed to load eventually to the normalisation of relations.
We are also active in the development of two-way trade. In
all this, of course, Australia's national interest is paramount.
We are watching closely China's actions and policy statements,
especially relation to tts declared support for so-called " Wars of
National Liberation". But if we could be convinced by actions as well
as words that China is willing to live at peace with countries with
different social systems, then the uncertainty and anxiety of Australia
and other countries of the region would undoubtedly be reduced. / 3 
The recent visit of President Nixon to Mosco and the results which
so far have been made known also give support to the idea that the
great powers are moving away from confrontation to negotiation and
detente. It is too early, however, to predict with any confidence the
effects of " The Summit" on the various trouble spots in the world
like Vietnam and the Middle East.
Perhaps the most important conclusion is that both sides appeared
to recognise the over-riding importance of not allowing commitments
to third parties to prejudice the vital national interests of both
sides. I
So far as our relations with Russia are concerned, the Australian
Government wants to develop a more normal relationship with thd Soviet
Union. We want to expand mutually beneficial areas of co-operation
such as trade and scientific and cultural exchanges, and the interchange
of visits with Soviet officials. So far the trends have been
somewhat favourable.
Despite these trends, and recognising the legitimate interests of
the Soviet as a world power, we have watched with some concern the
increasing Soviet interest and influence in the Indian Ocean. We do
not think that 1eir oresence constitutes -an immediate and hostile
threat from their naval ships in that ocean. But the increasing
Russian presence is a fact of growing importance to Australia.
Strategically, the Indian Ocean links us to our nearest neighbours
to the North, the coutnries of South-East Asia. We do not want to
see naval or any other form of military competition develop between
the great powers in the area. But we think the Russian activity in
the Indian Ocean is sufficiently significant for us to consult with
the United States and Britain. We believe these two countries share
our concern.
This brings me to Australia's relationship-with the United States
of America. We continue to enjoy what I believe to be a very cordial
and beneficial relationship. The United States has given powerful
leadership in the free world. It has shown courage and determination
in Vietnam, and it has shown clearly that it will not desert its
friends, S
We regard -our own relationship with America as of crucial importance.
This is in no way incompatible with our pursuit of an independent
policy in this region or elsewhere. In fact I believe it is
heloful to the stability of the region that we have this close relationship.
The ANZUS Treaty, as you know, joins us with the United States and
New Zealand in an intimate defence relationship. It is one enduring
expression of the mutual trust and goodwill between us.
Our experience in two world wars, and the events of the 1930' s
and 1960' s brought home to us, as a medium-sized power, the concept
that countries, like people, have a right to security, and that
people and nations are stronger through collective action taken
under and in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We have, since World War II, demonstrated, through
collective security arrangements under the Charter of the United
Nations, our beliefin this concept. / 4 
I believe also that we should be flexible in pursuing defence
assistance and co-operation under the arrangements we have made with
Singapore, Malaysia, Britain and New Zealand. The five Governments
agreed on measures appropriate to their respective needs and interests
in 1971. It was understood then, and is understood, now, that the forces of
the three external countries will remain in Singapore and Malaysia
for so long as the Governments concerned see this as in their interests.
Australia will at all times honor its obligations. My Government
believes that the Five Power Arrnaements will contribute to stability
here, and fill a vacuum. I would stress the continuing relevance and
importance of these Arrangmenets and the significance of the physical
presence of our forces in Singapore and Malaysia.
It goes without saying that Indonesia, Singapore and Malysia and
other countries of South-East Asia to our immediate north are of great
strategic and security interest to Australia. Our concerns are related
less to the immediate security situation than to the fact that the
long-term peace and security of the South-East Asian region is important
to Australia. It is imortant, too, that 7ustralia should maintain an individual
and constructive interest in the politico-economic development of these
countries, and especially to develop relationships with them which
Swill promote economic growth and increased opportunities for mutual
dev-lopment.
My Government accepts and, within the limits of our resources, has
for a number of years been oursuing policies d. signud to achieve these
objectives. I think I can fairly say that we have, as a result,
developed a particularly close bilateral relationship with each of
the Governments of Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia, a relationship
which encompasses a web of mutual concerns and interests across a
wide range of official and non-governmental activities.
ASu stralia has since 1950 provided many millions in aid to development
countries. This has been not loan aid but grant aid, and aid
without strings. We do not ask for debt payments. Let me say frankly
that we have developed such aid programmes not solely for humanitarian
reasons nor through a fear of communism.
I Our basic motivation has been our belief that Australia's stability
and prosperity are closely tied to the stability and prosperity of our
neighbours, and that this in turn depends to a large extent on economic
development and the satisfaction of the needs and wants of the peoples
concerned. Looking at the general field of international trade and economic
development, we have closely watched the evolution of the ' European
Economic Community. With the development of that Community and the
entry of Britain into that Community, Australia has, in its own
interest been seeking for some years to diversify its export trade
and particularly to build up markets in Asia.
We have been successful. Now about 42 per cent of our exports go to
Asia. As part of this orocess, there has been a steady expansion of
mutual trade with countries of South-East Asia, as well as agreement
on joint projects and Australian investment. 
In the reverse direction, there has been some investment in Australia,
and I am sure that these reci~ rocal trends w,-ill intensify during the
coming years. A11s a t%. rFding natioin, Piustralin has traditionally followed
policies designed to encourage liberal multilateral trade, but we have
also recognised the speci al problems of the develoning countries in
seeking tro gain markets for theii products, and hava acted to give
prefor--ntial access in tho 1Au-tralian market to a '&amp; road range of
thoso products.
T'Aere: are othar areas of mutual interost I could discuss such as
civil aviation, telecommunications nnd tourism, education, cultural
and sporting exchanges. In rill of these, Australia is becoming more
closol:&gt; involved in the affairs of South-East Asia.
MyIcnldei hswy I want to stress the imoortance
Austr '. JAa attach-es to the growth of regional co-operation. Coopiaration
on the basis of goodwill and mutual understanding.
We ar. members of several rgiona-l organisrati., r') s, all of which in
their own way are d~ signed to contribute to economic progress and
stability in the region. They include the Colon'bo Plan, theAsa
Develonment Bank and the Economic Commission for hAsia and the Far
East. ( ECA2FE).
1, Caiirman, while I have2 bh'n here, I have se~ en thie impressive
building . which houfao the Regional English Lanquage Centre, and also
Othoe Jurong Vocational Instituta. These arre the result-of the
practical and far-sighted schomo e volved by the South-East A-' Sian
Ministorsof Education, to whlich 17ustralia has lent cffoctive support.
More broadly, we will -ritch with interest and will do what we can
to encourage the activitie s of countries of Sout-East P. sia in seeking
to bu~ ld1 new and more effectiv-: forms of co-operation.
Win Australia, havoe also tzaklen an interest in prooosals being
discus : cd by the ASFAN countries.:-F teo evolve arrangements which might
leaed to the South-East Asian area being declardd a zone of peace and
neutrality. T" ime will show the 1. est way, to-_ se. curPe stability and peace, and
Lustrali~ i stands ready at all time-_ s to discuss . n-ea sures to help achieve
thcsE! obje-ctives.
0In conclusion, Gentlemen, I would repeoat thlat Australia is and
must rnmaln involved in the ouh-as Asia~ ri area. Your security and
stability affect our own security and ztability your prosperity
affects our Prosperity.
I hone and oxncct that we ccontinue to build and develop the mutual
ancd1 friendly relationshins bet-we: n our Governments and between our
neo-, Ies.
The results can Le really rewarding. The conse-quences dramaitic;
the int' erests of the peonle dIevotedly served, and our joint contribution
made to tho neace and s; ecurity of the people of S. utiv-ast Asia 
QUESTIONIS ANJD ANSTWJ2:; S
SINGIAPORE PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON-10 JUNE 1972
Q. You have spoken of Australia's role in South-East Asia and
of your interest in ASEAN. Do you think it is practical for
Australia to seek members hip o~ f 1\ SEan or at least more closely
associated with it C.
PM'~ So far the~ intentions and obj e-ct'vus. of the ASEAN nations
are to keep it clearly within the bounds of the South-East A7, sian
countries themselves. They 4 ve not sought to invite us to
beacome a membar, and althouglh we have taken a very definite
interest in the activities of the ASEAN countries, and of ASEAN
itself as an institution, we have not positively sought to
berome a member and whon wyc h,-) ve asked various countries for
thne reasons -% hy they blvethey should ? eon thcoir pre3sent
meibershirn, we have boon nrenared to accept th~ kt. I believe
it is Proper that tho~ countries thl-emselves sho-uld make up their
own minds and I do not think it would bE prudent in our own
interests if we tried, as it were, to exert on influence on them
tI-o permit us to become a member.
Q. The ALP immigration policy now is that 7people who migrato
to Lustralia they do sc on a ba! is free of consideration of
race, creed or colour. Do you agree with :. this principle
PM only yesterday, talking to the Prime Minister of Singapore,
I informed ' him that I had not come h-3re to take nart in Pa--rty
politics in his country. That I hbelieve is a policy that ought
to be ado'nted not only -by myself but by members of the
Oppcsition as well. I have no intention of becoming embroiled
in this sort of ;,' olitical struggle in Singapore. I like the
place too much and I woant to comae back again.
Q. If understand correctly, you consider your first line of
defence is South-East Asia. Yo-u referred to what you called
11ou generous offer" of military aid to Indonesia is this
part of it
PM I think31 there are many miore influences Involv,; ed in our
relationshipT-with South-FstA, and aruicularly withi
Singanore, Indones: LiI an tCnh ay~ dae fence ones. Because
there is not only defence and security that are important I
believe the relationshins therc are mutual and that our
security is inextricably bound up, the one with the other, so
we want the South-East 7I. sian countries, and narticularly those
witil which 1we have co--onerated very closely in the ' past, to
remain. -rec_ and inde. p-,-ndent. of course, security is one of
the prirmary considerations. But equally, too, based on an
araof peace, we want the whole of South-East Asia to develop.
We wa-nt Indonesia 1we-waant the other countri es that I have
mentiotibd !;-tha'Filininnes, the Thais, the Malays, we want
them to be able to rnrovide decent standards of living, to be
able to have a just and, I believe, a truly humanitarian society.
We have tradD, and becaiusc with trade will also flow great
wealth, so we want our trade relationshiPs to be improved. 12 
6 0 8 L
And it, too, is a better means of being able to understand one
another, and a better means of being able to understand the
psyches and the motivating forces that move the various countries
of South-East Asia, we want the cultural relations between our
two countries to be improved as well. So, looking at this
subject, I can't isolate any one element. I have to look at
it in the most general way and then to be able to decide where
our best interests lie. l1y colleague, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, said only yesterday " Our destiny is inextricably
bound up with yours, and yours with ours", and I think in those
words you will find a crystallisation of all that I think and
all that I feel. And as my feelings in these matters are just
as important on many occasions as the thinking process, could
I say this to you again that there is one thing that I have
found in the few days I have been out of Australia, in Indonesia
and in Singapore, and that is the respect that is held mutually
and the confidence that there is between the two groups of
countries. I believe I go back _ refreshed and I use that word
deliberately and I use it again I go back refreshed with
the discussions I have had here because they have given me a
great deal of confidence in the future security of this area
and its destiny in terms of development and the future I hope
it will offer to the neoples of the various countries I nave
had the good fortune to sea.
I have been based here for a couple of years, living in
this region, and during those two years, the auestion that
has been raised is the question that Asians always put to
Australians about Australia's immiaration policy. I have been
in some very embarrassing situations trying to explain our
immigration policy. LToaving aside the party politics side
of it, I am sure there are a lot of people here who would like
to hear the Prime Minister of Australia say a word or two
about the present immigration policy with regards to Asians.
This is a subject that requires very sensitive handling, and
I hope I will be able to handle it in precisely that way. I
believe, first of all, in terms of conitutional principles,
that every country has the right to determine its own policy
whether it be us, whether it be India, whether it be France,
Germany or any other country. Secondly, I have got to make
it abundantly clear tha. t what we want in Australia is not
only a big immigration programrme, because we have absorbed, well,
certainly well over a million migrants in the course of the
last few years I don't like to specify the exact number of
years but it has takan place. And, consequently therefore,
migrants from other countries have been welcomed in Australia.
But we welcome them on t: is basis, and we want to be sure that
migrants who come to us European, non-European or of partially
non-European stock are capable of being integrated into our
society and of becoming true Australians within a period of one
generation. That is our policy. We have certain....
Jwe try to determine the oace of ncn-Euroreans..... we have
certain conditions we apply. I can't go any further than the
statements I have made, not only in Australia but I made in
Indonesia a few days ago. They are set out vely fully in a
document that has been prepared by my I'inister for Immigration. / 3 
And if you want any further explanation of that policy, I will
get copies of the document as many as you want sent to you
so that there can be a full explanation given to the people
of Singapore. We have our policy. We think it is humanitarian.
We regard it as selective, but it is certainly not racist
because la. st year we did nermit non-Eurooeans and part non-
Europeans to come to Australia to the order of about 9 ,000
people, clearly showing that it is a liberal policy and one
designed to achieve the purpose I have mentioned and that is
to ensure that those who come fit into our community, are
good Australians and play ". their part along with the people
who are there today in ensuring we move along steadily, progressively
towards developments and towards policies that we
regard as not only right and sensible but in the long term
destined to help our own people and are humanitarian in
content. In your discussions here and in Djakarta, what role have you
and the representatives of both Governments been assuming that
Japan will be playing in South-East Asia over the next decade
Australia's attitude and I don't think it is up to me to
be recording the attitudes of other c~ vernments that is for
their Presidents Or Prime Ministers to do so you will forgive
me for not entering into any controversy about this other than
to say that I believe their attitudes on a wide variety of
international affairs are much th; e same as my own and my
Government's. Japan, undoubtedly, is a great power, a great
eo-nnom. c power, and must in time assert increasingly powerful
political influence throughout the Asian theatre, but I do not
believe, at least in the foreseeable future or as far ahead as
we can see that Japnn will become a military power. Second,
we believe that is in the deen interests of Japan, the fundamental
interests of Japan, that it must increasingly take its place
as one of the agencies for develoment in the Asian theatre.
And, consequently, not only must it increase trade in that area,
but lend its material and its financial resources towards
develonment projects there. We feel, too, that due to the Nixon
initiatives not only in Peking, in the People's Republic, but
also in Moscow that the whole of this area becomes as it were
in the cauldron again. But I w-uld liTk to use-the words of
Mr Lee Kuan Yew when he said " It is far too early at this
moment to work out . what the impact of the rapprochement and
detente between these three countries might mean in the Asian
theatre. W'it until the winds have died down. Wait until the
storms and tempests have abated a little bit.." and, particularly
when the dust has abated, we can then have a look around
and find out where it lies in our best interests. Of this I
can assure you that in both cases, we have looked very carefully
to think what the consequences might be, but as yet we look at
various areas where we feel that progress might . be made and
none of us is orepared to make a forecast at the moment of what
the future is likely to hold, certainly in the immediate
future in front of us.
You said in your sneech you believed in collective security
arrangements under the Charter of the United Nations. At the
same time, you say you would like to have the South-East Asian
area declared a zone of peace. Do you mean in the Asian
context, Sir .4 ( C 63
PC,-, x Z_ 
to
a-tL Z_
PM Q. PM Q PM Yes. If the people of the ASEAN countries want peace and
neutrality, yes we would give them whatever support we were
capable of giving. But I , ant to emphasise that our attitude
here is therefore directed towards the ASEAN countries seeking
peace and neutrality. From my own point of view, I have to make
this statement that when we are looking at this problem, of
neutrality or zone of neutrality and peace, we would also beconsidering
in which direction our vital interests lay. And
under no circumstances would we be considering the renegotiating
or the termination of such treaties as the ANZUS Treaty on
which our future depends. But of course if it became a
historical fact that we were asked to give direct support to
the ASEAN countries in order to try and ensure that they were
able to obtain a satisfactory and effective guarantee, international
guarantees of security and integrity and right to live
in peace and freedom, of course we would be willing to consider
what kind of support we could provide in helping to achieve
their objectives.
Sir, you described your Government's immigration policy as
being one based on humanitarian and non-racism. Can you tell
me, Sir, why your Goverrnment discriminates against non-Europeans
in its assisted passage programme.
I don't like to use the word " discrimination", and frankly
I think it is not a term that exactly defines our attitude at
all. The second noint that I want to make about the policy of
assisted nassages is thir. It is designed to ensure that we
get people with the right type of technical background for the
development of our own country. And it was designed at a stage
when it would be critically imnortant that we try and encourage
people with special skills to come there. That is the basis f
of it, and it is in no sense discriminatory in terms of race,
creed or colour. The second noint that I would have to say to
you is this, that having put that as the basic policy of it,
I am not the Minister for Immigration. While I can enunciate
to you what general policy is, I am not an authority on details
associate dwith that our assisted passage programme. What
I do know is that while Biritain will be somewhat reducing,
perhaps in time her contribution to assisted passages, we at
least will be keeping up cur contribution at least as far as
. it happens to be at the moment.
What are your views on the current situation in Vietnamr
please I do keen a pretty careful look at the cables that come
through on Vietnam, and my mood changes between unadulterated
pessimism and then slight optimism. I believe that the North
Vietnamese have carried out an attack which at least in terms
of intensity and severity is as great as the Tot Offensive.
And they have had successes in Phuoc Tuy Province and in Kontum
and An Loc, and makes it extremely serious and doubtful whether
the northern provinces can be held and whether these territories
could be retained by the South Vietnamese. But with the massive
help of Americans supported by the strength of the American
Administration under President Nixon, the South Vietnamese look as
though they are turning the tide back. The centre of Kontum has
now been cleared and is free of North Vietnamese troops. 
Supplies are continuing to be given to them. The.. third
division which was the source of all their trouble in Kontum
and the approaches to Hue, has now been re-established and at
least we can think this way. The South Vietnamese are now
doing pretty well, much better than we cruld have expected a
month ago. All I can do is t: o join with your own Prima
Minister when he said he hoped the day would come when there
could be a negotiated settlement. I hope that, too. When
America could withdraw and withdraw without dishonour, and
particularly those that remain in South Vietnam will be able
to carry out our most precious ideal to determine their own
future free from interference from outside and able to conduct
their lives internally in the way the people themselves choose.
Q The Straits of Malacca has become of late a fairly hot topic.
The countries in the region, particularly Indonesia and
Malaysia would like some form of control of the Straits to
naval vessels. Some major maritime powers notably Japan and
the Soviet Union, have ixpressed strong opposition to such
restrictions. What, if any, is Australia's position on this
issue
PM I did have some very useful discussions with President
Soeharto about the Indonesian's attitude to the Straits of
Malacca and I think I know their attitude very well, so I
understand the attitude of the Singaporeans, not only with
regard to the limit of the territorial sea and the extension
of jurisdiction from three to twelve miles, but also associated
with the problems of nollution. Our attitude is a clear one.
As yet, we have not made up our minds definitively as to what
our policy should be but we are watching the problem very
carefully and we think it is a matter when the United Nations
Conference reconvenes on the law of the sea, that that is the
annrooriate nlace for this nroblem to be discussed and where
the final resolution sho. uld be made.
Q Your Foreign Minister is saying that you have to see that
in the Indian Ocean if the Russians do have a presence there,
you would like to see the Americans have a counterbalance.
Would you care to comment on that Ovr ~ c. R
PM I would have to start off with this preface to you that the
Indian Ocean, of course, is vital to us as it is vital to the
United Kingdom and is of major importance to the United States
as one of the two superpowers in the world. And what we want
to ensure is that the Indian Ocean can remain an area where
people can ply their trade and carry on their rights to a
peaceful passage through that Ocean in accordance with their
own national interests.
We have, it is true, a feeling that we would like to see
therefore, competition reduced to a minimum, knowing always that
the great powers would never be prepared to give up their rights
to move their navies into those oceans Ywhen they felt that
their political interests were involved or their trading had
to be supported. So what do we think We do not believe at
the moment the presence of the Soviet fleets at any given moment
of time present an immediate threat to the security of my own
country. 
PM ( cont'd) But we do know that they are capable of rapid mobilisation
and think they could increase the strength of their merchantgoing
fleets pretty rapidly and can support them by a float
suonort and can let them carry on for a considorable period
of time. So what can I say about this I, of course, would
like to see the area in which neople can move freely without
a great deal of worry or inconvenience from anyone else. I
can't go any further than that at the moment. We are
anxiously watching the position. We cannot see a position
immediatley arising where this idea of the neutrality of the
Indian Ocean is a likelihood, but nonetheless we will keep
this under pretty careful control and will see whether in time
we can't co-ordinate some efforts towards a greater degree of
or a greater reduction of tension and uncertainty than we have
at the moment. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 61/ 1972
VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA
BY THE PRIME M1INISTER OF AUSTRALIA, THE
RT. HON. WILLIAM MCMAHON, ( XH., M. P.
DEPARTURE STATEMENT SIfTGAPORE
I visited Singapore from 8 to 11 June, 1972 at the invitation
of the Singapore Government.
Substantive discussions were held with the Prime Minister,
The Minister for Defence, Dr. Goh Keng Swee, The Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. S Rajaratnan, and The Minister for Finance,
Mr. Hon Sui Sen. The discussions, which took place in a cordial
frank and friendly atmosphere, revealed a close identity of views
on many issues, and contributed substantially to a deeper mutual
understanding of our respective positions and policies.
The subjects discussed covered a wide range of international,
regional and bilateral questions.
On the international plane, we discussed President Nixon's
visits to Peking and to Moscow and the consequent developments in
Asia. We also reviewed the situation in Indo-China and found that
our assessments were on very similar lines. We expressed the hope
that the pr: 2scnt tragic coiflict could be brought to an early end
and a just and peaceful settlement achieved.
I was given a comprehensive review of regional developments
including the progress mzade towards co-operation and solidarity
among the ASEAN countries. Australia welcomes these deve'opments
and wishes ASEAN countrieos furthrer success in their joint
endeavors. I was oleased to have confirmed to me the appreciation of the
helpful and stabilising role which Australia is playing in the
reqion. I feel that we are regarded as a reliable friend and
partner. on bilateral issues, we talked in depth about our relations.
They are in excellent shape. 
We noted with satisfaction that our two-way trade is continuing to
expand and that mutually beneficial private investment is growing
with government encouragement and support.
Our defence co-operation with Singapore is on a sound footing.
We agreed that the Five Power Defence Arrangements are of value to
us both, are working smoothly and that no changes are necessary.
I also visited the Jurong Industrial Estate and Vocational
Institute. I was most impressed by what the Singapore authorities
have achieved at Jurong. The rapid and efficient development of
this industrial area bears eloquent witness to the vigour and
vitality of present day Singapore.
I wish to exp3ress my gratitude to the Prime P" inister both for
his generous hospitaity and friendly welcome, and for the fruitful
and productive exchanges which we have had. These exchanges have
confirmed my belief that we share a basically similar view of the
future of the region and the need for strengthening regional
co-operation. I believe my visit helped to contribute to this objective,
and to the strength of our relationship.
CANBERRA, 11 June, 1972. 



I PRIME MINISTER
VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA
STATE DINNER
KUALA LUMPUR
Speech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon.
William McMahon, M. P. 12 JUNE 1972
Mr Prime Minister, Mr Deputy Prime Minister, Honourable Ministers,
Distinguished Guests
I want, immediately, to say how pleased I am to be here again.
And to express my appreciation of the welcome you have given me. I
have been here before and I have a vivid recollection of my visit
during the emergency in the early fifties. It is good to be back.
And thank you, Sir, for your generous hosnitality tonight.
In such an atmosphere we find a happy combination of dignity
and informality, and that kind of onen-hearted friendship we associate
with Malaysia and its peonle.
Prime Minsiter, Australia and Malaysia are old friends. You
mentioned this as the basis of our close and continuing co-Aperation
in important fields of activity. I endorse most strongly what you
have said. We have had many years of shared experience in both war and peace,
and our association has solid foundations because of our membership
of the Commonwealth, the similarity of our institutions, and our common
security, economic and social interests.
But there is more to our relations than past history. It is
commonplace to say that we are facing an uncertain world. The future
is always unpredictable not the least in South-East Asia, in the
centre of which Malaysia lives and to which Australia is so closely
bound. I belive we have the same objectives as we face these uncertainties
We are indeoendent countries, each following policies which seem to us
best adapted to securing our national objectives. Both of us want
the countries of the region to be free and independent, sturdily based,
stable and self= reliant, and socially nrogressive. Both of us wish
to see them free from external threat and interference. We want them
to live in harmony, and to grow in prosperity. 
Against this background, Prime Minister, I am glad the opportunity
has been presented to discuss these matters of common interest with you.
I valued our private talks this morning, which I found refreshing,
informative and helpful.
For Australia, Sir, our national interest is clear and 3asily
understood. We are not a great nower, though not a small one We
pose no threat to our neighbours and have neither the aspiration nor
the capacity to impose our views on them.
We in Australia believe, Sir, that peace in Asia is indivisible.
We look to a negotiated settlement in Vietnam which will permit the
people of the South to determine their own future. Beyond that we
look towards an accommodation with China based on mutual resnect and
without preconditions.
And we look to the day when internal subversion and insurgency
will not be supported by external powers a situation in which a
stable, tolerant, outward-looking Australia can continue to play a
co-operative and helpful role in the South-East Asian region.
Our desire, our logical and permanent interest is to have stable,
reliable and prosperous neighbours with whom we may maintain close
relations of mutual understanding, respect and friendship. We want
our association with each other to reflect the deen community of
interest between ourselves and our friends.
In seeking these things I believe we can build an even closer
relationshin between Australia and Aalaysia. It is also well recognised
that, to achieve freedom, security, social justice and sustained
progress in the region, will be a long and difficult task.
The first requirement will be national strength in all its
forms for that is the best deterrent to external interference.
The second requirement willbe to develop co-operation between regional
states. Malaysia has made a significant contribution to regional
co-operation especially through its initiative in launching ASEAN,
It has shown leadership in working for closer contacts between
South-East Asian countries, and helping to develop an enlightened
community of interest. We in Australia welcome these developments and
wish your success.
t this point, Prime Minister, I want to pay tribute to your own
personal leadership in the imaginative policies which Malaysia has
been pursuing, not only inthe international field, but also in
domestic affairs, notably through the Second Malaysia Plan.
Among statesmen your name stands high. We respect you, Sir,
and Malaysia for the vigorous independent spirit you show.
Your country is master of its own house and destiny, progressive
in its ideas and resolute in its performance.
Your proposal forthe neutralisation of South-East Asia under
effective international guarantees is an important initiative. We
see this proposal as clear evidence of your desire to work towards
a free and indeoendent South-East Asia, undeterred by the complexities
which inevitably are involved in such an understaking. / 3 
Time will show the best way to secure stability and peace,
and Australia is always ready to discuss measures to help achieve
those objectives.
I am gratified that in our talks this morning we agreed that
there are no * problems between us. Defence co-operation between
Australia and Malaysia is on a sound footing. We agreed that the
Five Power Defence Arrangments are the framework within which we
co-operate closely and are of value to us both.
I was delighted to have your assurance, Prime Minister, that
the presence of Australian forces, both land and air is welcome. The
arrangements are working smoothly and we are happy about them. We
also agreed that the presence of Australian air force units continues
to be of value to us both.
It goes without saying that Australia will at all times honour
its obligations. Prime Minister, there are other significant links between
Australia and Malaysia which are forged by mutual national interests.
The trade between our two countries has grown over recent years
and we look forward to steady progress in the future, and Australian
companies are learning more about Malaysia as a field of investment
especially through joint ventures.
You said, Prime Minister, that Malaysia would " welcome
Australia as partners in your development efforts This idea of
partnership is very close to our hearts in our won development Where
foreign investment is concerned. And so, Sir, we hope to see
increased activity in Malaysia by Australian companies in partnership
with yours. There is, I know, considerable and growing interest by
Australian companies in this prospect.
In the area of Government-to-Government economic co-operation
we have, of course, longstanding and active programmes through the
Colombo Plan. and through direct bilateral arrangements.
We are ready to contribute, ac'cording to your own wishes, and
our own capacity, towards the success of the Second Malaysia Plan.
We have always been willing to do what we can to assist Malaysia in
technical expertise.
To these specific links we add other associations, which may
in time p~ rove to be the most imnortant of all. I refer to the education
of the young people -both countries on the ways, history and culture
of each other's homeland, and to the development of cultural relations.
This reflects the great interest Australians are now showing
in their neighbours There are many facets of this interest.
But certainly a strong and stimulating influence has been the
large number, now over 5,000 of Malaysians students in Australia.
To this I add the increasing number of businessmen and tourists
moving between our countries. Thisj helps to promote understanding
' between our people and yours in human terms and has, of course, direct
-Dractical benefit. ./ 4 
4.
For it is 7* hen the friendships of Government are backed by
friendships among the people that we get a relationship of enduring
value, and rich in the-benefits it conveys to all.
I believe, Sir, Malaysia and Australia should always walk the
ways f Deace together.
I believe that the ideals we share are those that unite. And
that in giving them free expression, each according to our national
responsibilities and resources, we can help to build a better world.
I thank you, Prime Minister, for the honour you do my country
tonight. TAnd now I should like to propose a toast to your health
and to the friendship of our two countries. 



I
PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PM No. 34/ 1972
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister,
the Rt Hon. William McMahon, M. P.
Arrangements have now been completed with the
State Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and the
Australian Loan Council to be held in Canberra on Thursday
22 June, continuing if necessary on Friday 23 June.
CANBERRA, 12 June, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No 62/ 1972
VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA
JOINT COMMUNIQUE
Issued at the Conclusion of State Visit to Malaysia by the Prime
Minister of Australia, The Rt Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP.
14 June, 1972.
The Prime Minister of Australia, The Rt Hon. William McMahon,
M. P. macde an official visit to Malaysia from 11-14 June, 1972
at the invitation of the Prime Minister of Malaysia, Tun Haji Abdul
Razak. Mr. McMahon was accompanied by the Assistant Minister assisting
the Prime Minister, The Hon. J. D. M. Dobie, M4. P., and by Senior
officials of the Australian Government.
During his stay, fir. McMahon held detailed discussions with
Tun Haji Abdul Razak, with the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Home Affairs, Tun Dr. Ismail, and with the Minister of Finance,
Tun Tan Siew Sin.
Mr. McMahon visited the Headquarters of the Integrated Air
Defence System and Units of the Royal Malaysian Air Force and the
Royal Australian Air Force stationed at Air Base Butterworth.
He also visited the Air Traffic Control and Aircraft Fire and
Rescue Training Centre at Subang Airport, to which Australia is
contributing under the Colombo Plan, the Rubber Research Institute
of Malaysia and the National Operations Room.
He attended a security briefing at the Royal Malaysia Police
Headquarters. The Prime Minis te rsdiscus sed a wide range of international,
regional and bilateral Questions. Their discussions, which were
conducted in a warm and friendly atmosphere, underlined the close
identity of views which exist between the two Governments, their
strong coimmon interest in international and regional co-operation,
and their commitment to the objectives of peace, stability and
progress for the South East Asian region. / 2 
The Prime Ministers exchanged views on the effects of President
Nixon's recent visits to Peking and Moscow upon developments and
future prospects in Asia. They expressed the hope that the current
international trend towards conciliation and detente among the
major powers would continue, and that peace and security in the
South-East Asian region would be reinforced. They also reviewed the
situation in Indo-China and agreed on the need for continued efforts
to end the present conflict and bring about a just and peaceful
settlement. Tun Haji Abdul Razak gave Mr. McMahon a detailed and
comprehensive account of recent developments in regional co-operation
in which Malaysia has played a leading role. These developments
include the Kuala Lumpur Declaration, which Tun Haji Abdul Razak
described as an important first step towards regional peace and
security through the neutralisation of South-East Asia.
Mr. McMahon confirmed that the Malaysian Government goal that
South-East Asia should be a zone of oeace, freedom and neutrality
under effective international guarantees is entirely consistent
with the policies of his Government and welcomes the declaration
as a regional initiative directed towards peace and stability in
Asia. The Prime Ministers agreed the common objective of the two
Governments was the creation of conditions of peace, security and
independence in the area in which the work of regional co-operation
and national development can go forward.
In the field of defence, the Prime Ministers agreed that the
Five Power Arrangements provide a framework for close and effective
co-operation which is of value to both Governments. The Prime
Minister of Malaysia assured the Prime Minister of Australia that
the continuing presence of Australian forces, both land and air,
in Malaysia-Singapore in the context of the Arrangements is welcomed
by the Malaysian Government and contributes to defence and confidence
in that area.
The two Governments have no differences under the Five Power
Arrangements. Mr. McMahon reaffirmed that Australia would at all
times honour its obligations.
The Prime Ministers agreed that there was a firm basis for
friendship between the two countries stemming from historical
associations, from shared values and ideals and from a wide range
of current mutual interests.
With respect to economic co-operation between the two countries,
Tun Haji Abdul Razak welcomed the continuance of Australian aid
which is making a steady and continuing contribution to Malaysia's
economic development in accordance with the objectives of the Second
Malaysia Plan.
Among the projects now in hand are the East-West highway from
Telupid to Ranau in Sabah which will be completed this year, the
location survey and design of roads in West Malaysia from Segamat
to Kuantan and Gopeng to Ringlet, the provision of a number of
bridges in Sarawak and of a dredge for the Port of Kuching, / 3 
assistance to the Malaysian Agricultural Research and Development
Institute, and the provision of exverts under the Colombo Plan in
various fields, including Civil Aviation.
The Prime Ministers discussed a number of additional projects
in which it was suggested that Australia might participate. These
include the Pahang River Basin study and assistance to Mardi in
pasture and fodder research. -Mr. McMahon said that serious
consideration would be given to these matters on his return.
Mx. McMahon also discussed with Tun Haji Abdul Razak and with
Tun Tan Siew Sin ways and means of improving trade and private
investment links between the two countries. It was the common
desire of the two Governments that these links should be further
strengthened and developed. It was agreed that further study of
these matters would be made by their respective Departments of
Trade and Industrv.
The Prime Ministers agreed that Malaysia and Australia would
continue to be partners in development.
The Prime Ministers noted the many close associations which
exist between Malaysia and Australia, not only at Governmental level,
but also through contacts between students and scholars,
universities and writers, experts and technicians, businessmen and
tourists, and in many professional and other fields. They reaffirmed
the strength of the friendship and goodwill hetween their two
Governments and peoples.
Tun Haji Abdul Razak accepted an invitation from Mr. McMahon to
make an official visit to Australia at a time to be decided at a
later date.
Mr. McMahon expressed his sincere gratitude for the warm welcome
and hospitality so graciously provided to him and his party by the
Government of Malaysia.
CANBERRA, 14 June, 1972. 



SVISIT TO INDONESIA, SINSAPORE A ND MALAYSIA
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN B~ Y THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RT HON. WILLIAM4 JcMAHON, CHI, MP.
ISTANA TPA" 7_ U, "', LAYSIA 14 Juno., 1972.
yv intention, with yonr ap~ roval is to t:-. ke you fairly quickly
through the communique which was issued at probably somewhere about
two o'clock today, and wrhich has been agreed to .1. y the Governments of
Malaysia and my own country after fairly full and dotailed discussions
bet, 07cn Tun Razak and myscelf. if then subsequently you want to, by
all means ask me questions. I'll want to give priority in the asking
qf questions to members of the Malaysian rnress. So, if that is
satisfactory to you, I'll carry o-n in the way I've just mentioned.
i' Well, first of all, could I preface my remarks by saying
something to you. I came up hore, first to Indonesia, then Singapore,
and now Malaysia on what I t%-ermed initially a's a good-will mission.
I wanted to make certain that the relation~ ships bo~ twoen Australia
and the~ three countries I visited were based unon a sound fcoting and
that we had their confidence and good-,, ill. I ar sure that as I go
homne that objective has been achieved. Now, this gniodwill confidence
and trust is not based solely on historical consilderations or an
historical background. It'S based, to a large extent, on the fact
that we all know that we have tn play our part in the future in trying'
t%. o ensuro ocace and pros ority and progress iLn an area in which each
of us lives. And we knew t" H. 7. t none of us none of" the four
countries can -n -thdraw fromr It-he area, or withdraw fro,-m the
obligation that we've got to our own people, and in co-operation, try
to ensure the kind of oblectives that I Mentioned tro you a few
moments ago.
I could not have asked fo-r a better relatinnship with President
Soeharto than I have. AXs ' owu, we were able to rqive Indonesia
substantially increased defence and civil aid, for w,, hich they
expressed their approval. 11nd I think we could take it that on most
matters of mutual interert, there was a meeting of minds and'a
coincidence of views. Eqiually , too, when I went to Sing-pore, I
found exactly the same with Lee T.' uan Yew, who, is an old friend
of mine one who I have known for a long time and regard not only as
the groat Leader of his ow. kn c.-untry, but in a personal way as well.
Again, the relationship could not have been better, and we had a
common view on most of the problems that arose. / 2 
I think I can summarise his views in a statement that he made
at a dinner that he gave for me. If you haven't got copies of it
the members of the Kuala Lumpur press pleaso let me give you a
copy, because it does show the strength of goodwill between the two
countries and the way in which our views coincide. He said he's got
faith and trust in the Five Power Arrangements: He wants them to be
sustained. He wants tourism to develop between our two countries, and
he knows that together we-must play our part in the development and
progress of the South East Asian theatre.
I'll just read it out our attitudes on South Vietnam are the
same. Our attitudes to development of the South Asian countries are
the same too. And what he does say is that the Five Power Defence
Arrangements have received a degree of importance that over-shadows
the other matters that we've discussed. He also says that the Dafence
Arrangements of the Commonwealth Five Powers have provided continuing
stability to an area important to us, the people who live in it, and
perhaps to you in Australia, and there is no reason why we should
not make further progress in regional co-operation to consolidate the
present stability of the area. He also refers to a position that is
exactly the same as ours relating to South Vietnam, and he expresses
the view that when the American forces do withdraw and he hopes not
in disgrace then the forces that are left behind can be allowed to
sort out their future by themselves without external interference by
force. That, of course, is a view that is shared by my own Government
and by my own actions. We've clearly indicated where our heart and
where our will lies.
Now to come here, I want to say this too, and I want to say it
frankly. I've known your Prime Minister for some time, I've known
him again on a friendly, and I believe, a basis of complete trust
between two people, and I could not have hoped for greater co-overation
and goodwill that I have found here during the course of the last
three days. Naturally enoug I talked to him when he came out to the
airport to bring me into Kuala Lumpur. I have had dinner with him on
two occasions, and I have had a long discussion with him on matters
of mutual interest. For a large pa'rt, the discussions centred around
what was happening in the Asian theatre.
His pre-occupation, as with our pre-occupa tion, in international
affairs, is what contribution could we make the people of goodwill,
the people who regard themselves as friendly and co-operative
neighbours what contribution we can make to the objectives that
I've mentioned in relation to the other countries, and the objectives
that Tiln Razak himself shares with the other three of us. But we also
went over a wiete range of other matters. But,-first o-f all, know
Tun Razak is very intereste' in the problems not only bijateral, but
multilateral ones as well and he did raise with me the question cf
the part that he took in the Kuala Lumpur Declaration, and his
attitude towards the neutralisation of South-East Asia.
For my part, after discussion with him and I think you can take
it that this joint communique is a summary of my discussions with him
of the occasions that I have mentioned I did confirm that the
Malaysian Government's goal that South Fast Asia should be a zone of
peace, freedom and neutrality, under effective international
guarantees, is entirely consistent with the policies of his own
Government. ./ 3 
We welcomed the declaration as a regional initiative directed
towards peace and stability in the area. These were words that I
believe we could generally say in paragraph eight that the Prime
Ministers agreed that the common objectives of the two Governments
was the creation of conditions of peace, security and independence
in this area, in which the work of regional co-operation and national
development can go forward.
Then we come to paragraph nine, which, as far as the defence area
is concerned, does, I think, clarify the relationships between the
two countries. Again, I could not have asked that my discussions with
him could have been any better. They were frank. They were free,
and they were based upon the idea of mutual interest, goodwill, and
a desire to co-operation.
What we did agree was that the Five Power Arrangements provide a
framework for close and effective co-operation, which is of value to
both Governments. Then the Prime Minister for Malaysia assured me t
that the continuing presence of Australian forces, both land and air,
in Malaysia/ Singapore in the context cf the arrangements is welcomed
by the Malaysian Government and contributes and confidence in the
area. I go on to add the two Governments have no differences under the
Five Power Arrangements, and I reaffirm that Australia would at all
times honour its obligations. I think that most of you are pretty
able and talented pressmen. I draw your attention to the whole of
paragraph nine. But I think I can just repeat that the Prime minister
of Malaysia assured me that the continuing presence of Australian
forces, both land and air, in Malaysia/ Singapore, in the context of
the arrangements, is welcomed by the Malaysian Governmnent and
contributed to defence and confidence in the area.
We then passed on I'm not giving you the actual sequence of
events in which events occurred because this is not the actual
sequence, but this is the ay in which they were drafted. We then
went on to the question of the second Malaysia Plan and the
desirability of having continuation of Australia's aid, which is
making a steady and continuing contributinn to Malaysia's economic
development. Various pr,.-jects were, in fact, mentioned, such as I won't go
through thorn, but they are in paragraph II a~ nd you will see some
of them there. We discussed a Pahang River basis study, and
assistance to Mardi in pastoral and fodder research. I did
subsequently arrange for one of my very senior officers who came
with me -the second in command of our Dep~ artment of Trade and
Industry -to discuss with three senior nfficers of the Malaysian
administration, a wide range of matters that had been raised by the
Malaysian Prime Minister with me. I thought it was better in these
cases, where technical problems were involved, that the,, 6fficials
should carry out the discussions.
Then we referred to the question of the numbers of students who
are visiting Australia, and we reaffirmed the strength of the
friendship and goodwill between our two Governments and people. 
4.
All in all, therefore, I can only comment this way. I personally
believe it was a successful mission. I know it was carried out with
a maximum . of goodwill. I can repeat and these are the words of the
Prime Minister of Malaysia himself, referring to the Five Power
Arrangements that there are no problems between us, and I can
specifically refer you to the paragraph that relates to the Asian
theatre, and the ideals that the Malaysian Prime Minister has set
himself and the goal he wants to achieve in the K~ uala Lumpur
declaration. Have said all that, I now ask, and narticularly the Malaysian
Press, if there are any questions you would like to ask me.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, I read this communique and I found there is
nothing said regarding the problem of the Straits of Malacca...
PM. The problem of what?
Q. The problem of the Straits of Malacca, because this is a
matter of concern to the Malaysian Government. So I would like
to find out from you the Australian view or opinion on the matter.
Pm. The problem of -, the Straits of tMalacca was not mentioned
between myself and the Malaysian Prime Minister.
Q. Sir, in what way can your country help the countries of this
region achieve the objectives of neutralisation of South East
Asia? What role can your country hope to play?
Pm. I have to look at this Problem of neutralisation in the Asian
context. And., as you know, we are not, and have not been, invited
to join ASEAN but, as I see the concept, it means that the
participating countries of course and at the moment they are
only the Asiancountries of course would give up their bilateral
arrangements and they would join together, whether it happens to
be five or ten of the South East Asian countries or up to ten
anyhow, and they would seek international guarantees by the super
powers and by China.
But, as yet, tho concept of neutralisation has not been
defined. I said it is the statemce. nt that is hore this sets
Out my Government's point of view and our attitude towards it.
I think you will get a completecrystallisation oIf how it is in
the relevant Paragraph there. Is that what you were seeking?
Q. What I intended to ask is, in what way can your country
contribute towards neutralisation or these objoctives?
PM. I don't know at the moment what can he done because that's
purely a hypothetical question. The goals, or the immediate
intention of the ASEAN countries is to try and get a greater
number of countries to co-ordinate their effort. And when
they have done that and they don't expect this to happen for
some time, probably two, probably three years then when they
have got co-operation amongst the 01outh East Asian countries,
themselves, they will ask at least the two super Dowers and the
People's Republic of China to give effective international
guarantees. 
Whether they would ask us to be one of the quarantors, or to
join with a group of other countries as a guarantor, is something
that has not yet been raised. So I can't be any more precise on
that aspect than I have been.
Q. Sir, in this context, did you discuss the future relations
with China and how China would come into this strategy on this
neutralisation plan. In the context of this neutralisation, did
you discuss future relations with China and how to go about it?
PM. We discussed President Nixon's visit to Moscow and to Peking.
We discussed the problem of effective guarantees by the Soviet,
by the U. S. A. and by the People's Republic of China. We didn't
go any further than that. But the Prime Minister did mention
that in time perhaps it would be accepted as a fact of life that
Australia was one of those who could bo regarded as a supporter
of Malaysia, and our common approach to the problems of
neutralisation as set out in the communique.
Q. Could you tell us about policy towards China in the future?
I mean when do you hope to normalise relations with China?
PM. No. China is not one of the problems that I choose to say
very much about. JWo've made it clear that, from our point of
view, we are prepared to normalise our relationship with them and
to move steadily towards recognition. But it is on two conditions.
The first one is that we do not, and will not, desert Taiwan,
and the second one is, of course, that Australia's national
interests must be paramount in our thinking.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, speaking of defence in this area. In
Canberra in June 1969, your predecessor said the defence of
Malaya, not Malaysia, and Singapore was indivisible. Is that still
the Australian Government's position?
PM. Let me say this. I am not going back over the past, and I've
made it as a rule, as you should know, that I will not discuss
statements that have been made by my predecessor in office.
The Five Power Arrangements so far as I and my Government
are concerned, cover, in terms of consultation, both East, West,
and East Malaysia. The obligation to consult is one that we would
recognise covering Malaysia.
Q. ( Inaudible only a couple of words)
PH. Well, I'm talkingnow only against the Malaysian background.
Of course it covers Singapore too. But you asked your question
specifically relating to East and West Malaysia.
Q. Sir, paragraph nine. The words at the top of page three
" and contributed to the defence and confidence of the area". Do
you regard this as a complete deviation of Prime Ministerial
approval, i. e. Malaysian Prime Ministerial approval, of the
official briefing given us that the Malaysians are not overly
concerned about the withdrawal of the presence of land forces? / 6 
6.
PM, I would never come into that sort of a discussion overseas,
and, if I did, the ones who would resent it most bitterly would
be the Australian press and media backc home.
I think it is unforgiveable for any member of the Government
to raise political, or to * iiscuss political matters of this kind
openly when he is the quest of another Government. But, to put
it absolutely clearly and. beyond any doubt, that is the
arrangement I have made on behalf of Australia with the Prime
Minister of Mlalaysia.
It is a communique issued at the top, and carries the full
authority of the two Governments.
Q. Pir. Prime Minister, could I -ask when was it dLacidecd to issue,
a communique here and why there was no similar communique issued
in Singapore?
Pm. I wanted it issued because I thouaht -that so much confusion
has been caused in the Australian press, that it was highly
desirable that our attitudes should be clarified, and they shouild
be definitive and on paper. That was the reason why I felt it
was better that it should be done.
Q. Sir, you said before that the things which and didn't
necessarily appear in the order in which they appear here.
Could you tell us when you had your discussions with the
Malaysian Prime Minister concerning the Five Power Defence
Arrangements.
Pm. I won't go into that because, quitc frankly, I've talked
to him each time I've met him on it. So its been running
discussion since I've boen here. I couldn't identify when each
mlatter was raised. We continued t1-he discussion when it was
finalised, hut it's gone on during the whole of the time I have
been here.
A. Did you discuss th.-t in your first talks?
PM. Which one is this?.-Five Power. Yes, but not in the
definitive sense in which it is here. But I did discuss it with
him.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister. Could I just clarify that? Did you
contact the Prime Minister of Malaysia on this matter of the
Five Power Agreement following the-briefing that was given to
the Australian press here on the first day of our visit?
PM. Following which briefing?
Q. Following the briefing the Australian press was given by the
Foreign Ministry. On Monday morning, the Australian press party
here was given a briefing by the Foreign M-. inistry.
PM. By one member of the foreign office.
Q. Yes. The Deputy Sccretary of the foreign office. On
Monday afternoon we received word that you, through Mr. Rowland,
had been in touch with the Prime Minister, and that the Prime
Minister had asked. thiat he would prefer the statement to be
made from the foreign office. Did you contact the Prime Minister
that afternoon on this mat1-ter? _/ 7 
PM. No. I didn't contact the Prime Mirnister that afternoon. You
ask me did I contact the Prime Ministor. ' go, I did not.
Also tho statement that is contained rel~ ating the field of
defence was not in the specific tsrms in which it is contained
here, but in general terms as discussed in my first meeting with
them.
Q. Sir, could you outline for us the promise on which the
Australian military commitment to Malaysia and Singapore was
based?
P. M4. The premise.
Q. The principal premise on which the commitment was based?
PM. If somebody could give me a copy of the memorandum issues
I would want to quote exactly I am sorry. What
You want is what is the foundation, what is the rason dletre.
What I have said about the top of page throe that it is
welccmed by the Malaysian Government and contributes to defence
and confidence in that area. And I will also find out for you,
because wev got about four different principles set out
relating to Five Power Arrangements. I can get those for you and
I can let you have them as soon as this conference is over.
0. What I really wanted to know, Sir, was whether the pro-mise
was still that we, Australia, has its forces in thesetwo countries
because these two countries want Australian forces there, or is it
some other reason.
Pm. These are the reasons set out here as agreed to by the Prime
Minister of Malaysia and myself as the reason by
To set out the last four lines, the Prima Minister of Malaysia
assured the Prime Minister of Australia that the continuing
presence of Australian forces, both land and air, in M. alaysia/
Singapore in the context of the arrangements is welcomed by the
Malaysian Government and contributes to defence and confidence
in that area. That is the premise on which it is based.
Q. Prime Minister Meyer, ABC.
By that area do you moan Australia. To what extent does it
contribute to the defence and confidence of Australia.
PM. Well, if you read it, you will see that in Malaysia/
Singapore in the context of the arrangements is welcomed and
contributes to defence and confidence~ in that area. The words
are these clear enough.
Q. Sir, to put the question again and perhaps re-phrase it.
From the Australian view the presence of Australian troops here.
On what premise is that based? The question is what Mr. Reese
was trying to get at.? And does this in any way contribute to the
defence of Australia and the confidence in that area?
PM. What we are aiming at in this is clear enough and so far as
tho Five Power Arrangements are concerned they are making for
Australia's contribution to the defence and security of, using
the words that are there, Malaysia/ Sinaapore, in the context of
the Vjv P' Arraign-mants. ' 8 
I take it no further than that, other that it is our objective,
that happens to be the~ objective too of the other four countries
or powers under the Five Power Arrangements, that we want peace
and security. We believe that it will be a contribution to the
peace and security here, and for that reason we strongly support
it and are taking concrete action of a kind such as standing our
forces here, giving military and civil rai~ d as our contribution
to those objectives.
Q. Well, Sir, do you still regard the positioning of Australian
forces here as being part of a forward defence concept of
Australia and, if the Five Power Arrangements are no longer
considered necessary by the member Governments, what will be
your attitude then?
PM. If the governments we are up here and we have an
indefinite commitment to stay here. If there~ were... and I
Would be raising now a very hypothetical question and one that
frankly because of the communique that is being issued and
the precision with which it is being expressed shows the
attitude of the Malaysian Government and what they feel about
the presence of forces in the area. ' That shows the present
position. If they change their minds, that is a matter for
them, and we have made it clear again and again that if they
said that they did not want our forces to remain of course that
would terminate it. I want you toi understand this, I don' t
want to get irnvolved in semantics about this, but his speaks for
itself. It is a document of goodwill and of intention, and if
you read the words carefully, I think that you can tak~ e it that
goodwill in our intentions to assist them not only in their
development, not only in sustaining confidence, but in helping
them to build up their own defences and to be -ible to develop
their own sense of security and to look after themselves.
Q. Sir if I could perhaps put one last question
PM. No...
MR. GAUL Just two last questions. It's already gone on for more than
thirty minutes.
PM. I don't mind thcir going on, but I
Q. Sir, did you fi-nd at any times an indication on the part
of Malaysians Prime Minister that for discussing more serious
issues like China and neutralisation after the elections in
Australia is over so that they will know who will be in the
position
PM. I think I have already given an answer to that. First of all
I would not relate in detail what discussion took place .' etwee-n
myself and the Malaysian Prime Minister except to the extent that
it was in the communique. But what I can assure you of is this.
I think of him as a friend, and the warmth and goodwill seems
to move from him to my own country and from him to the people
of Australia, and I think the same goes for the Deputy Prime
Minister, too. 
Q. Indistinguishabhle.
Pill. Yes. Its now a long time and I can't elaborate on that. I
would refer to that in the sense as to what was said by Mr. Lce
Kuan Yew, the Singaporean Prime Minister. I can't elaborate on it
other than that the objectives of his Go-, vernment are the same
as ours and we want South Vietnam and for that -matter the other
countries Laos and Cambodia, to(-be able to-. live In peace free
from external agcression.
Q. Sir, do you detect that noutralisation, Palaysia's intere: st
in neutralisati " on, has diminished its interest in the Five Power
Airrangements?
Pm. No.
Q. Sir, d o you want yoursel1f -a: nd your Governimnt, in the event
of proven substantial external assistance ' f-r Malaysia's
continuing insurgancy p~ roblem with the. . Malayan Communist party
if this were a proved -Fact in tk-he future would you consider it
a reason for consu7lt ti c-. n under the Five Power Agreemenint if agreed
and if necessary Jfor intervention.
P. You are putting too big a hypothce-tical question to mne. 1-T
have our obligations under the Five Power , rrangement, which we
will koeep, findl they are in obligation to consult under cortain
circumstances. I can assur-e you and I h-nvo set this out in the
communiquo th-1l -e'live, up to our oblig~ ation and that is
understood and -iccept-d by the Ma lays ian Go-. vernmont.
Q. Sir, I don't want to quote but 1 don't want to bring in
internal Australian politics..*., but I mean it is a matter of
substance to Mlalaysiai, when the-Deput ' y Loadcr of the Labor
Opposition was through here, the Shadow Minister of Defence, he
ruled out all these conditions categorically. Do you imake the
same exemotion? I
Pm. Again I nave to inform You that I will not enter into
controversy with any other person, any other Australian Member of
Parliament whi lst am overseas. You have got to listo-p to what
t-he Deputy Leader of the Opposition said and judge him on what
he says and what hco has sublsoquentlyI. said, and I h-ope mpost of
you have see, n titel comment that lhe made on the IADS and'the
Australian Air Force component as reported in this morning's
Malaysian newspaPers.
Q. SiJr, this referonce to the Ku&amp; la Lumpur Jaclaration. Would
this be a'far more nc-sitive reaction of Australia than before?
Pm. It may be a little more concrete, but it was cleared with Mr.
Bowen and at least still the paragraphs himvo been drafted by
him the stateme~ nt he made in our own House on the
telephone about three timesthis morning, I could not give you the
precise time. 



EOUTH-EAST ASIAN VISIT
TELEVISION BROADCAST-7VE5-Y THE PRIME T4INISTER, THE RT. EON.
WILLIAM McMAJION, C. IH.,
ON ABC NATIONAL TELEVISION NETWORK 18 JUNE, 1972.
Good Evening:
As Prime Minister of Australia, I believe it is my duty to
report to you about my recent mission to Indonesia, Singapore and
Malaysia. My purpose in going was to discuss a wide range of issues of
national and international importance, flowing from the recent
dramatic changes in world affairs. I also wanted to strengthen the
confidence and goodwill between Australia and these three
neighbour nations.
A glance at the map will show how close and important they are
to us. We have growing trade and economic ties with them. We want
to promote their development and economic growth in our and their
long term interests, and we have a common interest in the peace,
defence and security of the environment in which we live.
So I thought it was an opportune time to go because so many
changes have occurred recently which vitally affect the future of
our country. President Nixon's visits to Peking and Moscow have
reduced tension between the great nowers the United States, Soviet
Russia and the People's Renublic of China.
But the dust has not yet settled and the outcome cannot yet be
clearly seen in the Asian theatre.
We do know that despite the great nower accord, North Vietnam
is still irVWlding South Vietnam. Many countries in our region are
under internal threat by subversive elements supported from outside,
and there is increasing competition betw., een the Soviet Union and
China for political influence. All this means that the prospects
for peace and stability in South-East Asia are still uncertain.
If we are to imnrove these prospects for the future, we must
work together to strengthen our economies to become more self--
reliant and to strengthen our defence capabilities.
During my visit, I talked at length with President Soeharto of
Indonesia, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore, Prime Miinister
Tun Razak of Malaysia and with many of their senior Ministers. 
2
Mow let us look at each of the three countries I visited.
Indonesia is a country of one hundred and twenty million
people. It is a few hours' flight to our North and is our nearest
neighbour. It is the fifth most populous nation on earth and the
only foreign country with which we share a border.
In the last few years it has made a remarkable recovery
from near anarchy. Substantial assistance was given by us to
Indonesia during this period, and it is in our own interest to
continue to do so.
With President Soeharto, I mapped out a programme for
co-operation in economic, cultural, defence and political matters over
the next few years. I was able to tell the President that the
Australian Government had decided to make a new three-year grant of
$ 69 million for economic aid up to June 1976.
0 As well, our three-year programme for technical and
defence assistance to Indonesia will be increased to help build up
its capability to defend itself. We will provide 16 Sabre fighter
aircraft and we will help the Indonesians equip a military airfield as
the base for them. Te are willing to carry out exercises between
our two Navies. We also agreed to consider ways of expanding trade
and increased investment by Australian companies there.
In the busy, progressive island nation of Singapore,
there is great warmth towards us. As the Prime " inister, Mr Lee
said to me " This isn't the time to be changing friends."
Singapore, as you all know, has strong traditional ties
of friendship and many common interests with us. They want to
co-operate in all kinds of ways.
For twenty years ncw, some 1,00 Siigaporean students
have been studying each year in Australia. And Australians are
visiting Singapore at the rate of over 30,000 a year. S150 million
worth of trade is exchanged between us each year. This trade is
very much in Australia's favour so our two Governments will be
looking at new ways and means of helping Singapore to expand its
trade with Australia. A battalion of our Army and other elements of our
armed forces are stationed there. They will stay there whilst they
are wanted. Our talks showed how close are our interests and our
views on the present world situation and particularly on South-East
Asia and its problems. We both want a negotiated settlement in
Indo-China that will enable the peoples of South Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia to determine their own future without outside interference.
It was emphasised whilst I was in Singapore how helpful
and stabilising was the role Australia is playing, and how much it
contributes to building confidence and the prospects of development
in the future. / 3 
-3
My last three days were in Malaysia. In Prime Minister
Tun Razak's words " We have been allies-in war arnd peace. And
good steady friends for a long time." This is true..
We are partners in the Commonwealth and--we are linked
as partners in many other ways. There are over 6,000 Malaysian
students in Australia today more than from any other country.
Malaysia has its Second Malaysia Plan a national
economic programme designed to accelerate economic activity and
progress for the malaysian people. It is an ambitious plan in
which Australia is closely interested and involved.
Malaysia is also one of the Principal supporters of
what is known as the Kuala Lumpur Declaration by members of ASEAN
that is, the Association of South-East Asian Nations. The Kuala
Lumpur Declaration is a proposal that South-East Asia should be
a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality.
Australia is not a member of ASENbut we have good
relations with all its members. The goals set out in the Declaration
are fully consistent with my Government's policies if effective
international guarantees can be obtained. And I told Tun Razak we
welcomed the Declaration as an important regional initiative.
I believe our discussions on the Declaration and
the Five Power Defence Arrangements have deepened our understanding
of each other's Policies.
I discussed the Five Power Defence Arrangements with
both Malaysia and Singapore. These Arrangements are working smoothly.
They will remain in full force and effect. I can assure you our
forces are welcomed in both ccuntries.
While I was away, there was some confusion here about the
attitude of Malaysia to the Five Power Arrangements. Let me state the
position in the considered words of the Prime Minister of Malaysia
" The continuing presence of Australian Forces, both land and
air, in Malaysia-Singapore in the context of the arrangements
is welcomed by the Malaysian Government and contributes to
defence and confidence in that area."
Those were his words.
There are no differences whatsoever between Australia
and Malaysia, or between Australia and Singapore, under these
arrangements. The mission was widely and accurately covered by the
local newspapers and television in Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore.
The editorial comments were complimentary and reflected real warmth
towards Australia and Australians.
Looking back, I am sure the mission was a success
and did a great deal to promote our friendships and our standing
among our Asian neighbours. I believe our mission achieved its
objectives that we are welcomed as friends and our policies are
a helpful and stabilising influence in South-East Asia. 



CHECK AGAINST DrLIVF. RY-BEFOE 11 A ( EST)
PRIME MINISTER
OFFICIAL OPEHIN~ G OF THE CRITICAL FACILITY AT THE
ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION,
LUCAS HEIGHTS, SYDNEY
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Pt. Hon. William McMahon,
CH, T-P 19 JU11E 1972
Twelve years ago, my distinguished friend and
colleague, Sir Robert Menzies, spoke here on a similar occasion.
And he said he helieved Lucas H~ eights was a significant event in
our national development. And he went on to forecast that this
establishment would produce many practical results for Australia.
Sir Robert was, of course, referring particularly to the role of
Lucas Heights in developing the technical experience we will need
when the time comes for Australia to embark on a commercial
nuclear power nrrrumm.
It is pretty well accepted now that by the end of
the seventies, one or more of our State generating authorities
will be building a nuclear power plant. Thereafter, more will
follow. It is not too much to say that if events develop as
predicted, Australia could be involved in a ver * y large capital
investment in nuclear power plants before the end of the century.
DHany of you are well aware of how essential it will
be that we go into such a programme equipped with sound technical
advice about the efficiency and safety of reactors and other
nuclear facilities. This critical facility is, I am told, a powerful tool
for making studies directly related to this objective. The machine
was built by a French engineering~ firm, , working with Australian
industry and the Commission's scientists and engineers.
Our recent agreemaent with Japan will also be important
to our understanding of the future application of atomic energy
for peaceful purooses. We also co-operate with the United Kingdom,
the United States and Canada.
It will be seen, therefore, that the leading nations
of the world in the extraordinarily complex field of nuclear
energy have been willing to share the benefits of their work with
US. ./ 2 
We occupy a seat on the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic E~ nergy Agency as the nation most advanced in
atomic energy in the South-East Asia and the Pacific region. But
we do not have the technical nor financial resources even to attempt
to take a place in the forefront of nuclear reactor development,
and if I may be allowed to emphasise it here, today, there is no
reason why we should seek to dIO so.
But we do make our contribution to the pool of
atomic energy knowledgre, and we do help our Asian and Pacific
neighbours through the loan of technical ex ' perts and equipment. We
also receive Agency and Colomnbo Plan fellows for training and
experience in nuclear matters.
This new facility will both contribute to our
objectives and extend our ability to collaborate with other
countries. For these reasons I am glad to have the opportunity
to open it today. My colleague, Sir Reginald Swartz, has already
reminded us of the benefits which are flowing to the community from
this centre. In the years to come, nuclear energy will help ease
our power problems. Most industrially advanced countries are now
either building nuclear power stations, or preparing to do so.
More than 100 plants are already in service and about twice as
many are being built or are on order.
We can expect nuclear Dower in the 1980' s'and
to account for an increasing proportion of Australia's new
generating capacity. On a per capita basis, we have one of the
fastest rising power demands in the world. one estimate that has
been given to me is that by the end of this century, one-third of
our electricity could come from nuclear stations. It is claimed
that by that time more than 50 per cent of the world's electricity
could Le so supplied. Such predictions have major implications in such
diverse fields as foreign affairs, finance, industry and commerce.
Within the Atomic Energy Comrmission, we have the experts to advise
on all technical aspects of nuclear power. They have done wideranging
research into all aspects of the control of radiation from
nuclear installations. And over a long period, they have made
close and careful investigations of possible effects on the environment,
including on marine life, and on flora and fauna.
But uranium is not only an industrial material. It
is a strategic material of high importance that involves the Commonwealth
in certain obligations. Every country in the world which
produces or uses fissile material imposes Government control for
considerations of national security, and to honour international
obligations, Australia must do likewise. / 3 
-3
Before our first uower station is built, there
must be a necessary framework of regulations and administrative
practices to provide such controls. We arc working constructively
with the States to achieve thes~ e objectives. Thcre can be no
better means of ensuring thait nuclear power will be introduced to
Australia on a safe, economic and responsible basis.
it is clear from what I have said that Australia's
role in nuclear energy is concerned with its peaceful uses. The
harnessing of this great force of energy for the benefit of mankind
is one of the areatest challenges of this generation.
The task is twofold: We must learn to use the
technology in peaceful pursuits, and we must contain and eventually
dissuaqe its potential uses for warfare and destruction.
it is difficult for some people to accept that in
the modern world even in cases where there arise differences on
certain major issues there can still be co-operation on others.
For example, the United States and the Soviet Union hold basic
differences on many great international issues. Yet President
Nixon and Mr Brezhnev were able last month to make a major step
forward in the vital field of world disarmament.
They have slowed down the nuclear arms race, and
they have done it in the cnntext-%. of maintaining a balance of
strategic interests. I sent a message of warm congratulation to
Mr Nixon for this achievement.
I would like to go back a little on Australia's
record in these matters, because this is an area in which I very
sincerely regret to say that France has failed to respond, despite
our co-operation in other areas.
Many years ago, in 1963, a partial nuclear test
ban treaty was concluded. Australia took its stand when it ratified
that treaty. It specifically bans tests in the atmosphere, outer
space and under water. It is unmistakeably clear that our present
attitude is not a nev, one.
Our attitude at the Plenary Session at Stockholm
was in accordance with long-existing policy. When the Australian
Government ratified the partial test ban treaty, it was strongly
opposed to the conduct of tests of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere,
wherever they occurred. This remains our strong policy. It is
therefore completely wrong to say that a new policy was developed
at Stockholm. In line with our long-standing policy, we have
repeatedly conveyed to the French Government, as you, Your
Excellency, have repeated and confirmed, through the proper channels
and in the most unequivocal terms the firm opposition of the
Australian Government and peonple to the French nuclear tests in
the Pacific. / 4 
Australia was the first country to protest against
these tests in 1972. AMnd we have repeated those protests. We
will continue to do so, by whatever means are properly avajable to
us to exert whatever pressures we can to bring about a cessation
of these tests and all atmospheric nuclear tests for all time.
The Austialian Government is dedicated to upholding
the partial nuclear test ban treaty. That is our policy; it has
not changed. We will continue to work within the framework of
international negotiation and consultation with the United States
and others so vitally concerned with the difficult technical issues
underlying questions of world peace, including a more comprehensive
treaty. But central to our policy is a clear and frank
unqualified opposition to atmospheric testing. Let there be no
misunderstanding on this score. I and my Government want the
present tests abandoned. Further, we have taken every reasonable step we
can to persuade our French friends to cease them. You will be
aware, Mr Ambassador, that I have already conveyed personally to
the President of France the views that I have now expressed.
And I want to confirm to yo~ u that none of the
explanations you have given would in any way, in any shape at
all, change my, or my Government's attitude, or the Australian
people's attitude, to the atmospheric testing by any country.
And I say this, notwithdranding the comments you have made about
the protests that have been made by my Government to your
Government itself. This Facility I am opening today is, I emphasise,
designed for peaceful purposes. It will assist our researchers
to develo in co-operation with the States, our capacity to use
nuclear energy for the generation of electric power.
So I am glad to have the opportunity of officially
opening this Facility, and at the same time to be able to set out
the Government's reasons for building it. It will undoubtedly be
an essential tool for our research workers, and I have now much
pleasure in declaring it open. 



FOR PRESS: PM'S NO 63/ 72
ATMOSPHERIC TESTS OF NUCLEAR WEFAPONS
Statement by the Prime Ministers of Australia and New Zealand, The
Rt Hon. William McMahon, and The Rt Hon. J. R. Marshall, M. P.
The Prime Ministers of Australia and New Zealand, meeting
in Canberra today, agreed to a joint message for transmission to the
Chairman of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva.
The text of the joint message reads
Upon the resumption of the meetings of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament, it is a matter of the deepest
regret that it should prove necessary for the Australian and
New Zealand Prime Ministers, meeting in Canberra, to address
themselves to you to express their joint protest that a
further series of atmospheric tests of nuclear weapons should
be imminent in the South Pacific.
' Thc GOYr3= Qe-nt of France must bear the full responsibility
for the decision which it has apparently taken to proceed
with such tests. It does so contrary to the aopeals made
to it by many Pacific countries, contrary tolthe urging of
the General Assembly and contrary to the recent call by the
Stockholm Conference which has especially cohdemned those
tests carried out in the atmosohere.
" The Australian and New Zealand Governments
reflecting the grave concern felt throughout their
communities and conscious that the problem of
atmospheric testing in their region is part only of a
broader problem;
recalling . their support at the U. N. General Assembly
November 1971 for resolution 2828( c), which stressed
the urgency of bringing to a halt all nuclear weapon
testing in all environments by all States;
call jointly on the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue to accord high priority to the
question of the urgent need for the suspension of . such
tests and the formulation of a comprehensive test ban
treaty. / 2 
" We should be grateful if you would take steps to arrange
for this message to be circulated as an official document
of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament.
Signed William McMahon,
Prime Minister of Australia.
Canberra June 1972 J. R. Marshall
Prime Minister of New Zealand.
Canberra June 1972
NOTE FOR PRESS:
The text of the joint message has also been released to the
New Zealand press. 



FOR PRESS PM'S NO S-4/ 72
WOO 0L
Statement by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William McMahon, CHMP.
The Government has agreed on the creation of a single wool
marketing authority to be known as the Aus-tralian Wool Marketing
Corporation, which will operate on a commercial basis.
The functions of the Corporation will cover those currently
specified in the Wool Industry Act and the Woo. Commission Act.
The Government has also decided that the Corporation should
have power to recommend to the Government from time to time chanqes
which it considers to be necessary to control the marketing of thq
whole clip. Before granting a pcwer of acquisition the Government would
require a submission or submissions for consideration relating to a
comprehensive acquisition scheme which is acceptable to the wool
industry, the State Governments and -the Commonwealth.
In any proposal submitted to the Government for acqulition,
the Corporation would be required to submit * proposals substantially
in accordance with the following financial safeguards
A statutory requirement that the Corporation conduct its
operations on a striCtly commercial basis.
A statutory requirement that the deductions from sales
proceeds made in arriving at net payments to growers
shall be sufficient to meet all trading costs ( interest,
( storage, handling, administration etc.), and to provide
for the accumulation of reserve~ s ag~ ainst the contingency
of losses being incurred. 
A statutory provision that on the commencement of an
acquisition scheme the existing Commonwealth commitment to
meet * losses not covered by earlier surpluses shall not
apply for the future elimination of Section 25( 5) ( b)
of the Australian Wool Commission Act 1970).
The amount, method and timing of payment which may be
recommended by the Corporation to the Government for
approval shall be subject to and above.
A statutory requirement that the Corporation's policy
on holding stocks of wool ( and hence its pricing policy)
shall be determined in consultation with the Government.
Mf The Corporation may with tha approval of the Government
abolish the PAP scheme and recommend another scheme.
It is the desire of the Government to ensure the retention
in the marketing system of efficient commercial innovators where
consistent with the overall objectives of efficient marketing.
The Government has decided that for the year 1972/ 73 only
the deficiency payments shall be the same as for the present season
1971/ 72. The question of underwriting the industry by way of direct
subsidy or otherwise has been dealt with as an issue separate and
distinct from both market reform and acquisition.
Canberra June 1972. 



SAUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER
FOURTH NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 21 JUNE 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon,
CH, MP.
Mr Chairman, Gentlemen It is a pleasure to be the guest of the Institute tonight,
to have the opportunity of talking to so many distinguished visitors,
and to such a representative gathering of leaders of Australian
business and industry.
I would have liked to have sp. okn to you in a freewheeling
fashion about the recent visit I have made overseas, because not only
was it a memorable one for me, but I do believe in the presence of
some of those people whose Governments were good enough to look after
me whilst I was away that they did show their great liking for
this country and and spoke of what they saw to be the wonderful
prospects in front of us.
But I think you can take it for granted that wherever
I went they showed a disosition to look to Austraa for assistance,
they looked to Australia for comradeship and for friendship and they
had implicit trust in the belief that this country will, in their
time of need, come to their help and come to their assistance.
So for that reason, I wanted to speak to you in the
presence of so many : istinguished guests, and say something to you.
Instead not in a freewheeling. because as Prime Minister that is
impossible under certain circumstances and so therefore I will
keep pretty closely to a text I have already prepared.
I think most of you will know that I have been visiting
three of our near neighbours in South-East Asia first of all
Djakarta, then Singapore and later on Kuala Lumpur. Naturally
the events of that journey are very much in my mind, particularly
as I have here on my left-hand side a colleague whom I have learnt
to respect and who I think is just as interested in not only the
South Pacific countries but also in the countries to the countries
to the North, and who realises that the our destinies of New
Zealand and ourselves our greatest friend is New Zealand
and these other countries are inextricably bound up and that their
destinies will inevitably affect what happens in our own countries.
And, too, it was an appropriate time for me to be there
because only recently President Nixon had completed his visits to
Peking and to Moscow. Also, there is no doubt at all of the changes
that are occurring, economically, socially and politically not only
in the countries that I visited but indeed in the whole of South
East Asia and the Western Pacific as well. 
2
Japan and I say this, Mr Saito in your presence
as you know, has emerged as a very great power and I think in the not
too distant future, you will see its political influence ex pnding,
and particularly will see a greater attempt at rapprochement with
its nearest and big nighbour immediately to the West.
Britain, of course, will be going into the Common
Market quite soon and that must have an impact on us of the size and
of the duration that for the moment we cannot foretell.
And, of course, there are also problems of our own
stability and growth. rhu QOD
These all give us, I believe, a very significant role to
play in the South East Asian and Pacific region. I hope therefore
you will bear with me if I mention some points of importance as they
affect Australia and our relations with our Asian friends. And then
I would like to refer more particularly to trade and investment
and in truth, this is exactly what I want to speak to you about tonight.
I went to Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia as Prime
Minister of Australia because our relationships there have a direct
bearing on our defence and security arrangements and on our economic
activities. I had no domestic arguments to export, and I think this
is one of the reasons that wherever I went and it was learnt that I
was not going to engage in political activities whilst I was overseas,
that we were able to talk so frankly and so freely together while our
relationships not only improved but I doubt whether they could have
been very much better.
I wanted simply to do what I could to strengthen our
friendships and increase our understandings on these vital matters,
and I believe the mission did exactly that. This came across very
strongly in my talks with the Heads of Government in the three countries,
with their administrations, and I believe with the people themselves.
Because you do get an impression and I speak of only
one capital and that was Djakarta.... it was unbelievable for a person
like myself who hadn't been a Prime Minister for very long, to drive
through throngs of children, probably as many as twenty or thirty
thousand, they knowing you are Australian and ready to cheer for the
fact that you have come from this wonderful country of ours.
The official and private talks just could not have been
freer and friendlier, nor more outspoken or have taken us more into
their confidence. Wherever we went, the press, radio and television
gave us a fair go, and I can impress that upon you.
I had what I felt was a good meeting of minds with
President Soeharto of Indonesia, Pr we Minister Lee Kuan Yew of
Singapore and Prime Minister Tun Razak of Malaysia. They, too and I 
64 i1
3
can confirm this they expressed appreciation of what we were
doing and of our great interest in their countries. They wanted
that interest to develop and they kept impressing on me their
desirability that Australian businessmen should go there and should
take part in the development of their own companies and of the
companies to which they were going.
I believe that te visit has helped to strengthen the
security of Australia and generally opened up new prospects for
closer relationships in the future in all manner of ways. It was a
most encouraging and stimulating experience for me and all the members
of my party. There was between Indonesia and us a complete
understanding of how each is contributing to better security and
to better prospects for economic growth in South-East Asia. We
are co-operating very closely.
In Singapore and Malaysia we again found a complete
accord at the highest levels and in their own words, there were
no issues between us because we are of the same mind. And that,
too, was a worthwhile contribution to our own security and the
security of the region.
0 Now, Mr Chairman, may I elaborate a little on my
discussions in South-East Asia on trade and investment. I had a
senior member of the Department of Trade and Industry with me, and
we had most constructive discussions in all three countries we
visited. They ranged over a wide area finance and banking,
trade and development, aid, particularly economic aid and defence
aid as well. And what struck me most in all these discussions was
the differences that there were in the various stages of development.
What they are concerned to do in each of the countries is to create
new employment opportunities for their people. This means they seek
to raise living standards progressively in the years ahead.
Unfortunately, and I say this with deep feeling, their
resources of investment capital and foreign exchange particularly
in Indonesia and Malaysia are far too limited, and they look to
us, not only for support, but understanding as well.
Increasingly, they regard Australia as a growing market
for their exports and as a source of capital funds. Trade between
the countries in thn region has been growing over recent years and
undoubtedly will continue to expand in the future. t
Many Australian firms have already taken advantage of
the special incentives provided by these countries for foreign
investment and have established operations in the South-East Asian
area. I believe that Australia has reached a stage in its economic
development which allows us to adopt a much more liberal attitude
towards overseas investment by Australian firms. This was the
subject of a statement by my colleague, the Treasurer, in the
Parliament in February. / 4 
4
At that time, Mr Snedden said
" Direct investment accompanied by exports of technical
know-how and managerial skills which give the Australian
enterprise a role in the conduct of an overseas venture,
is an important means by which Australia can contribute
to development and growth of other countries. This is
particularly true of countries in the Pacific and South-
East Asian region."
I fully endorse his view. And I can assure you from
my personal contacts how much Australian investment is welcomed
in the region. In Indonesia, I unveiled the foundation stone for a
new factory which will produce glass containers, probably between
to 25 per cent of their total requirements. The major partner
was an Australian company, Australian Consolidated Industries.
And if I can say this, one of the disappointing moments
I had going through Djakarta was to see branch banking systems of
the great American banks such as Chase Manhattan and First National
City and banks from the Continent and other olaces. But to my
surprise, even to my anguish, I found there wasn't a single
Australian branch bank there. Butnow we are moving to
establish representative banks, and Indonesia has closed off the
prospect of further branch bankincg systems being estabished there.
In Singapore, I visited a very successful Australian
factory Besley Pike at the Jurong Industrial Estate.
These factories are tangible examples of the role of
private Australian capital in the economic development of the area.
Arrangements have already bceen put in hand which I
believe will lead to even better trade relations and economic
co-operation. The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade
and Industry, Doug Anthony, will visit Indonesia early in July for
important trade talks including the review of our bilateral trade
agreement. Similarly, we have advised the Malaysian authorities
of our readiness to review our trade agreement with that country
when they are ready to do so. In both cases, the reviews would be
aimed at ensuring that the trade agreements reflect the current
nature of our trading relationships and cater for the high level of
interest in trade with, and investment in, Indonesia and Malaysia. 
5
I have also said that we are prepared to consider
additions to the list of itcms already covered by our system of
tariff preferences for developing countries.
Itis now generally recognised that it is essential to
establish a closer relationship between our respective business
leaders. An Austraian/ Indonesian Business Co-operation Committee
has already been established. It is very encouraging to note the
large number of senior Australian businessmen who have joined together
to promote this organisation.
I have suggested, in conversation with iTn Razak, that a
similar arrangement be made with Malaysia, and I hope that Australian
businessmen will become interested in it. When I raised this question
with the Malaysian Finance Minister, he mentioned they were so
anxious to get our investment and the possibility of getting a far
greater degree of investment there, that they would use their Capital
Dsvelopment Council as the vehicle for developing links with
Australian manufacturers, And whilst I am not in a position where I would be able
tc commit either the Malaysian Government or the Capital Investment
Council itself, I do believe that if Australian business interests
were prepared to have discussions with that Investment Council or
the management of that Investment Council, they would see they are
willing to provide incentives for investment opportunities there.
The private sector advisory panel of the Council might, as
Tun Razak and the Minister for finance thought, be an appropriate
mechanism by which you could, if you wished to, make contact and try
and ensure that that contact was successful.
Now, gentlemen: it is one thing for governments to
express a desire for closer economic relationships. However, at
the end of the day, the ultimate decisions on individual investment
projects or commercial transactions must be taken by the businessmen
themselves. The main purpose of these Committees will be to enable
business leaders in our respective countries to meet and review
problems and prospects relating to mutual trade and investment.
There were a number of other matters raised in the course
of our discussions. These will be pursued further through normal
diplomatic channels. 
6
I am wholly satisfied of the scope and need for greater
Australian participation in economic development in South-East
Asia. I think I can assure you that there is sincere goodwill
towards Australia and also that the regard for individual Australians
is very high. I have, too, taken this problem up with both the Treasury
itself and the Reserve Bank and we will shortly be as we have
recently produced a paper on international investment we will
very shortly be putting down a paper in the House that will deal
with this problem of investment by Australians overseas.
Now, Mr Chairman, these activities, of course, have to be
locked at in the context of our overall trade and investment
position, and I will conclude with some general observations about
that. In all external economic transactions, the balance of
payments is maintaining a very strong position with record performances
developing in a number of areas in the current year. In the first
nine months of 1971/ 72; exports rose more than $ 403 million above
S the level in the corresponding neriod of 1970/ 71. The more recent
figuces for May indicate that this trend has been accelerating.
For 1971/ 72 as a whole, exports could well be about $ 4,800 million.
I remember when I was Treasurer and we got to a figure
of somewhere about $ 2,400 million, we thought it was an occasion
for celebration, Now this was achieved despite some slowdown in the growth
of exports of mining products ( turning to Mr Saito)... I won't
continue because he knows the answer and you know the answer too.
I believe myself it is only a temporary slowdown in our exports to
one of the great countries to our north.
Firmer prices overseas for a number of rural products have
led to a substantial growth of rural exports, and exports of
S manufacturers have grown very rapidly this year. In contrast,
imports, reflecting the slower rate of growth in the level of domestic
activity, have risen much less than exports.
In consequence, the balance of trade surplus ie currently
running at more than double the level at this time last year, and
looks like achieving a record level around $ 100 million for 1971/ 72.
On the invisibles transactions, the net deficit has continued to
increase, but at a slower rate than in recent years. This improvement,
combined with the arger trade surplus, has made a significant reduction
in the current account deficit, which may be less than $ 400 million
in 1971/ 72 as a whole. This is the smallest current account deficit
for almost a decade. / 7 
7
If I can go back a little, I can well remember in the
time of the Menzies Government, when we used to think of having
current account deficits not of $ 400 million but we would talk
of them in the thousands and probably the two thousands.
So what it does indicate to me is the ability of the
Australian, not only to produce, but to got out and sell, and to
get out and compete and to win in international company.
But I believe when I read of recent exploits of the
Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd., in winning the contracts it did in the
Eurcpean markets, again it confirmed my belief in the Australian
manufacturer and the Australian producer, and their ability to do
the job when they have the opportunity and the will to do so.
We have also had a very strong increase in caoital inflow.
This brings with it certain problems which we are examining. The
overall balance of payments outcome in 1971/ 72 will thus be one of
substantial surplus, perhaps of the order of $ 1,500 million. This
surplus on external account places us well to meet the various
challenges and uncertainties which lie ahead.
In particular, the international monetary situation,
although it has settled down in recent months from the turmoil of the
second half of 1971, still has some way to go before we can have
Scomplete confidence in its viability. Discussions on possible long
term changes in the system could begin later this year.
If I can now say this. In some of the visits we have
had in recent weeks, particularly by Governor Connally, and some
of the talks I have had with my colleagues, as for example, with
my colleagues, the New Zealanders, have all indicated to me how
desirable it is that the sooner we can come to grips with this
problem of foreign exchanges to try and get them more stable, the
better it will be for us. And I do hope, Mr Prime Minister, and
I express this in your presence, that you will be thinking of
entering the OECD and Working Party No. 3, and when that happens,
if there has to be a group of 20, that you will join with us in
seeing that multilateral exchanges and multilateral trade are for
the benefit of our two countries.
So discussions on possible long-term changes in the
system will go on and I hope we can start very soon. As well,
a very important round of multilateral trade negotiations is scheduled
to begin in 1973, equivalent to the Kennedy Round negotiations which
are so beneficial to world trade. On the domestic front a review of
the tariff is in progress.
These developments in the monetary and trade fields could
have important implications for our external economic position.
I / 8 
8-
In the shorter term, the Government h * as in recent
months acted to stimulate the level of demand and economic
activity. Nevertheless, on present indications we can expect the
balance of payments to continuc in strong surplus in 1972/ 73.
These large and continuing balance of payments surpluses
can bring their own problems, just6 as balance of payments deficits
can. The Government will therefore be watching closely developments
on the external account in the months ahead.
If I can just make an interpolation to what I have
just said, fortunately for us now as the development of the work
of the Government Statistician, and the private and Commonwealth
banking system, we can now identify in a way that we have never
been able to do not only the source but the first use of the funds
that are coming to Australia. And this I can to you, . the
very largest proportion of the money that is coming in is for
direct investment, and is therefore making its contribution to the
growth and development of this community.
I am confident, therefore, that by maintaining the
flexibility which has been a characteristic of our economic
management, we can deal with new situations as they arise, and
justify the confidence which I believe is now beginning to flow
quite strongly from the business community.
Our neighbours in South-East Asia made it clear to me
that they regard Australia as a country making a considerable
contribution to stability in the region. We must continue to
justify that confidence by our performance at home and by our
readiness to explore new prospects abroad.
I hope everyone of you as a businessman here will
have the opportunity to visit each of the countries I visited.
You will get a reception of a kind that you will find unexpected
but generous and warm. But above all things I believe that if
you do go, end you go with enthusiasm, you will find that not only
can you do much to get expansion of trade on behalf of your
own companies, but also you will be able to make your contribution
to inter-country development prospects, inter-country trade
developments, and by this means, you can make the four of us
much more wealthy, and our prospects much brighter that I gather,
Sir Robert, was conveyed to you by some of the speakers this
morning, and later on this afternoon.. 



' EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE BEIVE .30 P. ( EST)
PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP
NUCLEAR TESTS 21 JUNE J972
Goodnight Lately there has bean considerable public comment and
controversy about the current series of French nuclear tests in the
Pacific. I want to explain to you, as clearly as I can, what
the facts are about tho Government's policy both on the French
nuclear tests, and on all nuclear tests in the atmosphere, as well.
No matter where they are undertaken and no matter which nation,
friendly or unfriendly conducts them.
I want to explain, too, the facts about Australia's
vote at the recent Environmental Conference in Stockholm. Once
you have these facts, I invite you to make your own judgment on the
many comments and opinions which are currently being heard on this
subject. Our oolicy on nuclear matters proceeds from the starting
point that Australia's role in nuclear energy is concerned with its
peaceful uses. The harnessing of the great force of nuclear energy
remains one of the great opportunities for gocd of our generation.
So we have a twofold objective We must learn to use
nuclear technology for peace, but we must also contain, and eventually
dissuade, its potential use for war and destruction.
As far back as 1963, a partial nuclear test ban treaty
was concluded. it was supported by many nations. This treaty
specifically bans nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space,
and under water. Australia took its basic stand against nuclear tests
when it ratified this treaty. It should be unmistakeably clear,
therefore, that our attitude is most definitely not a new or a
belated one. Rather iq it a clear, firm and long-standing policy
introduced by, and supported by, successive Liberal and Country
Party Governments, particularly my own. / 2 
-2
If anything, this strong opposition to atmospheric
testing which Australia expressed in becoming a party to the partial
test ban treaty nine years ago has become even stronger as time has
passed. In line with this long-standing policy of opposing the
tests, we have repeatedly conveyed to the French Government, through
the proper channels and in unequivocal terms the firm opposition of
the Australian Government and people to French nuclear tests in the
Pacific. Australia was the first country to protest against the
French tests in 1972. We have made that protest repeatedly since.
My Government is dedicated to upholding the partial
nuclear test ban treaty. That is our policy. It has not changed and
it will not change. At Stockholm, we abstained at first on a resolution
about nuclear tests because our primary purpose of opposing atmospheric
tests was already covered by that policy. As well, we did not think
the Environment Conference was the ideal forum to go into the
difficult technical issues underlying questions of disarmament and
world peace, including a more comprehensive treaty.
But because this action seemed to raise some doubts
about our central policy of opposition, we decided to once again
underline our fundamental opposition to all atmospheric tests for all
time by voting for the resolution whon it reached the plenary session
at Stockholm. I hope this establishes my and my Government's
position clearly. In the modern world, it is possible for nations to have
serious differences on some issues, while continuing to co-operate
on others. President Nixon's visits to Peking and Moscow are
examples. I very sincerely regret to say once again that France
has failed to respond, despite our co-operation with her in other
areas. We have taken every reasonable step we can to persuade France
to halt the tests. Last Friday, the day after I arrived back from my visit
to South-East Asia, !' had a personal message conveyed to the President
of France. On Monday, in Sydney, I shared a platform with the French
Ambassador to Australia. After hearing him speak, I felt obliged to
state that none of the explanations the Ambassador had given would,
in any way, or in any shape at all, change my own opposition or that
of my Government or that of the Australian people to nuclear tests
in the atmosphere. Lot there be no misunderstanding on this score. I and
my Government want the current series of tests abandoned. That has
been made as clear as crystal in the past few weeks and even as
recently as last night when Mr Marshall and I sent a joint message
to the Conference of the Commnittee on Disarmament in Geneva.
Thanks and Goodnight. 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER R
22 JUNE 1972
A large number of items have been listed for
consideration at this Conference, and there is also a
full quota of Loan Council business to be transacted.
It is our hope and I presume that it would also
be the hope of the Premiers that, while giving the
matters before us the attention their importance warrants,
we will be able to conduct our discussions on them
expeditiously, and with mutually satisfactory results.
The central object of our attention will, of
course, be the general financial position and prospects
of the States.
The extensive information which your Treasuries
have provided to the Commonwealth Treasury has helped
considerably towards our understanding of your position,
both as regards your revenue budgets and as regards
borrowing programmes, and the problems confronting you.
We appreciate that co-operation. For our part, we want
to do what we can within the limits that our own budgetary
requirements impose upon us to help you with your problems.
I suggest that we should move straight to discussion
on the States' finances generally, and that this discussion
be carried forward in private session where you could tell
us anything you might wish to say in confidence to
supplement the information and advice already available
to us. By approaching the main matters before us in this
way and first reaching general understandings on them, we
would then be well placed to make good progress with the
many other particular items listed for consideration both
in Premiers' Conference and Loan Council. 



Premiers' Conference and Loan Council Meetin!)-
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William Mcahion, C. li iP
22 June 1972
This has been my fourth meeting with the Premiers in
this forum since I became Prime Minister.
The three previous meetings were all characterized
by a genuine effort by all parties to reach accommodations
which took account of the problems of all of us. I am
delighted to be able to say that the same atmosphere of
warm and friendly co-operation has once again characterized
this meeting. Our discussions on the States' fi1nancial. positions and
requirements were greatly assisted by the States making
available to us in advance of'the meeting extensive information
on their financial positions and prospeCts. We appreciate
their cc-operation in this.
The discussions today have been conducted with great
freedom and frankness. As a result I feel that we all have a
greater understanding of the problems each of us faces.
The Commonwealth, for its part, entered the discussions
anxious to do what it could to assist the States in meetin5T theirheavy
responsibilities. We know that they have great pressures
upon them. All sections of the community have their ox'm
requests to make. Each, naturally enough, sees its own
problems as being of greatest moment. The State governments are
therefore faced with a great variety of competing demands, which
they have to deal with in some order of priority. 
-2
The Commonwealth is in a similar situation. One of
its highest priorities, however, is the need to enable the
States to meet their responsibilities. The allocation of
funds for this purpose is the greatest single element in the
Commonwealth Budget.
Against this background we approached this meeting
with the firm reso" lve that we had to reac~ h a fair and equitable
agreement with the Premiers, having in mind both their
responsibilities and the other responsibilities facing the
Commonwealth. I am glad to be able to say that we have
succeeded in reaching such an agreement.
The elements of this agreement are as follows:-
Revenue Assistance Additional assistance in the form of a permanent
increase of $ 112 million to the financial assistance grants
will be provided by the Commonwealth in 1972-73.~ This amount
will be built into the formula grants for the purpose of
calculating the grants for subsequent years, and will be
distributed in proportion to the 1971-72 formula grants as
escalated in 1972-73 under the formula.
In addition to this extra $ 112 million, the
Commonwealth will provide further amounts of approximately
$ 7.1 million to New South Wales and $ 5.4 million to Victoria
in 1972-73 by increasing the per capita payments over ' and above
their formula grants by $ 1.50 from the present $ 2 to $ 3.. 50.
The per capita payments, as increased, will be added to the
formula grants for the purpose of calculating the grants in
future years. A further amount of $ 3.5 million will, be paid to
Western Australia in 1972 -73 as a special temporary addition to that 
3.
State's financial assistance grant in that year.
Borrowing Pro rammes
Works and housing programme
The borrowing programme for State governments will
total $ 982 million, an increase of $ 90 million or 10.1 per cent
over 1971-72. Of the total, $ 248.5 million will be in the
form of a grant, and ', 733.5 million will represent borrowings
to be arranged by the Commonwealth.
Larger authorities programme
The borrowing programme for the larger (" semi-government")
authorities will be $ 488 million, an increase of $ 49 million or
11.2 per cent over 1971-72. The basic programme will total
$ 466 million, and to this will be added a permanent addition
of $ 10 million to New South Wales' share of the programme, and
special temporary allocations of $ 3 million for Queensland
and $ 9 million for Western Australia.
Smaller authorities programme
The practice of recent years of not imposing any
limit on the over-all amount to be borrowed by smaller
authorities will be continued. The limit on borrowings by
individual authorities in this category will be raised from
$ 300,000 to S400,000, thereby adding an amount conservatively
estimated at 310 million to their total borrowings in 1972-73.
Non-Metronolitan Unemplo rment Relief Grants
The amount being provided by the Commonwealth for the
relief of non-metropolitan unemployment will be increased from
million to 6 million monthly. This increase will operate to
the end of 1972, before which date the scheme will again be reviewed.
Details of these decisions, and the distribution of the
various amounts between the States, are shown in the tables attached. 
SUIMIARY OF AIDDITIONAL FINANTCE FOR STATES, 1972-73*
S million
( i)( 2)( 3)
Additional Revenue Grants Increase in
Works and
Housing Programmes Total ( 11) and ( 2) Increase in
" Larger"
Authorities Pro gramnme s
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Total 44.3 33.1 17.6 12.0 15.9 5.1
128.0 28.6 23.0 11.4 12.3 8.4 6.3
90.0 72.9 56.1 29.0 24.3 24 .3
11.4
218.0 21.4 11.6 7.5 1.7 7.7
-0.7
49.2
* It must be emphasised that the revenue grants figures shown are not comparable with those shown
for the increases in the borrowing programmes. The former represent the additional assistance
to be granted in 1972-73 over and above that which would be paid under existing legislation,
whereas the latter represent increases over last year's levels. ( 4) Total 94.3
67.7 36.5 26.0 32.0 10.7
267.2 
1. Revenue Grants to States in 1972-73
million)
Estimated
Financial Assistance
Grants under
existing legislation
479.1 362.1 252.1 169.1 182.5 75.9
1,518.8 $ 124.5 million
addition to
F. A. Gs
33.1 17.6 12.0 12.4 5.1
124.5 Temporary
revenue assistance
3.5 3.5
2. Loan Council Borrowing Programmes
million)
Works and Housing
New South Wales
Victoria Queer. sland
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Grant 79.0
63.4 51.4 34.0
23.2 17.4
248.5
Authorities borrowing Borrowing 25533.3 187.1 92.8
100.6 68.5 Total 312.53
250.5 124.2 134.6 91.7 Larger authorit
159.5 91.7 25.7 32.8
51.2 68.6 14.4
753.5 982.0 488.0
over $ 400,000 individually during ; ies Total
478.2 410.0 215.9 158.3 124.5 85.0
1,470.0
the year
3. Local Authority Programme
The limit on individual borrowings by the smaller authorities
was raised from $ 300,000 to $ 400,000. It is conservatively estimated
that, as a result of this increase, the smaller authorities might borrow
some $ 10 million in excess of the amount they might otherwise have
raised. The practice of imposing no over-all limit on borrowings by these
authorities has been continued.
4. Non-metropolitan UnemDloyment Relief Grants
( 000ooo)
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Total New monthly grant
2,510 1,350 1,200 360
450 330
6,000
N. S. W.
Tas. Total 523.4 395.2 269.7 181 .1
198.4 79.0
1,646.8 



PRIME MINISTER
" THIS WEEK"
Television Interview given by the Prime Minister,
T e Rt. Hon. William McMahon, for HSV7.
MELBOURNE
Interviewers John Boland
Max Grant JUNE 1972
Introduction Good Evening and welcome to " This Week" this week.
Much of our programme this evening is devoted to the first in-depth
interview the Prime Minister, ' r McMahon, has given since he returned
from his trip to South-East Asia.
Now to question the Prime Minister tonight, John Boland,
and Maxwell Grant of the " Herald".
Q. Prime ? inister, if there is criticism of you as Prime
Minister, there certainly was never any of you as Federal
Treasurer. And I have heard it said that you were probably one
of the most forthright and best Treasurers we have had in
Australia, and it is that area that I would like to deal with
first. With Britain letting the pound sterling float, most
financial experts believe that starling will be devalued when
foreign exchanges open tomorrow and the British Exchange opens,
I think, on the following Tuesday. Now if this happens, is it
possible that Australia's dollar would dvalue?
PM: I don't think so, and I think it would be highly improbable.
That's the clear answer I can give. I think that is the only
answer I can give in fact.
Q. Well, the devaluation of the oound sterling could affect
Australia's farm industries, and say bring a flood of speculative
money here, far more than has been potring into Australia
in recent months. Is this concerning you, and do you see some
vital areas of concern here
PM: The foreign exchanges will be closed at least tomorrow.
The British exchanges have closed and sp, too, have the Japanese,
so we have a little time to think. But what is important is
that the British Government through the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, has made it clear that there are no objective facts
on which Britain should expect a revaluation or devaluation
downwards, if you like. And I think that is probably true, / 2 
PM: so that what has happened in recent days has been speculative.
cont'd. But even if there were some depreciation of the United Kingdom
pound, it would not necessarily have a severe effect on us.
As you know, when we were looking at this problem in December,
we decided tLLo detach ourselves from the pound sterling, and to
associate our Australian dollar with the United States dollar.
Consequently, for the two reasons that I have just given, we
doubt whether this will have a very big impact upon us and that
includes the primary industries as wall.
Q. The floating of the storling pound, though, would in fact,
tend to make our exports to Britain dearer
PM: That is true, yes. But we don't know yet to what extent
it might occur.
Q. But it will occur to some extent You wouldn't argue
with that
PM: I wouldn't argue about that, but I wouldn't speculate.
Consequently I would not speculate to the extent to which it
would affect Australia's primary industries. I do notthink
it could be very substantial.
Q. Has the Government considered floating the dollar, as
some Sydney and Melbourne university economists have suggested?
PM: No, we haven't because we believe and I think most other
countries believe in having a fairly stable exchange rate.
And we do like some areas within which the exchange rate can
vary, but we want the band to be not too big. And we want the
United Kingdom Government and I know it's the view of the
United Kingdom Government that it get back back to a parity
of exchange and it fixes the band within which fluctuations
can occur, as quickly as it can. It knows that is in the
interest of world trade and worlddevelooment, and so do we.
Q. You were Federal Treasurer, I thin when the late Harold
Hoitwas Prime Minister...
PM: Yes, that is true.
Q. Prime Minister, you took a very strong stand on the pound
sterling crisis then, and you did have trouble with the Country
Party at that stage. Sir John McEwen, I think, was Deputy
Prime Minister then. Now, do you expect pressures...
obviously primary industry will be affected... you would
expect pressures from the Count-ry Party again in this area.';
PM: It is much too early to speculate and dangerous to do so
because we will -not get the kind of fluctuations in the
exchanges that we had previously. And, in my own view, looking
at it as I do at the moment, I don't expect any trouble about
this problem.
Q. You p robably could.... would you be prepared to say there
is certainly no prospect at the moment of a revaluation of
the Australian dollar 
PM: I would not speculate about this at all. I would be fairly
certain of this, that we will not change our parity with gold
or with the United States dollar, but that doesn't mean to say
that there might not be some fluctuation in relationship to
sterling, if it does devalue that is, move downwards.
Q. You think it is pcssible that the Australian dollar could
move downwards
PM:-The Australian dollar
Q. Yes.
PM: If I have created that impression, no, I do not. The
Australian dollar is strong and there is no reason why it should
do anything else than stay where it is, at least fcrthe time
being.
Q. Before Mr Anthony left for overseas, he told the Press he
was gravely concerned at the flood of investment and sp eculation
money pouring into Australia. He said he wanted decisive,
quick and realistic action on foreign investment. Prime Minister,
have you heeded those words How do you feel about that
PM: Well, Iwis the one who initiated probably the most farreaching
and in-depth~ enquiry into the Australian exchange rates,
and also the flood of money that is occurring into * Australia
from the international markets. Everyone who is really
interested in this problem should try and understand the analysis
that was made by the ~' easury. I have examined it, and my
officials have examined it in great depth, and we have decided
to present five papers to the Federal Ca) Anet dealing with the
problems that may emerge as, -for example, whethcr there should
be some regulation, or control of the flow of capital into
Australia, and whether we want better guidelines for borrowing,
whether we should do something about interest rates, whether
we should give greater flexibility for Australian corporations
to invest overseas and for overseas corporations to be able
to borrow money from us. Now, before anyone can come to a
precise conclusion which he knows will be for the benefit of
this country, he must have those papers from Treasury, and the
Government inust make up its mind what it will do. That doesn't
mean to say wee are not interested in them. We are vitally
interested in them, but wee want to be certain that when we make
a decision we do it in the best intcerests of this country.
Q. If you had to devalue, do you see this as being a sort of
political storm that could affect your electoral chances
PM: There is no prospect of Australia devaluing.
Q. Well, that is pretty final, Prime Minister.
Q. Before the next election
PM: I wil. Tive no other answer than tha-4t. There is no prospect
of us devaluing. ./ 4 
0. Prime Minister, I " would like to turn to defence and foreign
affairs. What is the future of the Five Power Agreement,
particularly if Labor won the Federal election, and the recent
controversy which you have had on your South-East Asian tour?
It would seem there is some sort of uncertainty as to where this
Five Power Agreement is going. i know you have underlined and
said in the second part, yes, we are definitely going to continue
with it. But Labor has said, well, if we win, we are not going
to worry much about it.
PM: There is no uncertainty so far as the Liberal Party is
concerned, nor so far as the Coalition Government is concerned.
And I can state our position precisely. We have Five Power
Arrangements with Malaysia and Singapore. We will keep them in
full and they will not be changed. We have no intention of
changing them. We have troops stationed in Singapore and
Malaysia and we have no intntion of withdrawing or reducing
them. In other words, on both scores, as to the Agreements
themselves, or the Arrangements temselves, as they are
properly called, and as to the stationing of troops, we are
firm on what we do. And I believe, too, well, I know
it's not a question of belief, it's a question of knowledge
the Singaporeans and the Malaysians want us to keep thcm there
and they don't want any reduction. And I think that even in
recent days, not only when I was there, but probably subsequently,
that is the view of the Singaporcan Government. And it is the
view of Tun Razak, who most recently said that these Arrangements
provide an umbrella for them and that they are probably in the
enlightened interests not only of Singapore and Malaysia but of
Australia as well, I wouldn't substantially differ from that
view. It is to the advantaqc of the three of us that the
Arrangements are maintained, and we will do so. As for Labor,
nobody can tell you exactly what they mean, but we do % now
what their long-term intentions are. Tha-is to get out as
quickly as they can. This sets the dividing line . betwen
the Government and the Opposition.
0. Prime Minister, on this issue of the Five Power Arrangements
and keeping a battalion there, the thing that seems strange to
me is that Tun Razak has nowhere actually denied the statement
of his official in the background briefing of the journalists,
who subsequently after you raised the issue of a clarifying
statement and this most recent June 19 statement you referred
to about it being needed as an umbrella, he has nowhere dcnied
the public servant's ztatment. Do you find it strange?
Pm. No I don't. I do don't. I do not find it strange. I
believe that the statement issued at his request by the Foreign
Office itself was a complete enough cxplanation and I could not
have asked for anything more. When it was supported by the
communique, I believe that our position was clearly stated by
both him as Prime Minister of Malaysia, and myself as Prime
Minister of Australia. Mr. Sulong is an able man and I would
make no commontary about him. NH is a civil servant, and I do
not think it would be proper for me or, for that matter, for
anyone else in a position such as mine, to enter into any
controversy what relates to a civil servant. I am satisfied with
which the Prime K. inister, represanting the Government of Malaysia
has said, and what Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, the Prime Minister 
representing the Government of Singapore has said, and I don't
want to enter into any controversy which relates to a civil
servant.
Q. The ANZUS Treaty, Prime ! Ninister, is one which Australians
have grown up with now, and have looked on with great respect,
yet Senator McGovern who is a Presidential candidate, and I
believe has a reasonable chance of winning the Democratic
Presidential nomination, if not the Presidential election, says
that he is going to pull out of ANZUS if ho becomes President.
Where docs that Wcave us?
Pm. First of all you have said he might have a reasonable chance.
There could be disagreements of opinion with you on that score,
but I don't again want to raise the question of United States
politics in Australia. That is their business. And while we are
interested in it, I doubt whether it is a proper matter for me to
be discussing here tonight. This is a Treaty, and treaties in
the United Statcs are part of the suprema law of the l and. We
regard ANZUS as crucially important to use, and I know the
United States Government, as it excists, regards it as crucially
important, too, and I have had assurances from Senator Fulbright,
the Chairman of the Foreign Ro. lations Committee that ho and I
take it he means his Committce, too regard that as a Treaty,
that they will maintain and I have no doubt that they will. So
I cant go any further than that. It is crucially important to
us, respected by the Government of the United States, respected
by at least the Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee of
the United States.
Q. I am wondering, though, whether it is crucially important to
them and I agree with you about our knowledge of American
politics because we ara not in a position to say who will win the
next Presidential elections, But nevertheless these are
possibilities and I am wondering whcther the Americans generally
are treating the ANZUS pact as strongly as we dc?.
PM. I think you are raising a political problom that is so
hypothetical. that it cannot be poeci~ ely answered. I can say
no more than I have already said that so far as the g~ overnments
of the two countries are concerned, ANTUS will be sustained. We
regard it as crucially important as you know the Labor Party
is backing and filling about it, and nobody really knows where
they stand on the AN7US Treaty.
Q. Prime minister, getting bac! to Malaysia for a moment. How
do you feel about Tun Razak's greater emphasis these days on
greater indepcndence of nations in that area and ASEAN nations?
Pm. I respect his views about noutralisation of the ASEAN theatre,
yes, that is true. But as he has made it clear, and as I have
made it clear, there is no inconsistency between the long-term
objectives of Malaysia and the objectives that we all share in
trying to onsure the peaca, freedom and the independence of
the South-East Asian theatre of Australia and of the other
ASEAN countries. But this question of neutralisation is a long,
long-term project. 
Q. Well perhaps five or ten years..... 2
PM: If I could just put it to you.. The idea is to get ten
nations into ASEAN. At present thereare only five, and when
that is done, they have to get guarantees from the three great
powers, and probably back-up from people like ourselves and the
New Zealanders and other countries. In other words, we wouldn't
be conceived of as a recinient of guarantees. We would be
looked at as giving some kind of support like the guarantor
countries.
Q. So you see Australian troops remaining even if this ASEAN
commnunity was expanded
PM: Well, if you use the word " expanded", that is a different
matter. I think thley would probably stay. But if you asked
me to go on for a period of say, five or six years hence, and
this is the time period we are thinking about, it is far too
long to try and speculate about it.
Q. SEATO gets under way on Tuesday in fact I believe you
are opening the SEATO Conference in Canberra?
PM: Yes, I am.
Q. Tgis is confusing these days to Australians. It seems to
be the poor relation to the ANZUS Treaty. Now, what future has
SEATO got, and why do we need the two, Prime Minister
PM: Wbll, you are using emotive words. In the case of ANZUS,
it is only between the United States, New Zealand and ourselves,
and virtually guarantees our inde ' pendence. That is why it is
crucially important to us. The SEATO Treaty relates primarily
to South Vietnam and to Thailand. These are the countries
covered by the Treaty, and it is a treaty that concerns the United
States. The President hims, 2lf has stated that the United States
will keep its treaty obligations, and we would be a peculiar
people if we distrusted the President of the United States at a
time when they have given such unbelievably strong support to
South Vietnam. . and shown their desire that South Vietnam should
remain free and that the neople of that country should have the
right to determine their future. SEATO, I believe has some
value, and while we know it has some 7al I think it is
in the best interest of Australia that it be sustained. I can't
understand those who, recognising that it has some value, would
want to have it destroyed.
Q. Prime Minister, recently a symposium in Me-lbourne, I think
three weeks ago, which was opened by the Foreign Minister, Mr
Bowen, and attended by exports on China, China-watchers and
academics, completely threw out the concept of the y ellow-peril
. and expansionist theories of China, Now, from Mr Bowen's
observation, is the Government changing its views slightly
towards China and that has existed in the past
PM: I think I must put this in two different.., from two
different sx~ ect. to you. First of all, we do want to
normalise our relationships, our diplomatic relationships with
the People's Republic of . i'ina, but we do not want to do that
at the expense of Taiwan. in other words, if we can get an 
Pi. accommodation with them which will recognise the present
( cont'dlrelationships between us, we would want to have recognition
with the People's Republic. That is our present position.
Two, we want the People's Republic to become part and parcel
of the world community, and we did take a fairly strong role
at the United Nations, not only to ensure that the People's
Republic became a member of the General Assembly, but that she
also had her seat in the Security Council. That was done,
we voted for them, we wanted them to be there. But that
doesn't mean to say that we are prepared to give up Taiwan
as theprice of getting recognition. Now, we have also in
recent Tonths if I can use words pretty close to those
used by 14x Bowen proceded in a normal way towards trying
to get a better accommodation and to improve the dialogue
hetween the two countries. Un to the moment, we haven't been
successful, but we will cantinu-with our efforts. And we will
do so in a way that we know is to the manifest advantage of
Australia, and we won't pay too big a price in order to
get the kind of accommodation that might otherwise be available.
Q. Prime Minister, what do you mean actually by " accommodation"
and " dialogue"? These are fairly vague terms. Are we actually
talking to representatives of the Peorle's Republic at this
moment or at this time?
PM. We have been talking in various capital cities and once at
the United Nations. We have been talking, yes.
Q. In Paris also?
PM. I don't want to mention which places we have been talking
in, but we have been talking in certain places
Q. Certainly in New York at the United Nations
PM: Yes.
Q. How are we going then Are we progressing more
PM: We are not getting ahead very fast, no. But the People's
Republic, the Gvernment of the People's Republic, knows our
position and they know just how clearly we are expressing
ourselves. In my view, and this applies under current circumstances,
I think you could take it that the ball is now in
their court.
Q. There has been no invitation to an Australian Minister
or no fresh invitation to an Australian Minister
PM: If there ever was one, there was no official invitaion
from the Gvernment itself. It came through sources in Hong
Xong that we could not have regarded as official. Rut since
we have not had any renewed invitation for an Australian inister
to go to Peking.
Q. Or a trade mission
PM: Or a trade mission. 
Q. Prime Minister, during your overseas tour it may have
been a little overshadowed, but you made some negotiations,
did you not, with the Government in Djakarta about the pos. 4ibility
of Australianbanks setting up there
PM: Not negotiations no that is not precisely the right
word. I did make enquiries about why there were no Australian
banks having branch associations there. And I was informed that
it was now too late. They would only let twonty-once branches
come in, or figurps of thatI--kind, anyhow. So I then looked at
what could be done. Could we have representative banks and
they said, yes, we could. Our groat hope is that we can
establish representative banks there. They won't be able to carry
out normal banking business, but they will be able to represent
their clients. And I want this to be done because undoubtedly
Indonesia is a country of great natural resourc e. Undoubtedly
its trade prospects will increase, and as they increase so, too,
will ours. So I want to be in the business as soon as we can get
there, and I would like representative banks, even branch banks,
to be established.
Q, Prime Minister, tur:. ing to unemployment and the local
economy now. The unemployment figure for last month must have
been a disappointment to you, particularly when it didn't drop
but it rose. Now what is the answer if this trend continues?
PM. Well, normally in the month that you are talking about it
does rise slightly, and it rose a little more than we wanted
it to or expected it to. As you know, we ever since Mr.
Menzies first established the Government in 1949, have not only
believed in but we have made a reality of the doctrine of full
employment. We have been remarkably successful. But we were
proceeding from a position where we had ovc-rfull employment and
measures had to be taken to control them and above all to control
inflationary pressures. Now unemployment has got a little or
somewhat too high for us. But we have taken action wherever
we have thought it has been necessary. As for example, in
September, again in February at the Premiers' Conference, again
at the Premiers' Conference last week, and in between times
as well, we have taken action in order to give a stimulus to
growth. And as growth proceeds, we hope that it will overcome
the difficulties that we now have relating to unemployment.
But if that isn't enough, then I can assure you we will take
further action. In other words, we will keep to the reality
of a full employment policy.
Q. Isn't it time, Prime Minister, to take it now. There are
something like 70,000 excess over job vacancies, and that is
more than twice what it was this time last year, I believe?
Pm. Well, I can't go into the detailed figures with you but
only last week we injected a massive ': tirnulus into the economy.
So I think we have taken the kind of action you suggested ought
to have been taken.
You think the handouts to the States ./ 9 
PM. I wouldn't call them handouts because they are a reality.
We gave them a big increase in what are called general revenue
grants. We gave special assistance to New South Wales, to
Victoria and to Western Australia, and of course, there is a
flow-on of that to what ar: called the claimant States. We
have increased the amount of money that is available for what
we call the quality of life to give better sewerage facilities,
better hospitalsand better education, and by these means we
hope the stimulus will be sufficient. And I think it is fair of
me to say this, too, to you and to everyone who cares to be
viewing, that the technical exnerts themselves believe that there
is a lot in the pipeline from our past actions and that these
should very soon be making themselves apparent, not only in
growth and demand but in employment.
Q. Prime Minister, prices and wages though, are still going up,
and I am just wondering whether you had discussions with Mr.
Marshall, the New Zealand Prime Minister, when he was here in
relation to the wages and price freeze which they have imposed
for five months and apparently is having quite a deal of success?
Phi. No, I did not. They have a unitary system of government, we
have a federal system. They have the power, we do not have the
power. But I think you should understand this and I want
every person in Australia to understand this that our problem
is one mainly associated with wage increases in excess of our
production or productive capacity. And if those wage increases
become excessive, then there is very little that you can do in
order to restrain inflationary influences. As well as that,
with industrial trouble, with the strikes we are having, with the
powerful unions operating outside the arbitration system, of
course this compounds the problem for us. So what we are doing,
whenever we get the chance is to appear before the Commission, or
if we can't appear before the Commission, we do our best to try
and bring it before them and see if we can reduce the industrial
anarchy, if we can try and keep some restraining hand on
excessive wage increases, which are the basis of all our problems.
Q. I am wondering whether our system is right? It is almost
like the dog chasing its tail. Unless you can teg the two
because as soon as you get a wage increase, up goes prices.....
PM. I deny that it is a case of the dog chasing its
tail. Basically, it stems from the fact that there are excessive
wage increases, and I think anyone with an elementary knowledge
of economics knows that once you get wage increases that are
in excess of productivity, you must necessarily have an
inflationary impact, although it might be over a period of time
before it shows itself. So first of all, we have got to get wage
increases, or average earnings increases under control. This
is basic, and I believe that the Commonwealth Government is doing
all in its Constitutional and legal power to try and keep these
increases under restraint.
Q. Prime Minister, I want to talk about the Budget for the moment
and ask whether you are going to loosen the purse strings there.
But on April 7 at a oress briefing in Canberra, you mentioned
fourteen categories of policies. 
Q. You said," We believe public opinion will best be served by not
cont. being hesitant in letting the public know what we think and why."
That was after a Liberal Party meeting. The categories were
the economy, development, defence, foreign affairs, quality of
life, urban development, arbitration, the law, national health,
national goals, education, social welfare and rural matters.
Now, have you really hit hard in each of those categories with
the strong policies that you promised to?
Pill. In most of them we have, yes. And you can tell tonight
what I have said about defence as to whether we are precise and
definite and know where we are going. The Lalbor Party doesn't.
Immigration, there is no doubt. Education, we took action
shortly after I made that statement to show what we are prepared
to do, not only for government, but for independent schools as
well. So we are prepared to take action as and when we think it
is necessary and as and when we think it is in the public interest.
And we give our reasons why. And the most recent example, and
the one I think shows just how quickly -we will act, is the way
in which we treated the Premiers at the recent Premiers'
Conference and Loan Council. That shows decisiveness of action.
That shows that we are prepared to do what we think is right,
and as I said a few moments ago, if we think more action is
needed, I can assure you we w~ ill take it.
Q. In the Budget?
PM. Yes, in the Budget or wherever else it happens to be. Before
the Budget if it was necessary.
Q. Perhaps with a decrease in personal income tax?
PM. No, I wouldn't speculate about details of the Budget at all.
In fact, I think any person who did that is, I think, doing a
disservice to the community. I believe it would be improper and
wrong. I certainly won't do it and won't make any forecasts.
Q. The 35-hour week, Prime Minister, is gathering quite a deal
of momentum now. Do you concede that it does have merit in somFe
areas where it could help unemplov~ nent?
I'M. I don't think it will hel unemplovmient. In fact, I believe,
that the 35-hour w.-ck, going over too wide a range of the economy
will create even greater problems for us than we have at the
moment. That applies particularly to inflationary pressures,
and the danger that inflation itself can cost us out of
international markets and create the probabilities or the
Dossibilities of unemployment. This is a point that I want to
keep on making. But I don't want to go too far about the
week at the moment because it is now before the Arbitration
Commission. I think that is the proper place where our arguments
should be put. I finish what I have to say on this, on this note.
I want every woman and every man in this community to know that
if we had a 35-hour week it would undoubtedly reduce production,
it would undoubtedly raise prices to a vcry high level, and would
create very severe problems for us in the future. This is the
biggest difficulty we face at the moment, and we will do all in
our power to try and restrain those inflationary pressures. / 11 
11.
Q. Prime Minister, what is ha-pening to the taxation review?
PM. The taxation review? We have decided upon it. We are now
waiting to get a panel of names from whom we can choose the people
who will make up the Commission.
Q. National superannuation?
PM. National superannuation is a matter that we have been giving
a lot of consideration to, but we have not yet come to any
conclusions about it.
Q. So they are a couple of those policy areas we mentioned
that are still handing.....?
PM. Well one isn't a policy area at all. One is choosing the
personnel, and we haven't had the amount of success we would like
in getting the people we want on it. But the Treasurer, I believe
is getting close to the stage where he can make a decision. On
the other issue of policy, that is a matter that I personally
believe has to be looked at in a wide context of fiscal policy
and what we might think about even in the long term.
Q. Prime Minister, I would like to quickly turn now, because
time is going to be our enemy, to the French nuclear tests.
Australians feel, generally, that they are behind New Zealand in
taking steps here to prevent these French nuclear tests. Now we
were a little bit slow in the United Nations meeting on the
environment in Europe, and I am wondering whether you feel we
couldn't be taking a more positive approach on these tests.
PM. Well, I believe that we came in a little, a very little,
slowly at Stockholm. But I would like to emphasise thiis to you
since 1963, we have been a party to the Partial nuclear Test Ban
Treaty, and we have objected whenever we have had the power to
do so, the opportunity to do so. We have objected to
atmospheric nuclear tests, and we have always strongly objected
to the atmosoheric tests of the French, and we led the way. We
are a party to the non-proliferation treaty the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty we initialled the agreement. And since I
have been back, I personally have taken a very strong attitude.
We have made representations to the Conference on Disarmament now
sitting in Geneva. I personally took to task the French
Ambassador when he raised this matter at the opening of the
nuclear facility just outside Sydney a few days aco. I believe
that we have taken sensible action, but I am not satisfied because I
do not believe that it is proper or right that France should
explode nuclear devices in the atmosphere in the Pacific theatre.
And we are now considering what more we can do. I have only today,
and yesterday, becn discussing this with the officials and also
with my colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs. 3ut we
want to act rationally, we want to act sensibly, we want them
stopped, but we want to act simultaneously in the interests of
this country.
Q. What sort of actions have you been considering, Prime Minister? / 12 
12.
PM. I don't think it is right that I should speculate on those
because I don't think it is right to create false expectations,
and I certainly will not do so.
Q. But you intend to take further action with the French
Government?
PM. I have written to President Pompidou asking him to stop
these tests, and he has replied saying that it is impossible, that
he willnot do) so. ' Where we will ao from there I will not
speculate now, but I will certainly be taking up more with my
colleague s.
Q. You have ruled, out, I suppose, the suggestion of a group., f
Ministers that we ought to oput.... .( inaudible)
PM. I have not ruled it out, but I don't regard it as a
prospect that would icad to success. I believe the one real
prospect is to mobilise world opinion, and with the New Zealanders
wie are doing what we can to mobilise world opinion. This is the
best, this is the wisest course to follow and we keep on letting
the French know where we stand and we hope to draw others in with
US.
Q. What do you think of Dr. Cairns wanting to sail in with the
" Esmeralda" into the
PM. That is spectacular but it would have no useful effect.
Q. Can you take any steps or would you, to stop the parachutiestS
who at this time, anyway, are scheduled to fly out tomorrow
morning according to them?
Pm. My latest advice, F-2 this was given to me within the course
of ten minutes prior to the time when I camne here, is that nobody
yet has asked or suggested to us that it should be done, and
certainly no-one has presented to us a fl~ ight plan. Although
we have reason to believe that it Mi ght hapen soon, but until
that happens, again I believe it is speculative. Without
discussion with my colleagues, I couldn't make a statement about it.
Q. Let's turn to~ the Federal elections now, cnming up in
November. Today's Sunday Press says that they are expecting
you to reshuffle your Federal Cabinet before that comes about and
that Mr. Bowen could be going to the High Court and also you will
have to find a Minister to take over in London. Now is this a
possibility, a reshuffle before the elections?
PM. I read the article in a Sydney paper. It is totally false.
I have not considered, and I have no intention of considering
a reshuffle before the next elections. None at all.
Q. Will Mr. Bowen be standing for his seat at the next elections?
PM. I hope so.
Q. Has he talked to you about T-hrcthor he may wish to stand down?
/ 13 
13/
PM. I wouldn't talk about confidential discussions between
any colleague on any subject whatsoever. But I have said,
answering that newspaper article, that I have not contemplated
a reshuffle before the election, and I won't do so.
Q. And Sir Reginald Swartz.....?
PM. Sir Reginald Swartz is like me. He loves the place and
wouldn't leave.
Q. Prime Minister, there has been a call.... I would like to
turn to social services now there has been a call for a Royal
Commission such as New Zealand had into social services and
poverty. What is the possibility of such an enquiry in Australia
at Federal level?
PM. On social services and poverty?
Q. Yes.
PM. My own belief is that on social services and poverty it is
up to the Government to find out what is wrong and when it knows
what is wrong, or when it even regards there are difficulties,
to solve them itself. And that is my attitude and I believe it
is the one we will take. And I think you could take it if you
look at our social services policies, ever since we have been a
Government way back since 1949, you can take it that we have
always been anxious to ensure that there is a continuing increase
in the purchasing power of the pension and we have always
widened the scope of our social service payments. This will
remain our policy. I can say no more about it at the moment,
because this is a Budget matter, one of the matters that has to
be kept for the Budget and I don't want to have it thought that
I am in any way at all compromising the attitude of the Treasurer
or the Minister for Social Services in the presentation.
8, Health and dental... these seem to be two areas that we
don't seem to be making much progress in. These costs are going
up and particularly dental fees are getting completely beyond the
average man in the street now. Is some consideration being given
here, in this area?
PM. Well we established the Kerr Committee, and Mr. Justice
Kerr was superseded by Mr. Justice Mason of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales. And he made recommendations relating to the
common fee in New South Wales; We adooted those. We increased the
Commonwealth contribution to the common fee in all States, and
we did that because we regard the health of the person who is
sick as of paramount importance. They will not have to pay any
additional part of that fee. We will pay it. But what we hope
to ensure is that a much larger percentage of the population will
be covered by the common fee than hitherto. And we have been
talking to the Australian Medical Association, the AMA, in order
to see if we can ensure that they will be the authority throughout
Australia for the fixation of fees. If we can ensure that this
done, I can assure you that we will have much greater prospects
of success with the National Health Scheme, whether of medical or
of hospital benefits. / 14 
A A 14.
Q. Incorporating dental?
PM. No. No, we have not looked at the problem of bringing
the dental services under the medical health scheme.
Q. On a more personal note, Prime Minister, it is about three
months since we last saw you, and you are still lonking fairly
fit. How many hours a day would you work?
PM. Oh, I suppose about ten. I work pretty consistently. I
don't have very much etertainment, but I would imagine it would
be at least ten a day. But you can't tell, you see
Q. What time do you get up, and what time do you normally get
to bed, in an average day?
PM. I get up probably.... I wake up round about six o'clock and
do some personal thinking between say six and seven. I get home
probably anything between half past eleven I am talking now
when I am in Canberra or if I am at home then I would work
until half past eleven, till round about twelve or one, sometimes
a little bit later, but that is probably a normal routine.
Q. Prime Minister, you have denied the Federal reshuffle. I am
wondering if you win the next election you will, of course,
have to form a new Cabinet whether you would consider inviting
Mr. Gorton back into the Ministry?
Pm. Don't tempt me to answer questions that are extremely
difficult to answer and are hypothetical. I wouldn't answer that
sort of a question, but in any event, so far as Mr. Gorton is
concerned, I refuse to discuss him in public because I don't
think it is proper.
Q. 1ow do you feel about the Government's fortunes at the moment?
Are you still glad it is a few months to ge before the next
election?
PM. Yes, I am, but what I can say I can make two comments.
First of all, we are doing all we can, and I believe we are
administering not only the economy, but the Government pretty
effectively under what have been in my view the most difficult set
of circumstances i can remember in all my experience of government.
So with all the difficulties, I think we are doing pretty well.
And I will have no hestitatinn whatsoever in any administrative
theatre, whether it haopens to be, say Papua/ New Guinea, whether
it be medical health and social services, whether it happens to
be the exchange rates, whether it happens to be in urban
development, " or urban renewal. In all these matters, we will
give the closest attention, and pretty devoted attention, too.
And I hope by the time the election comes round, we will be able
to get the approval of the Australian reople, and carry on in the
way we have carried on since R. G. Menzies won power for us
in 1949.
Q. Prime Minister, thark you very much for appearing on
" This Week". 



EN~ oiBtR GOf: o r release before 2.00 a. m. 27/ 6/ 72
4~ L1A~
FOR PRESS: PM No 65/ 1972
UNITED STATES MEAT IMPORTS
St~ atemnent by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William M4cMahon, C. H., M. P.
I have received advice that the President of the United
States has decided that restrictions on imports of meat will be
suspended for the remainder of 1972.
Australia welcomes this decision by the President. It has
been made in the light of rising meat prices in the United States
because of shortages in domestic supplies.
We are the major supplier of imported meats to the United
States. United States imports of meat were limited to 1,240 million
ounds in 1972. Australia's share of this quantity was 600 million
pounds valued at approximately A$ 270 million.
From November 1971 to the middle of June 1972, Australian
exports for arrival in the United States in 19172 were 30% above
the figures for the period November 1970 to the middle of June
1971. Apart from Australia, most other suppliers were having
difficulty in meeting their quotas for-1972. However, on the
basis of Derformance to date, Australia will have no difficulty
in fi!. ling its quota for 1972, and also supplying increased
quantities to the United States.
Ca * nberra,
26 June, 1972.
EMBARGO: 



OPENING OF SEVENTEENTH SEATO COUNCIL MEETING
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon
M. P. 27 June, 1972.
Gentlemen: I welcome you as distinguished delegates to the 17th meeting
of the Council of the South East Asia Treaty Organisation.
Although we are in the depths of winter here in Canberra, I assure
you that our welcome to delegates and their wives, and staff, is
a warm and sincere one. I particularly want to welcome General
Vargas, the retiring Secretary-General. We have known him as a
dynamic and energetic personality. I know, as a former delegate
and so does anyone else who has been connected with SEATO that in
the rugged tenacity and strength of purpose of General Vargas, SEATO
has no greater champion.
The South East Asian Treaty Organisation has occupied an
important position in the affairs of the South East Asian region
since its formation in 1954. Notwithstanding the many changes since
that time, it still has a meaningful role to play so long as
external threats remain to the peace and security of member and
protocol states, the continuing importance of the Manila Treaty
remains self-evident.
That Treaty has contributed to the stability of the region
for almost eighteen years and the Organisation has provided the
machinery for co-operation between member countries. Neither should
we forget that because of its obvious security value to regional
members and protocol states SEATO also contributes to regional
confidence. While the Trcaty and the organisation retain their
value and relevance and they do, despite the critics my
Government will continue to support and sustain the Organisation.
The presence here of the distinguished regional representatives
of Thailand, The Philippines and the Popublic of Vietnam and of the
distinquished representative of Britain, New Zealand, and the
United States, is also clear evidence of the importance these
Governments continue to attach to SEATO.
One has only to recall, that as recently as February of this
year, President Nixon reported to the United States Congress that
the Manila Treaty had made " a valued contribution to peace", and
that the Treaty had been and *'-4, ill be honoured". 
W 3.
During my visit, I was very much heartened by the trend towards
closer co-operation among these countries. I was very heartened
by the goodwill and friendliness I found there towards my own
country, and I can assure you they know we are anxious to assist
them with their very real problems. It is interesting to recall that
the Manila Treaty represented one of the earliest examples of
regional co-operation.
It is a sign of the times that the links which bind the
countries of South East Asia are being progressively strengthened,
by increased contacts and exchanges, and through co-operation in an
increasing variety of regional organisations and arrangements.
It is my wish that your deliberations at this Council meeting
should be successful, and that they will contribute further to
regional co-operation, progress and security. 



MACQUARIENETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. WILLIAM McMAHON
CH, MP 28 JUNE 1972
COM1MONWEALTH/ STATE RELATIONS
Good Evening You will remember that last week we had a meeting
in Canberra between the State Premiers and the Commonweath. This
was a very important meeting because it was the first step in setting
the course for the Commonwealth and the State Budgets for the new
financial year which begins on Saturday.
It was my fourth meeting with the Premiers as Prime
Minister. Once again, as in other meetings, the discussions were
really good. Three Libezral/ Country Party and three Labor Premiers
sat around the table with the Commonwealth. And we got down to
business in a spirit of' goodwill and co-operation.
Frankly, I don't think it could be much better.
Certainly it's a lot better than it has ever been before.
As you know,: the Commonwealth collects most of the
taxes you pay, . and a sizeable part is paid to the States to allow
them to finance their various activities.
The balance is used by the Commonwealth itselZ for
national needs like Defece and Social Services and to meet the
cost of running the nationAl Government.
One of the Commonwealth's objectives was to do
hat we could to make sure the States did not have to substantially
ncrease taxation. And I t4ink we gave a great deal of help.
his is what Sir Robert Aski-of New South Wales said:-
" I hope to avoid any increase in taxation altogether." / 2 
-2
And this is what the VictoriaiPrenier, Sir Henry Bolte, said:
" I think the most important thing is that there will not
be any increase in State taxation."
The Premiers' Conference and the Loan Council decide
the level of financial assistance g~ rants to the States and the
borrowing programmes for works and housing.
Incidentally, the Commonwealth has for many years
underwritten the State Government works and housing programmes to
thae extent that borrowings approved cannot be raised on the market.
Now you hear a lot of talk about haggling and about
the States coming " cap-in-hand" to the Commonwealt-h. -This hasn't
been the case in my Administration.
We have given new taxing powers to the States by
handing over the pay-roll tax t-o them, and the Premiers'now, tell
us their problems and give us an assessment of their needs before
we meet. So we are all pretty well informed when we sit down
together. Now let me sum up briefly the main results of the
Conference. First the Comimonwealth will provide the States in
1972/ 73 with $ 128 million more in revenue grants than they received
before. This will take the t~ otal amount the States will get from
us in the new financial year to over sixteen hundred million dollars.
In addition, the Commonwea'lth will provide as grants
nearly $ 250 million of the States' programme for works and housing
which we agreed will be $ 982 million and we guarantee that they
will receive the remaining part of the prograimme if it cannot be
borrowed. These are pretty big sums. In total the State
Governments and their authorities will have available from
Commonwealth sources and from borrowing approved by the Loan
Council something over $ 3,000 million in the next year. That.,
I believe, spells progress.
I mention two other matters.
We are still keeping a very watchful eye on
unemployment. As you know, we have already acted promptly to get
the numbers down. At the Premiers' Conference we decided to do
more. The Commonwealth agreed to increase the money to be
spent up to the end of 1972 from four and a half million dollars a
month to six mil~ lion dollars a month for the relief of nonmetropolitan
unemployment. The States will, of course, decide
for themselves in what non-metropolitan areas and in what way
they will spend this money. 
S-3-
They, like us, are pledged to a policy of full
employment.. S. We also talked about urban problems..
The Commonwealth shares the concern of the States
Sat the plight of some of our cities andtheir services. How can we
ease the traffic snarls-and the congestion in our cities.. and the
sprawl., that is taking place in our suburbs?
Under the Australian Constitution, of. course, these
are basically problems for-State Governments, as only they have
the power to act within their own borders. But the Commonwealth
takes . a deep interest in all this, because, after-all,--we are
one people, living in one continent.
The increased funds I have been talking about give
the States the opportunity to tackle the problems directly in the
way they know best. We have been-doing-mre -tban--iny peopl. e eali. I
for housing--and for-roads, for example.
So I repeat, the overall result of the Premiers'
Conference was good. It will do much to help our growth and
development, and promote more of the things you need to improve
the quality of our national life.
Goodnight. 



OFFICI2'. L OP.' ui OF THE DRIWI RIVER
DARWIN, N. T.
S2eech by the Pripic Minister,. thze Rt. Hion. William
Mci-Iahon, M-I. P. 29 June, 1972.
May I apologise to you for the delay in getting hare th~ is
afternoon. I am not any good at arithmetic, but I am -told that
we had a headwind of betw., een 100 and 22* 0 milas ner hour, ane2 that
delayed us for an hour.
I ho-e your rcmarks about your own P1. rc-mier turn out to be
wrong. I you havc your new Lcader and your new Statehood, not
at the time you get your next damff, b. ut at the time you get your next
power station,
This is trw first visit to the Torrit-ory sincz. I becacr Prime
Minister and I ca loo: i-ng forwar2! to it even though it migh1t only
be a few days. Bccausc it is mary vurnosed visit to sec the
mining dOVelOnn~ ents at Gove, to visit Darwin agaix. after a lcrng
absence, to have talks with the, aboriginos at the Yirrkala ' M'is: sion,
and to open tlia ne w Ab-original Transitional College in rnhemn Land.
First, mav i talk to yo-u butthe 7orritory and its future.
I and my Govarnment have faith in ! Iustralia andd in tho futuro of the
north. This dam 11r. eierhas said to cost $ Y! 9 million and the
largest ever build in the:. Territory -is unmistakable proof of that
f aith. Bu'_ let me put this project in the context of the total. volume
of new public works being providzed by the Conmnonwealth.
Since 1967, Cemrn cnwelth Capital expenditure of nearly two
hundred million d-ollars aFs been ap prove: d, and total Commonwealth
capital and maintenance expend~ iturLe has beer. almost 630 million
dollars. ' A lot of monay, mione\ iell spcnt because it is
providing the basic infra-structuire: for dev' lcpment and for progress.
Let uF, take mining first. big ventures at Gavc, Groote
Evlandt and Tcnnant Cre; ek have involved new investment of almost
400 million dollars. The conner and gold mines at Tennant Creek
and the manganese mine at Groote_: ' Eyelandt arc alread y major income
earners for us. 
Production of bauxite at the 300 million dollar . Gove project
commenced in 1971. By mtid-1973 the project will be producing
1.4 million tons of bauxite and one million tons of alumina a year.
This will include 60 million dollars of export income.
These, and other mining projects, have attracted large-scale
private capital, modern technology and people. Private
initiative has been encouraged, and services have been provided by
the Commonwealth Government, in order to get these projects of f th6'
ground. But it is fair to say the development has only been made
possible by the faith and enterprise and large-scale investment of
the companies involved.
Then there ' is the investment in the pastoral industry, in
tourism and in prawning.
More than a decade ago, we took the initiative to construct
beef roads. To date, more than thirty million dollars has been
approved in expenditure on these roads. This has given a significant
lift to the pastoral industry and to overal national and local
development. Today 96 per cent of the cattle turned off are
transported by road, and the value of the turnoff has doubled to more
than 22 million dollars a year.
I am sure the tourist industry has uncalculable but enormous
potential. In fact tourists are now spending more than $ 20 million
a Year here.
Ta6 -~ ain~ industry, which has developed over the last three
years, is supplying about a third of the nations's prawn exports.
* This remarkable growth in the basic industries has led to a
rapid increase in population, as Mr. Reiher said, at a rate of about
nine per cent a year.
Darwin and Alice Springs are attractive in themselves and have
become the fastest growing towns in Australia. They've nearly
doubled their population over the Past six years, and can no l. onger
be regarded as frontier towns.
During the last five years, the Commonwealth has matched this
outstanding growth by programming now works in the main Territory
centres valued at very nearly 100 million dollars. This means a big
improvement in the quality of life for the people who live here,
and who want to come here in the future.
The government iJs also deeply concerned in case there should be
any possible conflict between the full development of the nation's
mineral wealth and the need to preserve the nation's environment.
In the reconciliation of these conflicting interests, we have
adopted a realistic and I believe, a practical ap * oroach. our
Paramount concern is Z2ustrali&amp;' ncitie-na iiuLe(: rcst, iin.-the welfare
in its widest sense of our own people.
The government would be irresoonsible if it failed to
develop the recently discovered uranium deposits, but we are not
interested in development for development's sake. ./ 3 
I1
3.
Wo ar,? coPnc? rnud about ccnsorvation of t'ic natural environment
an'. the preservation for posterity of unique feat. ures of the
ecology. The study which we have initiatedi on various, aspects of
the onvironment in areas of potential uraniuim develooment in the
Alligator River region, is an exanrple of our poliCy in action.
This study, jointly fi.? aic-d by tho government and the mining
comp:.. tes, is estimated to cost rnor than 500 thousand dollars.
it will Pd-kntify and evaluate th flora arid fauna and other
natural resources of tile area, so that the mining development_ can
proceed in a ; way consistent i ti the prteservatc fauiu n
. rrcrlaccable gart of our country.
The government's aim is-crnsistent with the descrP-ntion by the
Secretary of the Interior in th tUnitr-d States.-
proror balance between rz-ourcc: develonment and the
maintenance of leasant surround ' incrs'
We want to saee r-evelonment that i,. ill make a pormnennt contribution
to th-e Australian economy . in a 1., xy. which will prt: serve tho inherited
values of our own environment, anl. which will retain for all
Australians thez, features of t1~ rat ocnvircornt whilch Should ' ne
preserved and enjoyed.
ThIs lai is a credit to-all whio havc: worked on it, and who
have completoA it ahe ad o--f scho. d-ule7.. It hrings to over 15 million
dollars the total exnanditure anoro-a. 1 the-Commonwealth on new
watctr Fupl'.]. y 3? ro) jccts in the-rlorritorV cvor the Last five years.
' Congratu2. . tion: 7 to th-1'! rthern Torri. tcry aurninistratio'n,
resnonsible for the watezr surnply; to the Department of Works
tho aesign and construction authority; tc th. e main contractors,
McMahon Construction Pi. Ltd. of Adelae I can't claim any
r-zflected glor.-and to the oth; r contractors and organizations
involvzd here today.
I now have the very greatest pleasure in dcclaring the Darwin
River Darn open. 



OPENING OF THE ORD RIVER DAM
KUNUNURRA, W. A.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon
William McMahon, C. H., M. P. June, 1972.
Mr. Premier, Mr. Chairman, Sir Reginald, Sir Charles, my " ther
Parliamentary Colleagues, Distinguished Guest, including my own
Minister for the Interior, Hunt, Ladies and Gentlemen.
Before us as you can see stretch the waters of the greatest
man-made lake that has ever been built in Australia. It is a
unique and imaginative enterprise.
For years we have talked about the Ord Irrigation Scheme
here on Australia's North-West frontier, in a region where some of
our pioneers wrote their names into the record of our history.
This is the country to which the overlanders came in the last
century. Let us, now, remember those adventurous men and their
families, who drove their cattle until they reached the Kimberley.
The story of the Durack family is only one which enriches the
history of the far North-West. They first crossed our continent to
settle here in 1835, and it took them over two years to get here.
Today the site of their homestead, named Argyle, lies under this
lake. It is singularly appropriate, therefore, that the Government
of Western Australia has given the name Lake Argyle to this
great stretch of water.
The early pioneers broke the silence of this land. Since then,
the modern pioneer has come, and technology has made its contribution
to the pace of development.
The Ord River Irrigation Scheme is one result, with this dam
as its central feature. Storing millions of acre feet of water,
it gives a new kindcE like to this area: To the cotton and other
crop farmers, and to the adventurous Australian families who lived
and have made their homes here in Kununurra. They have demonstrated
their confidence in the North West in an unmistakble way. / 2 
It is not my interntion today to recite the history of the
Ord River Scheme although I want to say I have had a long
association with it ever since it was first mooted in the
Commonwealth Cabinet.
In some ways, it has been a controversial project, which has
had its troubles and its problems. Many have been overcome but
new ones crop up to test the skill and energy of the farmers,
research workers, and of the officers of the two Governments
Commonwealth and State as well.
Let us put problems aside to talk about the engineering
triumph this dam really is. Let us acknowledge the spirit, the
enthusiasm and the labours of those who live here.
The North-West no longer sleeps in the past. It is
bustling, adventurous and Drogressive. Beef-roads have soread
across the Kimberley. Highways link the outposts with our ports
and with cities, and the jet-port at Kununurra has conquered
distance and brought the Ord River community into the web of a
rapid transport system.
I am pleased to mention here that the Commonwealth recently
approved a major upgrading of the road to the Kimberley on the
Northern Territory side of the border. This will provide a high
standard, all weather link through to Katherine, Darwin, Alice
Springs and on to the east.
The West Australian and Commonwealth Governments have taken
many initiatives together in the Fast Kimnberley. We began in 194G
when the two Governments financed the Kimberley research station.
We brought the CSIRO to the area, and it is still here and will
continue to do valuable work. The Commonwealth has contributed many
millions of dollars to assist the West Australian Government. in its
development programmes in the whole of the North-West.
West Australia has always had faith and confidence in this
Ord Scheme and i the impact it would make in the East Ximberley and
in the North. It was against this background that the Commonwealth
Government decided in 1967 to provide funds within a limit of
$ 48 million for the main dam and the development of the irrigation
area around here.
You, Mr. Premier, as you so well said, as Minister for Public
Works were a driving force for this project in its early stages
and so were Sir David Brand and Sir Charles Court in later years.
The results of this enterprise and co-operative effort not
only by governments but by people cannot yet be measured fully.
Much has been achieved but and I repeat more or less what you said
1r. Premier there is much still to be done.
But let me mention two or three developments that stand out
at this time. First cotton. I amn told thc cotton area per
farmer has almost doubled in about seven years. The yield has reached
top world standard now 1000 lbs. of lint per acre or nearly
double what it was seven years ago. That is a first-class
performance. 
3.
Then there is research. The experts tell me the Kimberley
Research Station has made good progress on hybrid cotton, cattle
production, peanuts, safflower and sorghum. So, too, have the
West Australian Department of Agriculture, and scientists and
researchers of the University of New England in New South Wales
who are also working in this area.
These applied experiments will help to increase the range
of activities here, and give the Ord region further economic
diversity. They will make their contribution, Mr. Premier, to the
goals and to the ideals that you have mentioned.
So we have here today something made and something in the
making. It is an interesting and spectacular country and provides
the attractions and climate, I believe, for tourists. Who knows
that at some time in the future this Lake could be the site of a
great water carnival for the North and the North-West, attracting
overseas tourists who want to see the granduer of our new
frontiers. Both governments have been alert to preserve the natural
beauty of this environment, and funds have been provided for
ecological studies over a very wide area. This is a place, I
believe, where man and nature can live in harmony.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we have here today a huge dam
a great lake and a new horizon for the East Kimberley and the
North-West. Those associated with this project have planned and built
well. I would like to mention the personnel of the constructing
authority, which was the Public Works Department of Western
Australia, and the contractor, Dravo Pty. Ltd. which was awarded
the contract in world-wide competition. I cr-:-; aatulato them on the
jobs they have done so well.
This is part of our nation-building, and we are a great
country part of a process that is going on all. over Australia
today. I new have the very greatest pleasure n officially declarii
the Ord Piver Dam open. 



PRIME MINISTER
OFFICIAL OPENING OF NABALCO PTY. LTD. ALUMINA PLANT
GOVE, N. T. 1 JULY 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon
CH, MP.
Many of you have come from other parts of the world
for this ceremony, and many more of you have flown in from
" down South". I have come from Darwin and Kununurra, where I
have had the pleasure of inaugurating several other northern
development projects. I want to thank you, Mr Meyer, the Chairman of Swiss
Aluminium Limited of Zurich, and the Australian partners, for
inviting me to take part in this opening ceremony.
I am sure I speak on behalf of all the guests when I
say how impressed and enthused I am by what I have seen and
heard. I understand that this impressive and massive alumina
plant has been'korking up" for about a month now. And I am told,
too, that we may have to wait a few weeks more before we see the
first production alumina perhaps another five or six weeks.
I wish I could stay that long but, as you will know, it would
pose difficulties in a year like this.
Mr Chairman, you and your partners in this
European and Australian joint venture can take pride in the fact
that this plant will be " on stream'" one month ahead of the
company's own schedule, and five months ahead of the deadline
agreed to with the Federal Government.
It is now just over three and a half years since the
joint venture agreement was signed, with the present level of
per cent Australian participation. The partners then thought
that exports of bauxite would commence in 1P71, that the first
stage of an alumina plant of half a million tons per annum capacity
would be complete by tih end of 1971, and that expanded production
of a million tons a year of alumina would be achieved by the end
of 1974. / 2 
2
In 1969, these objectives had to be revised to take
account of the delay flowing from financial reconstruction of the
project. Taking this into account, it is all the more remarkable
that in this remote and undeveloped part of Australia, where literally
all the basic infrastructure had to be provided before construction
could begin, you have completed this alumina plant ahead of target.
There must be few projects of this size, cost and complexity anywhere
in the world which have been completed in such a short period.
This is a tribute not only to you, Mr Meyer, and to
your executives, but to the many contractors and sub-contractors and
to the multinational workforce who have met their deadlines, and shown
again that Australian and international partnership can operate
successfully to bring a major mineral project into operation.
We have already seen this happen in the West, we are
seeing it here again today in the North. I am sure that with
experience as a guide and barring the unpredictable, as the project
develops, it will beat the forecasts and the target dates for future
development. Another illustration of this success story is that the
plant will produce one million tons of alumina per annum by next July,
sixteen months ahead of schedule. By then, the Gove Project will be
generating an annual export income of $ 60 million, and that income
could double in the foreseeable future, with expansion of the alumina
capacity and possible eventual development into aluminium refining.
There has been, as we all know, a downturn in the
aluminium industry. That is true, but the speed at which this venture
is going ahead shows the confidence of the industry in the fact that
this is a temporary situation.
This project has in fact an assured market for the
whole of its alumina production for twenty years, and the Australian
partners may choose to sell uo to 30 per cent of production themselves.
For the basic raw material, bauxite, Gove alumina
can arrange contracts for up to 40 million tons over 20 years. It
has already contracted 33.5 million tons, including 19.5 million tons
to Japan, and 14 million tons to Eurooe. This is private enterprise
in action and deserves to be praised by all of us.
To gain some idea of the significance of this project
to the Territory, we should recall that the total value of mineral
production here in the Northern Territory in 1962-63 only nine
years ago was $ 7.5 million, and five years ago, it was only a
little over $ 20 million. Gove is a project of great national significance. It
makes its contribution in many ways to export income, to employment
and, if you will forgive me as a former Treasurer, to our taxation
income. / 3 
-3
It bears mentioning again that these achievements have
been made possible by a co-orerative effort between Australian and
overseas investment, investment that has been welcomed because it has
played a dynamic role in Australia's general economic development
throughout the postwar period. It has added to our domestic savings,
even though they have been high by world standards. These investments
have also brought here technological resources and managerial know-how
which might not otherwise have been available to us.
Recently, in Canberra, we have completed a far-reaching
review of overseas investment policies. As a result, we will soon
be presenting five papers to the Cabinet dealing with
whether there should be some regulation or control of
capital inflow;
whether we need better guidelines for borrowing;
the question of interest rates;
whether Australian companies should have greater flexibility
to invest overseas; and
whether there should be more flexibility in overseas.
corporations borrowing here from us.
These papers will be considered with the objective of ensuring that
the decisions made are unmistakably in the best interests of Australia
and Australians. It is obviously in the national interest to ensure thait
there is major participation by Australian companies in ventures of
this kind. I am glad that the Australian equity of 30 per cent
may be increased to 50 per cent depending on future programmes.
Australian companies may not have the majority financial
holding in this venture, but I understand there has been a true takeover
on the staff side, and that Australians now occupy some 60 per cent
of senior managerial Positions. As well, it is the company's policy
that Swiss managers will be progressively replaced by Australians.
Mr Meyer, it is more than satisfying to me, as Prime
Minister of Australia, to oen this plant with the knowledge that it
will process Australian natural resources in accordance with the
policy of the Federal Governmrent, and it will make an important
contribution, not only to decentralisation and northern development,
but to the prosperity of this wonderful and developing country of ours.
Mr Meyer, to you and your Australian colleagues and to
all the people present here too, I can say that it is with the
greatest pleasure that I officially open this plant and look forward
to seeing it get really into production. 1 



OPENING OF DHUPUMA COLLEGE
GOVE, N. T. 1 JULY, 1~ 72,.
Speech by the Prime Hlinister, The Rt. Hon. William ?' c. ahon
M. P.
Ladies and Gentlemen, and most importantly, boys and girls:
Thanks for the invitation to come here today to open this
school. Down south, we hear a lot about this very fast-growing
and developing part of the Northern Territory, but not enough
Australians get the chance to come up here personally to see for
themselves what is going on.
On Australia day five months ago, I made a statement about
my Government's policies for aboriginal citizens. It covered
important questions relating to the future progress of the
aborigines themselves. Some of my comments may not be known to you,
so I shall try to tell you what I said in that statement.
We had five changes to make in our programmes and policies
for aborigines. First we wanted to ensure that aborigines have
free and unimpeded access to the rights and privileges of our
society. We want to encourage and assist them to keep and develop
their own culture as a worthwhile and wholesome part of Australian
life. We want to emphasise that overy aborigine has the right to
say how closely and how-soon he will become integraded into the
mainstream of Australian society.
This is more likely to happen when aborigines retain their
own identity, traditions and their own culture.
The third point of my statement on Australia Day was that
our objectives must be based on plans which recognise the wishes
and the aspirations of the aborigines themselves; and which provides
the opportunities to develop their own personalities and abilities:
And which involve the aboriginal people themselves in the working
out of those plans.
The fourth objective is for government programmes to ensure
that aboriginal citizens manage their own affairs as much as this
is practicable in order to improve their potential and ensure
their fullest partici. ation in the national progress: And further
so that handicaps in health, housing, education and vocational
training can be reduced. / 2 
We also want to remove the few rcmaining laws which
discriminate against aborigines.
I cannot emtnhasise enou,-1-01. at this statement of policy
objectives means in effect that Australian as a people, through
the Federal Government, recognise that aborigines have many problems
and difficulties notf7, ce. by '--thcr .7trnlinn. It ma ns thert w,:
will -'-ovoryt!, i1n7 * ssill see that -~ ur abor~ rri-nal citizo: ns have
th cortunities to--reach at least the sam~ e standards of living and
education as are anjoyed b~ y all other Pustralians.
The opening of a newr school is, I believe, a big event in any
community; But the opening of a new school to meet the needs of
aboriginal. communities is an evan bigger event. Soon in these
buildings there will be new, young, fresh minds who will play their
Dart inl the future of our country.
May I snpeac ow.% to the older people here, and particularly to
the parents. * You havo., and] you will see many changes -chancles which
have brought and will bring you and your families benefits as well
as problems. Your children are now grow'ing up in a very different
world to yours, and for that matter even to mine. School will
fire their minds. The: y will ask questions and perhaps question the
authority of their parents.
Seeing these chang-ms might influe'nce parents to take their
children away from schi-ool. You must not let this hap~ pen: It is
better to accerot that our children will wa nt to ' change the worlti.
Some of you may feel that knowledge will loosen the bonds
between children and their parents, and load them to neglect: their
old ways. We must try nnd haln them enjoy both the new and the
old. Schooling should teach children to resnpect both old and new
ways, and should forster a child; love and respect for his parents,
his home and his culture.
To you students I say--Work hard3 at school because every
bit of knowledcae will make you better E1Pedto face the outside
world when you have grown into youn; j men and' women.
Ohupuma College is thc second residential school in the
Northern Territory for aboriginal children. Kormilda, in Darwin,
was the first. A third college is now being built at Alice S-rings.
It will cost a lot of money, but money is not important. What is
important is the onnortunity which these colleges provide for young
UreonAe. Kormil-da means "' tomorrow" and Dhunumua, as you know, means
" looking up" t. These names are well chosen, and -will enourage you
to look up to your life of tomorrow. Twenty-eight of you young
people come fro~ m Kcormilda. I want you to bel-p Dhupuma develon in
the same way. You should think of it, nct sn much as anothe-r school,
but rather ft a place of opportunity and riewarding assocation.
Having said this, it now gives me very great oleasure to
officially declare this College npen. 



PRIME MINISTER]
LUNCHEON FOR P-LUM7-INA PW7.' JT OPENiING
GOVE, N. T.
Speech by the Prime fiinistCer, the Rt-. -I'ic. Willia-m
icahon, 1 July, 1972.
Mr. Chairman Ihave bezeri ass) ciate-' with Cove evor siflco the beginning.
In those d-ays it w-. as F, wast In those av wo couldn't hav3
t~ oqhtthat the -heeaotr anh as now, taken nlace coul; 1
conceivably hav eventuateD-. So yrou can imagine how I fLcoming
to this arca anA' bein~ g able look me an-: see ' athas
hap;:? n&amp;! 2 t-o( ay.
Your corperatinn is now th--third! largast -or at least
Gove is now tho thir,. 2-largor , t community in the Territory, and
judgecd by what we yev: , o far szcn, it a fnr cry from whiat I
call " roughing it" s in thi:-r. ays whc--n-I first camne up hero. And,
too, this is cnL, of the la-rgt:-. st sinale-stage -,. roje,-cts undertaken
by private: enterprise in Australia, an(! by far the largest in thc
Nort-Ae , n Territorv.
The Territory itself, as you know, is tho fastest growing
area in Lustralia with a nonulotion avcra-ing inlgot about
9 per cent ner annum. This' coulld have -occurred unless
.2c. loomrits like vc had made such1--'--henomenal growth possible.
that is not all, b:-cauoe t-hisl projcti.-uttndn
example of planneld dvlme'ofa rcmotc area, and it is boing
developed on th Arnhcm Land PAboriginal Reserve.
This unusual alnd novcl location ha5 and will continue to
raise problems. But our nroblems must bje understood and policies
de'veloped against t h1ihi S t oricanl fact that over th. e yr-ars large
areas of t-he Northern Territcry larcrar than the United-Kingdom
or, if you %, ant an Australian c. omoarison, larger than Vi1ctoria, have
ber sct aside as ri-serv-cs for thc uso and benofit of the 22,000
aborigincs who live he,: re.
Some; 110 12ees's of threa% and a half million acres have been
rovod on these rc~ szrv-. The great mjority of them have beon
aipprovold for aboriginal commnuniti. es. I. re:-cent times, we -avco
a'nproved threa pastoral le-aseri totalling about 5,500 square miles
to ab-original grounc. 
It is now part of the history of Gove that the aborigines
on the Peninsula claimed hereditary rights to the land. The
Territory's Supreme Court ruled that Yirrkala aborigines have no
legal basis for their claim.
This decision led to a wide-ranging policy review. I think
I have been associated in a very deep way with that Committee And
we had that review in order to find out exactly what we could do
in order to ensure that not only do the aborigines have their
reserves of which they have permanent occupation, but as well, we
wanted to give them a tenure, which they would be able to use and
use for their advantages.
I was able to announce on Australia Day, the 26th of
January, exactly what we would do. A central feature of the
statement I then made was the proposal for a new form of general
purpose leaseholding. I wellremember at the Cabinet discussions
then and there deciding to call it a multi-purpose lease, because
not only was it going to be used for a variety of purposes that
were associated with mining or commercial purposes or anything else
that might be involved in it. But we had these multi-purpose leases
and we would grant them within aboriginal reserves, and those multipurpose
leases would, in fact, be renewed.
May I clear up something here, because if there is one
difficulty I have felt over the time I have been associated with
this, it is that either people didn't want to know, or if they
knew, they didn't want to do anything about it.
But what I want to emphasise to you is that the reserves
themselves are of permanent duration, and they are for the
aborigines themselves. Within that we have the general purpcse
or the multi-purpose leases within those reserves, and of course
they can be granted by the Loan Board on which there are two
aboriginal representatives, and they can be renewed if the
aborigine people themselves make the application and the Board
itself decides they should be renewed.
For these reasons, I fail to understand( again as one who
is profoundly committed to the ideal of giving the aborigine all
the opportunity all the opportunities that a country can give)
I cannot understand the constant cricicism we still have about what
the reserves mean, and what within those reserves the multipurpose
leases mean as well.
Now, at the same time as I mention these multi-purpose or
general purpose leases, I think probably my friend, Ralph Hunt would
prefer me to at the same time we decided on a policy
relating to mining on the aboriginal reserves.
We considered whether prospecting and development on
reserves should be prohibited for the present. We concluded it
was in the national interest as well as in the interests of the
aborigines themselves that mineral exploration and development
should continue. But within this context, we are consulting with
those aboriginal communities which might be affected, so that
their welfare can be fully taken into account before mining
applications are approved. / 3 
6 
In the case of exploration applications, we have consulted
with aborigines having bona fide tranditional interests in the
areasinvolved. The aim of these consultations has been to inform
them of the type of work to be undertaken and to identify any
sitescf special significance which must not be disturbed.
As well, if aboriginal communities are interested in
exploration rights, their applications may be granted preference,
subject only to their a1. ility to carry out an exploration
programme and not necessarily with sophisticated techniques.
In the case of most applications by non-aborigines, we
expect exploration right'-s will be granted, and that satisfactory
development conditions to protect the interests of aborigines can
be negotiated. Where this cannot be done, or the Aidministrator
believes development would be prejudicial to the aboriginal community;
development rights may have to be deferred, for the time being.
These guidelines for development are aimed at securing
the maximum involvement for aborigines in projects, and a real
participation by them in their benefits.
There is one other aspect of prospecting for minerals that
I thinkl should mention. It is import ant to know what mineralisation
occurs on these reserves. And the only way td find out is to have
a reasonable policy of exploration and development. We have done
this without sacrificing in any way the interests of our own people,
our own aborigines.
At Gove, royalties from the bauxite and alumina will. be
about $ 550,000 initially. Within a few years, they are likely to
exceed $ 1 million per annum. * This money will be paid into the
aborigines benefits trust fund for all aborigines in the Territory.
In our review arising from the land rights decision, the
Government decided that 10 per cent of the royalties from Gove
should go to the Yirrkala community because of the special impact
of this project on them.
When we announced that decision on Australia Day, no date
was specified. I a= now glad to announce that we approved
arrangements only last week for this 10 per cent payment to apply
retrospectively from the time of the first royalty on Gove bauxite,
that is, 31 March 1970. This means the first pra yment to the
Yirrkala community, which is now due and has been approved, will be
$ 21,488. This money w'ill be Paid into a special fund administered
by the local Aboriginal Council whose representatives of the
Yirrkala community are at this function today.
I have had the pleasure of talking to some of you
previously about a number of your problems and I was glad of the
opportunity to visit you yesterday. I realised then, more than I
have done before how the people of two separate and distinct
cultural backgrounds are living close together here.
One group, the aboriginal people, is in a less favourable
position to cope with the problems presented by a new community
nearby. This is not only a problem for government or the
management of Nabalco. f 
a Sb
I A
I 
It is a problem which concerns averone who lives here. It is a
problem that concerns the Northern Territory Administration, and my
colleague Ral'ph Hunt. It is a oroblem that concerns me and my
Government. In such situations a balance of interest naturally has to
be struck. I think that whenever questions of competing interest
arise, weinve to find a fair balance betwieen the interests of the
aborigines and the general community.
To put it very simply, those who come here to develop the
natural resources should be ' prepared and ever ready to understand
the views of the aboriginal People and to make concessions to their
views. Unless this is donu, the-result could be a social environment
unacceptable to any of the residents.
It is therefore most important that the European community,
the main workforce on the ground at Gove, develops good and happy
relations with the aborigines.
The development of Nhulunbuy is of particular interest to
me and my Government. It is one of the few examples where the
Commonwealth has participated directly with private enterpris~ e at
the initial development stage.
Nhulunbuy was built at a cost of $ 45 million of which the
Commonwealth is contributing nearly one-third. Private enter~ prise
has taken the balance and has shouldered the major burden of infrastructure
in this multi-million dollar project. Theirs bas been a
splendid contributiJon here for the benefit of the aborigines and
Nabalco alike.
Surely, and for me particularly as Prime ? finister, it is
worthy of special recognition that the Gove partnership has taken
big commercial and social risks and has been able to achieve our
goals in their own interests, and those of the nation, and they
have beaten all their target dates.
An objective of our policy in the negotiations with the
Cove Companies to which I would like to especially refer and I
want to do so again for background of contemporary social thought
and trends was our desire to minimise ecological changes in the
environment and to avoid the effects of Pollution.
Stringent conditions were imposed relating to reclamation
and regeneration. We will want to know that the companies affected
accepted these obligations more than five years ago, and they have
lived up to every single one of them.
This in itself provides the perfect answer to those who
claim for their own reasons that the Government and the mining
industry have given little thought in the past to environmental
matters. From their past performance, we know that the companies
have a genuine wish to co-onerate with the Government in every way,
not least in the fields of aboriginal advancement and environmental
protection. 
It is worth recording and I can nrobably record this in a
stronger way than most n c. ope th--at the Cove Aqr. gornent was
negotiated long before my sttatemon-t of January aboriginaJ.
policies. Indeed, I can emnhisise, that this agreement in some ways
led to that statement.
We in tha Governmnt look forrward with confience to
continuad co-operation with the partnershi7 in this and in other
fields. Having said all this, may I now ask you every one of
you to please charge your glasses and (: riflk with me a toast
to the joint venturers for their cntri&gt;. ution to the development
of our Nrth and to th1 devlonzont of our own country. 



EMBARGO : NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE-6 * 30-PM (' EST)-
PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIr NETWORK
W! E KLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRI ? M. 1INiSTER, TH-E RT. 1,1N. WILLI7M !" cMATJON
Cli, M P JULY 1972
NcRUmERN DEVELOPMENT
Good Evening I thought on this occasiorn I would vary the diet a
little and talk about sonic of the things that make Australia such
a great and wonderful country to live in.
Some time ago, I received an invitation to go up
to the North that is the Far W. est, ' East and West Kimberley,
Cove and Darwin. And t-he matters that excited my interest were
t%-hese. Australia is a country that needs a tremendous amount of
1w. ater conservation. W~ need oxrnorts in orier to permit our
dcve lopment to go on a-nd our standards of living to imnrovr..
We also have -the nroblems of the environme-nt, anal
I also wanted to make anquirles, if I could, about the Crown of
Thorns Starfish and the Groat Barrior Roef.
First of all, then about iwater conservation. I was
invited up to ovnen a dcm in Darw; in that will cqiva water suplyl
there for many years to comei. A~ nd Darwoin is, I believe, thet
fastest-growing capital if I might uri that word in Australia.
T was alba invitod to go across to the Ord Damp.
And to give you an impression of what it is ] ike, the Ord will
zervice an area t-wi ce as big as Victoria and will have nine times
as mnuch wate-r as Sydney Harbour.
i. n tim~ e there is no douht tha-t this water conservation
will pay big dividends for us.
Up th." ere 7hen talking about tie Ord scheme, -they
talk about " Sydharl. s" ( Sydney HWarboui). And they mea-ure -the
water flow bv the amount of: water in the Sydnfey Hlarbour that
would pass through the gateways in the course of half an hour,
and believe me, it is a tremendous amount of water. 
2
I then moved on to the second place that I had to
open, and that is the works in Gove, right up in the far North-
East of the Northern Territory. About $ 300-$ 350 million has been
spent here in order to establish bauxite and alumina works. There
is a difference between the two.
And in the not too distant future, we will be exporting
overseas approximately $ 60 million worth of bauxite and alumina per
annum. There is a large Australian holding in the Corporation
and the Australian holding can be increased should they wish to do
so in the future. I then went on to a place called Mission Beach, just
south of Cairns. My main reason for going was that it was on the way
home but I also wanted to have a look at the Crown of Thorns Starfish
and see to what extent this could be controlled so as to ensure that
the Reef could be maintained.
The Reef will be in the future as it is now a great
attraction throughout the world. CSIRO is working on the problem and
we have had a commission that has reported to us about it. I now know
a lot more about this and I will be taking a bigger interest in it
when I return home. These were the reasons for my visit. And then I realised
during the time I have been here what a tremendous potential the
whole of the North has, not only for Australians because I hope
they will be able to enjoy it to the full but also for overseas
people as well. The North is a wonderful area. It is part of the greatness
of this country. It gives a tremendous amount of enjoyment to everyone
who has the opportunity to travel up here. And I believe Australians
will be able to travel here much more in the future.
Goodnight. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No ' 6/ l972.
SIR HENRY BOLTE'S RETIREMENT
Tribute by the Prime Minist3r, the Rt Ron. William
McMahon, C. P.
I am sure all my colleagues on the Government side would
want to join me in wishing Sir Henry Bolte a long and happy
retirement. Sir Henry is a great Australian. His achievements are
many and he has given unsurpassed service to Victoria and to the
Liberal Party.
I have always valued his continual goodwill and his wise
and down-to-earth approach to political problems.
CANBERRA, 11 July, 1972. 



EMBARGO : NOT FOR RELEASE' B. rE63 PM EST.
PRIME MRAINISTE
MACQUARIE NETWORK
WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. WILLIAM. McMAHiON
CH, I p 12 JULY 1972
ABORIGINAL POLICY
Good Eveninr: Next Friday is National Aborigines Day throughout Australia.
Recently I talked to large numbers of aboriginal
leaders in the Northern Territory and the Kimberley. I was able
to discuss with t--hem face to face how they felt about the assistance
we are giving and the directions in which we are moving.
S ince the last National Aborigines Day twelve months ago,
there has been a steady and significant development of Commonwealth
policy and objectives for the aboriginal people. So now I want to
outline to you some of the objectives of the Commonwealth policies
as they affect aborigines.
The most important development was the five point statement
I made on Australia Day, six months ago, setting out my Government's
* olicies for aboriginal citizens. Those points are worth recalling
now when our attention can be focused on the one day of the year
when we can look at the problems and prospects for Australia's own
aboriginal population. It is very important that we should try to
understand the aims and directions of national policy.
First, we want to ensure that aborigines have free and
unimpeded access to the rights and privileges-of our society.
Next, we want to encou-rage and assist aborigines to keep and
develop their own culture as a worthwhile and wholesome part of
Australian life. That is, we want to emphasise that every aborigine
has the right to say how closely and how soon he will become
integrated into the mainstream of Australian society. We think
this is more likely to happen when aborigines retain their own identity
and traditions and their own culture. The concept of separate ./ 2 
-2-
development as a long term aim is alien to our objectives.
The Liberal/ Country Party Government's objectives must be
based on programmes which take notice of the wishes and the
aspirations of the aborigines themselves, which provide the
opportunities to develop their own personalities and abilities and
which involve the aboriginal people themselves in formulating the
policy program-mes.
Our fourth objective is to make certain the Government's
programmes encourage aboriginal citizens to manage their own affairs
as much as practicable so that they can improve their potential
and participate fully in national progress, and that handicaps for
aborigines in health, in housing and in education, and in vocational
training may be steadily reduced.
Lastly, we want to get rid of the few remaining laws which
discriminate against aborigines.
Those are the five objectives of the Australia Day statement.
I cannot emphasise strongly enough that this statement means that
Australians as a nation, and through their national Government,
recognise that aborigines have a great many problems and difficulties
not faced by others.
And I assure you it means we have shouldered the burden.
It means we will see that aboriginal citizens have the opportunities
to reach at least the same standards of living and education as are
enjoyed by all other Australians.
Since the 1967 Referendum on the question of Federal
responsibility for aboriginal policy, special funds have been
established concerned with aboriginal housing, health, education,
employment and business enterprises. In the financial year just
ended, direct national expenditure on aboriginal advancement was
nearly $ 45 million.
We intend to create a new form of leaseholding on aboriginal
reserves to assist in land rights. There is a new mining code
setting up guidelines for mining on abcriginal reserves. And I
want to emphasise because it is not always clearly understood
that these reserves are not only very extensive, covering an area
nearly as great as Victoria, in the Northern Territory alone, but
that the reserves are of permanent duration for the aboriginal
people themselves. We have allocated $ 5 million in the first year of the scheme
to buy land outside reserves for aboriginal groups. We are
currently considering an offer to acquire land for one aboriginal
group in this way. Wie will delineate and protect land for
aboriginal religious and ceremonial purposes. ./ 3 
One of the grouns I visited at the beginninq of this
month was the Yirrkala at Gove in the Northern Territory.
They are receiving directly 10 ner cent of royalties from the
nearby bauxite and alumina development as a result of the
Australia Day decisions.
I recently announced the first royalty payment of about
$ 21,500 to the Yirrkala and as time goes on, the total
aborigines' royalty from the Gove project will reach $ 1 million
a year. After meeting and having the pleasure of associating with
them, it is fair to say that they believe they are being
satisfactorily treated.
After I came back south, one of the most important of
their leaders sent me a message rejecting press reports about
agitation to send several aborigines to Switzerland in protest
against the mining venture. I thought that indicated their
attitude pretty clearly.
As a nation we have a long road ahead in ensuring that
our aboriginal citizens take their rightful place in our society.
Since 1967, we have been taking more and more vigorous action
towards this aim.
I believe we have been doing so sincerely, wisely and
f he real benefit of the Australian aborigines themselves.
co urse that I hope all Australians will wholeheartedly
s ibet. 



FO R PRESS PA. No. 7/ 1972
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt.
Hon. William McMahon, M. P.
The Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon, is to
visit Paoua New Guinea during the first week in August. This
was announced in Canberra and Port Moresby tonight.
The visit is in response to an invitation to Mr. McMahon
rom the Chief Minister, Mr. Michael Somare, conveyed when
Mr. Somare was in Canberra in " ay.
The Prime Minister said that he was greatly looking
forward to his visit which would enable him to have discussions
with Mr. Somare and his Ministerial colleagues, and to visit
Papua New Guinea including Port Moresby and other centres.
Details of the itinerary are being discussed with the
Chief Minister and will be announced when completed.
CANBERRA, 18 July, 1972. 



PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
By the Prime MAinister, The . Rt Hon.
William IMcMahon, CH, MP.
NATIONAL HEALTH 19 JULY, 1972.
Q. Prime Minister, you are critical of the Labor Party's National
Health Scheme. Why.?
PM. I can explain it fairly easily. Last week the Labor Party
released an expensively produced pamphlet. It contained its
own version of a National Health Scheme, and I believe it's a
very revealing and cynical document. I make this accusation
because this is an official Labor Party document and it is
based on satire. It's main headline is borrowed from the title
of a well-known satirical theatrical revue and it seems clear
to me that the Opposition wants to treat this serious and
vital question of national health as nothing more than a joke.
Many Australians already know this flippant, unthinking approach
is typical of the serious deficiencies of Labor's plan for
health nationalisation. They know its policy is so shot through
with contradictions that it amounts to deception. That's my
view.
Q. Well Sir, that only deals with the pamphlet itself. Why
do you criticise the Labor Party nolicy on national health?
PM. Well for a start, the Leader of the Opposition and his
health expert can't agree. His own health expert has had to
correct his Leader in public and to do so more than once. The
Leader of the Opposition announced that families with a
taxable income of less than 1,700 a year would get free health
insurance. Mr. Hayden announced his Leader's figures were out
of date. That was nearly two months ago. The latest Labor
pamphlet is still talking about free health insurance for those
earning less than $ 1,700 a year. Which one of them speaks for
the Labor Party?
Q. That may be so Prime Minister, but where does the
Government stand on free health insurance? 
PM. Well, we already provide free health insurance to families
with an income of less than $ 2,178 a year. That means that
under Labor's so-called olan to help the needy, a family at
present receiving free insurance could immediately have to pay
at least $ 26 a year, and it would not be tax deductible.
Q. Hasn't the Labor Party announced how it's paying for its
Nationalised Health Scheme?
P1. Yes, but you find the same chopping and changing here. At
first it was a compulsory tax of 1.25 per cent of everbody's
income. Last July it was lifted to 1.3 ner cent. Now it is
to be 1.35 per cent. No--one can be confident it will stop
there.
Q. What about hospital treatment?
PM. Well the Leader of the Opposition tries to pretend his
scheme will cover you in all hospital wards. His health expert
had to contradict him again on this. Under Labor, the patient
would be forced to pay all additional costs over and above
public ward treatment, and the taxpayer will pay at least $ 168
million more each year for the privilege. The present
voluntary scheme allows you to insure in full for all hospital
wards, intermediate and private as well.
Q. Sir, there's frequent criticism that there are too many
benefit organisations. How do you answer that?
PM. That is another great Labor fallacy. They want to wine out
overnight 82 medical and 92 hospital organisations and they
want to replac6 them with one big centralised government-run
show. This idea was totally rejected by the experts we
appointed to examine health insurance. It would cost millions
to duplicate facilities all operating now at no cost to the
taxpayer. Labor wants a complete takeover of all hospitals.
Such a plan, I believe, and my experts believe, will inevitably
collapse.
Q. Would it be right to say then that tke voluntary health
insurance scheme is perfect?
PM. No. The Liberal Party does not say he voluntary health
insurance scheme is perfect. We do thin t is the best that's
available, because our policy is to nut the interests of the
patients first. The individual is of paramount importance to
us, and we want to treat the patient as an individual humanbeing
not a cog in a medical care machine. We believe
Australians want a scheme which reflects their feelings, which
treats them as people, not as computbrised episodes of illness.
We also believe the patient must be personally identified with
a health scheme and have some personal responsibility.
We have attempted to do this by establishing the common
fee system which provides for: 
3,.
Eighty cents for a surgery visit;
One dollar twenty for a home visit;
and five dollars for any operation or
specialist procedure.
We are now trying to improve this system. This year, * Mr.
Justice Mason recommended increases in the common fee in New
South Wales and we accepted them for all states. The increases
will not be paid by the oatient but by the Government. We
have a practical, working scheme. It's a pretty good one and
we will improve it. Labor's policy, as you know, must destroy
it! 



FO PRESS: PRIME MINISTERPM. No. 68/ 1972
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES SPECIAL GRANTS
Statement by the Prime minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon,
CHi, MP
The Commonwealth Grants Commission has considered
applications made by Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania for
special financial assistance from the Commonwealth for the year
1972-73 under Section 96 of the Constitution.
The Commission recently recommended payment of
special grants in 1972-73 as set out below, and the Commonwealth
Government has approved the Commission's recommendations.
Queensland Advance grant for 1972-73
South Australia
Advance grant for 1972-73
Plus positive completion grant:
being a final adjustment of an
advance grant paid in 1970-71
Amount recommended for payment in
1972-73
Tasmania Advance grant for 1972-73
Less negative completion grant:
being a final adjustment of an
advance grant paid in 1970-71
Amount recommended f. r payment in
1972-73 10,000,000
1350,0
13,500,000 21,000,000
10,000,000 2,400,000 7 ,600,000
Legislation to authorise payments of these grants will
be introduced during the Budget sittings of Parliament.
In aggregate, therefore, special grants amounting
to $ 38,600,000 will be paid by the Commonwealth to the three States
in tlis financial year, in addition to the substantially increased
general financial assistance grants agreed for all States at the
Premiers' Conference on 22 June last.
CANBERRA, July 1972 



PRIME MINISTER
OR PRESS LOCAL GOVERNMENT DEPUTATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William M~ cMahon,
CH, MP
The Prime minister, Mr McMahon, today received a
deputation from the Australian Council of Local Government Associations
comprising the President of the Australian Council of Local Government
Associations, Councillor A. A. Mills ( Western Australia) the
Past and incoming President, Councillor H. G. Behan, CMG, MBE
( Queensland) and the Secretary of the Association, Mr N. T. G. Miles.
The deputation was introduced to the Prime Minister
by the Hon. Bob Katter, Minister for the Army and Chairman of the
Canberra Committee on Local Government, and Senator G. Davidson,
Secretary of the Canberra Committee.
The Prime Minister told the deputation that he was
impressed by moves in the United States to restore more authority
to government at the grass roots level.
As life in the cities became increasingly complex
and populations grew, local government authorities would have to
play an increasir4y larger part in improving the quality of life,
particularly with regard to recreational, sporting and cultural
matters, in addition to other traditional responsibilities.
The Prime Minister expressed his specific concern
for the problems of local government, particularly in relation to
their prestige, authority and responsibility.
The Prime Minister recalled that at the recent Loan
Council meeting, the limit on local government borrowings without
the approval of the Loan Council had been raised from $ 300,000
to $ 400,000. This was a recent and clear indication of the
Federal Government's concern for local government and it was hoped
that this liberalisation would improve the range of local government
activities. The Prime Minister also indicated to the deputation that
he would like to see local government represented at the forthcoming
Constitutional convention. He confirmed that he would strongly
support the attendance of local government authorities at the
proposed Constitutional convention. / 2 
Councillor Mills, on behalf of the Australian Council,
expressed appreciation that the Prime Minister had been able to
meet the deputation at short notice. It was the first time in more
than two decades that national representatives of local government
had been received by the Prime Minister.
While the deputation recognised that state Governments had
the responsibility for local governments, it nevertheless felt that
the Prime Minister should himself be aware of the tremendous
pressure on local government for increases in services and amenities.
Councillor Mills informed the Prime Minister that the
Australian Council was nreparinq a pamphlet setting out the current
requirements of local government. When this was complete, it would
be personally presented to every canditate in the coming Federal
elections by Mayors and Shire Presidents.
Councillor Mills emphasised that, while the Australian
Council was a non-political body, it believed it was necessary that
its message be understood by all sections of opinion.
Councillor Mills also emphasised that the deputation did not
in any way seek to infrinqe on procedural matters prior to a.
Constitutional convention, but it believed it should take the
opportunity to express its fundamental views when meeting the Prime
M-inister. Councillor Mills said the deputation had been impressed
by the fact that during the discussions, the Prime Minister himself,
had taken the initiative in expressing his specific concern for
the problems of local government.
Mr. Katter said at the conclusion of the discussion he
hoped that now that a dialogue had been opened, it would introduce
a new era of too level contact between the Federal Government and
local government.
CANBERPA, July, 1972. 



EMBARGO: 7 TUESDAY. 92
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 7C/ 19) 72.
RETIREMENT OF SIR REGINALD SW1ARTZ
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon
William McMahon, M. P.
I deeplv regret that Sir Reginald Swartz has decided not
to stand at the next elections for understandable personal reasons.
Sir Reginald has given long and dedicated service to
Australia in a number of portfolios. He has a fertile min and is
a master of tactics and has left his mark on each of the portfolios
he has administered. His experience and ability both as Minister
for National Development and Leader of the House will be missed.
He is one of the most popular " embers in the House and
Members of all parties will regret his decision to stand down.
I wish him and Lady Swartz many years of enjoyable
retirement. CANBERRA, 24 July, 1972. .972. 



3USINESS AND _ PP. CFSSIO17AL MEIV S DTNNMR
Speech by the Prime Minister, r'nc -It Flon. William Mcilahon, CH!, NIP.
24 July. 1972
Dir Macklin, Parliamentary Colicagues, Ge ntlemen:.
I cartehere toniciht zprimarily t'-o -talk to ' iou about a technical
subject that I know is v ry dear to most of you anai certainly
dear to my friend in. the Chamb-tr of !-. anuf-c-tures sitting inranediately
to my right. And t hat subject I wanted -to talk about wa:) s the subject
of tarif fs and its preoccupation with t;-c manuf acturing -: nd the
conuercjat industries of ti-. is country.
I also wanted to say somothIng to you a bout the state of
the economy, not too muc.. i ecause w) e have got a Budget comi ng aLong in
three or four weeks time, and I am one of the believers in the oldfashioned
British custom~ of Budget solidarity and abov" all, of Budget
secrecy. Not only bc&amp; c~ I think that you can kc: 2r ' jour secrets
to yourse-lf and you ca-, have -the surpnris~ oiemont when the Treasurer
delivers the Budget th~ en you will got infinitely better public
reaction and public resrpanse thian ," ou will if therc-are leaks, and
when the Cday comes, the Treasure r has nothing else to do but reci. toc
the taxation proposals and the wa-y t~ o bring disapproval by those whlo
have to pay thc7, m.
Tonight, seeing that thei gatharing is as great and
distinguishf2s as it is, I still beivdI had to go along with my
irmediate intentin But af-ta ng to your President, I al! so
felt th~ at, tima wil ling anC you ar~ cir. n to be intarc-sted and my
pra'yers rz usually answered -that I might say something to you on
a mucn morc+. Lnt:: resting subje-ct and thiat is my recent visit t"-o !,, uala
Lumpur, Singaporce and Djakarta. Pocause it was a momorable triP and
believe ou-r de-: stins to a zosdrhecxtc~ nt and our future
developmont are wra-) p d up itll tho dCrvc,: br-mient of those cou. ntties. We
are the ones w'no can raost+ benof it-froti close association with them;
from, their inchastri al developmeont; and from our capaci. ty f or trade with
thM. 11T But may I nowj, Mr ' lacklin, get on with the subje-ct. The
two subjzlcts that I want to speak to you about tonight. I want to
a ' ssure you, as one who has been Treasurer for some time, and enjoyed
the nortfoi i mens. y thnit I bolieve? I had a pretty glood comm~ a-nd
of Trcasury problems arnd kept the econony reasonably healthy, prohably
as healthy as It ') as ever heen. So I have the % nowledg-e and the ability
for quick adaptation and chango Lthat I think is so essential and
imoortant to a2 Treasurer and rarticularly to a Head of Gove-rnment when
we are looking at Cur economic problems. ./ 2 
I believe there are very sound grounds for thinking the
economy will significantly improve in the future, in both the short and
long term. There has never been any doubt about the long term, because
over the years we have continuously built this economy of ours on a
broader basis, much more variable, much more basically sound and with
inherent strength. And our record of two decades of growth has been
a tribute to the kind of policy that we have been able to adopt.
We are all aare that most of the problems which hav.? captured
the headlines in the past year or so have not been long term but short
term problems. It is true, too, that we have had setbacks. The unemoloyment
problems have been stubborn, somewhat too stubborn, and the oresent
level while low by standards of other countries is still certainly
not acceptable to me. As you know, and here I come back to that word
" flexible" again because we have considered it desirable since September
of last year we have taken positive measures to reduce the number of
unemployed. Even taking specific action of a kind that hitherto we had
not taken. We have also taken other measures on a broad basis, particularly
the mini-Budget and the assistance we gave to the Premiers. I
think I can say to you that as these measures work their way through
the economy, conditions most certainly will improve steadily. Encouraging
indicators are now showing.
The latest of these is the slowdown in price inflation
reflected in the consumer price index figures last weze. The increase
of point nine of one per cent is the lowest quarterly increase for
nearly two years, although I have to admit there were some special
problems or special influences that were involved thers. A little over
seven months ago we felt that in the June quarter we would be extremely
lucky if we could keep the consumer index at very much less than 2 per
cent and probably a little higher.
So that you can take it that we were delighted when these
figures of point nine of one per cent came about because it gave one
of the indications that inflation, one of the most difficult and intractable
nroblems that we have had to solve and one that could easily cost
us out of international markets, did show some kind of improvement. I
don't want to go overboard about them because the results affect only
one month. I will say it is pretty good, or satisfactory anyhow, and
I hope we can keep up this kind of record in the months to come.
I don't want you to think that I'm arguing that inflation
has been solved. It has not. Together, you and I as manufacturers,
people in the commercial world, and recole in the other sections of the
economy and in the Goverrment have .1l got to exercise our combined
skill and our energies to contain it.
Providing we can do this and make our contribution, and
providing only we can keep wages closer to the increases in productivity,
then the better the chance we have t First to conquer this problem;
and then to get the economy moving along at a growth rate of at least
per cent. Let me emphasise too, that c nsm. r demand has obviously
been far too subdued. I admit that and tlr'-t is the reason why we took
action at two successive Premiers' Conforeccs and in the mini-Budget,
and through the banking system to give at least the incentive and the
/ 3 
intucement for consumer demand to improve. And through that means to
be able to get the order books full and when the order books became full,
for it to work back into the basic industries. So I emphasise to you
that the community has been too cautious in its spending. But with
increasing confidence and I believe confidence is improving, and
there's evidence of it; there would be greater evidence of it still,
if industrial lawlessness were reduced to a minimum, and we were able
to reduce the uncertainty that has been caused by the difficult conditions
created by some sections of the Trade Union movement; cur record
must improve. What I can say in positive terms, and it has been emphasised,
and emphasised very well in the Treasury Annual Review, is that the
goals of national growth for this year are much higher than for the
financial year just ended.
Now to achieve our growth I believe we need four ingredients.
The first one undoubtedly is confidence; a little more confidence; a
little more willingness to spend can, I believe, achieve miracles.
We can increase consumer spending and I have just mentioned that; we
need greater industrial stability and we need less industrial lawlessness.
I believe as you look at all these oroblems you must make this concession,
particularly if you understand what my Government has done; that we have
acted in both a responsible, and I believe a comprehensive way.
I know it is a Government of decision. WJhen major decisions
have to be made, we have handled them. Only a few moments ago, talking
to my colleague on my right hand side, I was able to mention to him that
never in 72 years of Federation had any government had the courage to
introduce into the civil service the rule of ho work, no pay' despite
the year after year recommendations that were made. This year we introduced
the amendment, and I don't like to be boastful because that's not
my way but at least I can say that since that time we have not had a
strike or a threat of a strike on the Commonwealth Civil Service.
Let me give you two exampls of the kind of action we have taken.
First we have introduced into conciliation and arbitration a new system
which will be proclaimed shortly if it hasn't been proclaimed today. I
believe it is the most extensive reform of the conciliation and arbitrationi
system that has been carried out for a little over a quarter of a
century. We have in that review strengthened the sanction provisions of
the conciliation and arbitration act.
The second point I want to make is that we have, and we will
continue to intervene before the arbitration commission in wage claims
whenever we have considered it to be in the public interest. Never has
a case gone by where a. sharp increase in wages is demanded by the unions,
unless I have immediately asked my colleagues to have a lpok at the problem
and to see whether in the public interest, in the interest of keeping
inflation low and demand high, we should intervene.
I now move on to the subject I really wanted to speak about
tonight and that is tariffs, and I hope to explain what we are doing,
the reasons for our actions and if I can, to remove some of the indecision
and lac of certainty that might be in the minds of manufacturers
and producers of raw materials. My Government's policy was clearly
set out by my colleague, Doug Anthony, the Minister for Trade and Industry,
in a statement that he made to Parliament in April of last year. I can
assure you that we as a Government have not, and we will not, depart
from that policy. / 4
L 
Before I get on to policy explanation, may I say something
to you to put the issue in context. I want to emphasise in the strongest
terms the vitally important role that manufacturing industry and
the private enterprise system in general plays in the development and
pr-ogress of this country.
This, of course, includes transport and other areas of
commerce. I want to emphasise this because we are a great country
with a great performance per head of population. Those who travel
overseas as I do, come back delighted with the respect and admiration
that there is for us and the performance of the Australian people. And
a. Ll those achievements, or mcit of them anyhow, are by private enterp3ise.
The manufacturing and mining industries particularly are now
playing a magnificent part in development, and in our ability to expand
our trade and to play our part and make our contribution to the development
of the countries immediately to our North.
We, as a Government, do recognise that a sound, profitable
and growing manufacturing sector is of fundamental importance. Its
g:: owth must be fostered and the economic climate created to ensure that
manufacturing industry assumes an even greater and more important role
in our eeonomy as it does in the other higher industrialised communities.
In this context, I want to discuss tariff policy and I want
to make three points. As an essential condition of growth and progress,
we must encourage the best and the most efficient allocation and use of
our resources whether Australian, or those which are attracted here
by the inducements of the ratural resources and the economic climate of
tills country. Historically, in the two decades after the war, successive
governments consciously pursued policies directed towards a high and
sustained growth rate and the optimum employmentcf resources. This,
as I said, but I repeat it now in somewhat different language this
d: iversification of industry turned us into the broadly based industrial
economy that we have today. In more recent years, as our economy has
become more sophisticated, the need for greater selectivity in industrial
development has become more desirable. To achieve this we needed policies
designed and attuned to the times.
As I said last year, to the Chamber of Manufactures of New
South Wales, we cannot accept uncritically and without reservations the
use of our national re. urces in activities which require very high
levels of protection, because, prima facie, such activities are less
suited to the Australian economic cnvironm~ it than industries requiring
more moderate levels of protection.
The second main pQint I want to stress is that low tariffs
b:: ing benefits as well as costs. The benefits to the community which a
government must consider in making a judgment on the level of protection
include the direct marketing relationships which one Australian industry
may have withaiother, and the effect of one industry's costs on another
industry's prices. I assure you they go wider than that. For example,
an industry may be employing special classes of labour, which we what
to encourage. It may also be developing special skills and technology.
In the same way, there can be highly significant non-economic benefits
for us such as defence.
You will see, therefore, that when these factors are involved
in tariff decisions, the Government and I want to emphasise those
words must play a crucial role. I personally assure you my Government
gives and will continue togive very close attention to these aspects of
tariff administration when Tariff Board reports are before us. 
The third point I want to make! is that decisions are made
only after considering the capital investment in the industry concerned
and the employment which that industry creates. I want to emphasise
these ingredients of policy and also one other points.
In cases where, according to the recommendatbn of the Tariff
Board, it has been considered desirable to encourage the transfer of
resources from one industry to another, the Government has frequently
decided that the transfer should be a gradual process. And I can assure
you that in the implementation of this policy of gradualness, I have
taken an interested, and I believe on occasions, a decisive role. We
have done this, for example, in the case of woven and knitted shirts.
We did this to achieve an orderly transition to a lower level of protection.
We decided that the existing level would be maintained for a
longer, much longer period than recommended by the Board.
In the meantime, the Government is negotiating for voluntary
restraint arrangements with low-cost overseas countries in order to
ensure protection to Australian manufacturers.
Today, one of the greatest leaders in Australian industry
is in Japan, trying to and he will undoubtedly succeed ensum
some kind of restriction is imposed voluntarily by the countries that
are exporting to Australia. In the same way, protection given to
malleable cast iron pipe fittings is being reduced in three stages over
five years. More recently, as uith another case in which I was deeply
involved, the Government has provided the local shipbuilding industry
with a longer period for gradual change than the Board recommended.
So let me say to you now without reservation that if tariff action
ware considered likely to lead to phasing out of any segment of
manufacturing industry firms would not be expected to adjust overnight
anid, of course, the interest of manufacturers and emikbyees would be
protected. I emphasise again to you that special care will be taken
relating to changes that might have the effect of putting job opportunities
for Australia at risk.
Turning to another aspect of tariffs, as you know, a compreheansive
review of the tariff is now taking place. I have learnt a great
deal about it from my friend, Mr Pascoe, during the course of the last
hour. In fact it has been one of the most informative lectures I
have had since my university days.
I am aware that some sectors of manufacturers are feeling
apprehensive about the outcome of this review. I want to assure you
that the review is not in any sense an exercise against a policy of
adequate protection for economic, efficient and desirable Australian
industry. On the contrary, the Government's intention is that it should
work in the long run, for the benefit of our manufacturing industries.
The review will be completed in about six years. And, of
course, I want to emphasise that if ever you feel you are having unexpectac
difficulties which have to be solved immediately, then you have recourse
a~ s an immediate court of appeal to the Special Advisory Body.
There is a second point that I want to teake and I want to
make it now again because of the discussion I have been having with
y' colleague on my right hand side, Mr Pascoe. He has mentioned that
in this large-scale revie'w, there should be some kind of a timetable
drawn up so that industry itself will have a degree of certainty reintroduced
into the manufacturing industries and a degree of predictability
that they do not have at the moment. ./ 6 
I can assure you that when I go back tc Canberra tomorrow
night or when I arrive there on Wednesday, it will be one of the first
problems I will take up either with Mr MacKay of the Department of Trade
and Industry or, if necessary, with Mr Anthony. I can assure you that
it is one of the problems that has worried me and I am glad that you
have driven home this point effectively tonight.
As each review report is reviewed, it will be considered by
the Government, and we and here I want to emphasise this point and
keep on emphasising it if I can we, as a Government, and no-one else,
will decide what action should be taken. The Government needs and expects
the Tariff Board in its report to give as clear and comprehensive advice
as it can on both the reasons for its recommendations and the likely
consequence of adopting them. The fact is, however, that there are
larger areas of the tariff which have not been looked at for very many
years and some tariffs have never been reviewed since their inception.
In these circumstances-there are bound to be some tariffs which provide
protection far in excess of the amount required. Of course excess
protection of this kind adds unnecessarily to our cost structure, and
cost inflation. And you must know this is not in the interests either
of the manufacturing industry or of the community.
The existing economic climate and timing are, of course,
also imporant and must increasingly be taken into consideration in the
decision-making process. We also take note of the protection policies
of other countries where, in addition to tariffs arrangements or other
devices like quotas, import licensing and export schemes are used. We
are concerned entirely with the practical and beneficial effects of
tariff changes on individual industries and the economy as a whole.
So you will see and I hope I can convince you on this point we are not
and we will never be influenced by abstract theories.
Particularly, Mr Chairman, I want to emphasise that the
Government makes the decisions in all cases on tariff matters. We have
a very strong tariff committee of the Cabinet, and in major cases such
as the chemicals review or the shipbuilding industrv or of woven garments,
we take those into the Cabinet itself and if variations have to be made
based on the grounds that I have mentioned, we are not only willing but
happy to make changes we believe desirable in the interest of Australian
manufacturing industry and above all, the country itself. Now, the
Board is a highly exoert body but it is an advisory one only, and its
recommendations are not automatically accented by the Government ( as I
have already pointed out).
Gentlemen, tariff nolicy is -art of our overall policy
towards manufacturing industry and the free enterprise economy. That
rolicy I want to repeat is to give all the support we can towards the
development of a soundly growing and confident manufacturing industry
in Australia. I want to sum un to you in this way:-Confidence is
catching If we all . have confidence, talk with confidence, and above
all, act with confidence, we will, I am sure, and of this I can give you
great reassurance, get ahead faster and much futther this year than we
did last year. This must give our longer-term development programmes an
added stimulus for the good of the country, for iegood of manufacturers
and for the benefit of the consumers of all kinds. If we can give
these benefits to the consumers, I believe we inspire confidence to get
back in the market place and buy to let those who sell to the market
place get their order books full, and in time, as it works back to the
/ 7 
manufacturers and the producers of base materials, to ensure that they
are fully employed, that our growth rate continues and each and everyone
of us can make our contribution to the development and to the standards
of living and the values of life that I believe every person here tonight
holds dear. Mr Chairman, that was what I wanted to say to you on an cfficial
level. As time is passing and as you wanted me to speak for a somewhat
longer period than I intended, I thought I'd say something to you about
my recent mission overseas to Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia. I
must confess that I went with some trepidation based on advice given
to me that there might be perhaps some doubt or disenchantment in these
countries with Australia. As Foreign Minister I had the good fortune
to make the acquaintance more than that a valuable friendship with
Lee Kuan Yew, the Prime Minister of Singapore, and Tun Razak, the Prime
Minister of Malaysia.
I had also been able to establish a valuable friendship with
President Seeharto of Indonesia. What did interest me was the fact that
these people trust us; they hnow that we want to trade with them; they
know we want to make our contiibution to their duvelopment; they know
wevent to help them remove poverty and to assist them with the development
of their abundant natural resources. They believe that as a people
they can rely on the people of this country in whom they have the
greatest confidence. I addressed their Parliament. The welcome was
outstanding. And I can express this with certainty as they grow
wealthier and I know they will we will be the beneficiary, the main
beneficiary because they will want the kind of materials and the
finished products, the manufactured products, that we in Australia by
that time will be able to produce.
So it was not only a mission of goodwill but it was educational
in this sense. I realise the many opportunities that are open for
us and the way in which we can trade with them. This must be to our
mutual development. Particularly as they develop and we develop economically,
so too will our ability to ensure peace in this area, and in the
long run, if I can repeat those words again to be able to make our
contribution to the peace of the whole of the South-East Asian area.
Indonesia is a wonderful country! it is well worthwhile visiting; they
like us and I believe Australians should go there more frequently and
find out what the trading p:--ssbi1. ities are.
I then went to Singa~ oe to talk to the Prime Minister, Lee Kuan
Yew, who is a friend of ours. Of course, Singapore is developing quickly.
It is now trying to change its economy from a cottage economy or the
development of fabrics and textiles and things of that kind, into a
manufacturing industry that will produce the medium range, high quality
products such as television sets, radios and consumer durables of a
similar kind. Here you find a dynamic wholesome society. Again you found that
they trusted us and I think the spoech Lee Kuan Yew made on the night
that he gave me a dinner was memorable in the sense that while I left
Australia feeling a degree of hesitation and doubt, after hearing his
speech I realised how much he valuod us as partners and friends and how
much he wanted us to retain our armed forces in Singanore. Not only
because, as he put it in his own inimitable way, it was of benefit to
him, but it brought a feeling of confidonce and filled a vacuum which
if we were not there would be filed by somebody else, probably more
powerful and more intimidatory than we or they would want.. 48. 
Then on to Kuala Lump~ ur to meet an old friend, Prime Minister
Tun Razak. I was able to go up to Butterworth and see our Air Force
at the airfield which we've made a c-ontribution towards doveloping.
We provided Miragcs and other tV,. es of aircraft for the integrated
air-defence system there. Again, I believc we have stationcd something
like two squadrons of Mirages to be part of the Commonwealth Air Defence
System in the aroa. If you want to see efficiency developed over a
period of little less than two years if you want to feel proud of our
ability to make our contribution to the. welfare and the defence of othersthen
you should find out a little more about Butterworth. It was really
heartening to see the way in which their air defence system was working.
Not so long ago the Malaysians had little or no knowledge of the vast
techniques of direction-finding, of radar detection and the other
components of air defence systems. I think you. can now take it that thy
are pretty compotent and effective, and making a significant contribution
to the defence arrangements.
Up there and I want to drive this home because it's not
always adequately reported in the pre-ss not only are the trade
opportunities great because of incroasing stability, and they will
expand as the time goes by, but each of these realises that if
South-East Asia is to remain free, then it is desirable that we should
keep our forces, our armed forces of the three Services in Singapore
and the Air Defence System in Malaysia. We should be able to assist
Indonesia to build up a capacity tc develop a more ef f~ ctive Army, and
a more effective way of ensuring that if a threat does emerge from
outside, they will, with our help, and probably Ait help from other
countries, be able not only to defend themselves but also to make
their contribution to the defence of other South-East Asian countries.
The point I want to make and drive home is that if eva'r there
is a country that ought to be proud of what it is capable of doin~ g,
and in fact does do, it is ours. For that reason, thank you Mr
Chairman, forasking me to come. Above all, I have, come and I can,-
assure you it has givon me an enormous amount of pleasure to be with
Australians, to know what you are capable of doing.
May I express the hope that I will have the good fortune to
be qiven the chance to provide continued leadership. There could be
no greater honour than providing leadership to the kind of people I
see sitting in front of me tonight. 



F; ) RP PRESS No 71/ 1S72
OILI. INIDUSTRY STRIKE
Stateirent by the Prime ?-Tinister, the Rt.
Bon. William McAahon, CH, MP
Today I calle, 2. a meeting of seniJor Ministers to
consider the critical situation caused~ by the oil industry
strike. The strike is a challenge by about 1,000 union m-embers
to the whole structure of conciliation and arbiAtration which we
are d; etermined to maintain.
It threatens to disrupt industry , cause unemployment
and slow down com~ mercial and industrial activity in Australia
affecting the life of every citizen.
Let us look,-at the facts.
Early this year a log of claims was served by the
unions upon the oil comnanies.
A numnber of strikes and stoppoages occurred and after
patient and painstaking effort, a Deputy Prcsident of the
Conciliation and ArbiLration Comm~ is~ ion, M~ r. Justice Voorre on
union assurances that the strikers had returned to work qave an
interim decision which granted wage incrciscs of $ 4.3oner week for
trad--: smcn and S3.60 for tradcF, assistants. He made these increases
retrospective to 5 June.
Mr Justice M~ oore granted these incrcases on. assurances
that the men had genuinely r= eturned to work
And t'h. e employers had already statc-d that as soon as the
strike ended they were ready to contcinue wi th the hearing of 1
the union's claims in full by the Com~ mission.
Desnite this, the strike w as resumed and has continued
in defiance of th. e-decision of Pflr. Jnstice PMoore. On Friday night
last, it became obvious that the ACTU was powerless to get the ment
back to work. The Governm--. nt obiectives are twofold. The first is to
ensure--that the men return to work, that tihe renfineries opera-te,
that supplies of patrol and oil are available and that a situati-on
in which services vital to the community are grinding to a h-alt
should end. 
The Government also believes that it must uohold the
svstem of arbitration.
In the interests of the whole cormmunity I asked the Minister
for Labor and National Service, the Minister for Shipping and
Transport and the Attorney General to have immediate discussions
with the oil industry employers and with the ACTU.
Discussions took olace with the employers this evening
and arrangements are being made to have discussions in Melbourne
with the ACTU tomorrow morning.
The Ministers will renort to Cabinet which will meet
tomorrow, Thursday afternoon.
CANBERRA, 26 July, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No 72/ 1972.
OIL INDUSTPY DISPUTE
Statement by the Prie M: i ster, the Rt.
Hon. William CniMP
Following discussions yesterday with senior Ministers in
Sydney about Ehe oil industry dispute, I announced that the
Minister for Labor and National Service, Mr. Lynch, the Minister
for Shipping and Transport ( Mr. Nixon), and the Attorney General,
Senator Greenwood would have inmediate discussions with oil
industry employers and the ACTU.
The Ministers met last evening with senior representatives of
the oil industry and this morning with ACTU officials, Mr. Hawke,
Mr. Petrie and Mr. Souter.
The purpose of these discussions was to enable the Ministers
to obtain a first-hand appreciation from the employers and from
the ACTU of the strike situation, possible developments and their
consequences. The Ministers have now reported the substance of
these discussions to Cabinet so that steps might be taken as
appropriate. The ACTU representatives informed the Ministers that they were
not prepared to say whether the ACTU wanted or could get the
w striking union members back to work, except under conditions which
could be seen as inconsistent with the decision of Mr. Justice
Moore. The strikers are to hold meetings in the four States
directly affected, Victoria, South Australia and Queensland
tomorrow morning ( Friday). This gives them the opportunity and the
responsibility for deciding to return to work immediately under
the terms of the recent decision of Mr. Justice Moore of the
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The Government wants a
full resumption of work and the lifting of any bans or restrictions
on the work to be performed.
The termination of this strike would make possible an early
resumption of proceedings by the Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission for hearing and determining the unions' claims in full.
The employers have consistently maintained their willingness to
proceed without delay to arbitration provided that normal work
is resumed. 
The Government for its cart is firmly convinced that when
matters in disnute between emnlovers and unions cannot be resolved
by negotiation or conciliation, there can be no alternative but to
proceed with arbitration. That is precisely the situation which
has been reached in this particular dispute.
It is in the interests of all sections of the community that
our system of arbitration be maintained and that any efforts to
undermine it must be resisted.
The situation is becoming increasingly critical. The oil
companies have no,. put forward reasonable proposals for an
emergency plan that would minimise inconvenience to the public.
Unlike the plan proposed by Mr. Hawke the companies' plan
would not discriminate between companies but would involve the
participation of all of them.
The ACTU officers have been prepared to recommend that some
men return to work. It is a tecL of their authority and concern
for the public interest whether they now recommend that all men go
back to-ork. This is the only sure way in which the unnecessary
hardship and suffering by countless members of the community as
well as the threat to their welfare by the needless. disruption of
industrial and commercial activity can be avoided.
I emphasise the ACTU carries a heavy obligation for the
continuation of the strike.
427 Julv, i? 7?. 



LIBERAL PARTY
FUND--RAISING DINER, BARTON ELECTOPATE
SANS SOUCI, NSW. 31 JULY, 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon,
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I accepted the invitation to come here without any
hesitation at all. There is a very simple explanation why I
wanted to come.
I want Barton back into the Liberal fold as I want
St. George back, too. I want Vince Bruce to take his place with
with us on the Government benches, and with your help I believe
he is a certainty. He is an excellent candidate. Everyone who
knows him will vouch for that. He will be an excellent member,
because he is young, talented and a good Liberal.
Most of you already know and if you don't I am
telling you now that he will do a first-class job representing
the people of Barton as well as representing the Liberal Party
and I believe when he represents you, you will find that
Australia as a whole is proud of him. The experts say we need
a swing of about 3 to 4 per cent to recapture this electorate.
With the candidate and the organisation we have got, that's easily
attainable, provided we can all get the truth driven home to the
voters in this and in all other electorates.
It is of critical importance that the Government's
achievements should be better known and its programmes better
understood. We have a first class team of Ministers, who are giving
this nation sound and effective administration. But from now on,
as we move into the election period, we will all need to redouble
our efforts to get our message across, and counter the propaganda
of our opponents. In the last eighteen months, I've been to every state in
Australia to some of them several times and recently I've
toured the Northern Territory. 
In that time, I've seen the country pause and adopt a " wait and
see, attitude. In recent months, too, I've seen it putting caution
aside and getting into its stride again and the pace is steadily
quickening in response to government measures deliberately taken
during the last eighteen months
to stimulate growth
to create employment
and at the same time to keep the brake on
inflation
Not one single area of government activity has been left out of
our continuing process of reviewing our policies, overhauling them
and developing them in new directions.
Our policy thinking goes on in the knowledge that Australians
are individuals and fiercely individual in the values they hold
dear, and the kind of society in which they want to live.
In today's world, there is an increased awareness of the
individual's responsibilities to his society. The Australian
people have delegated to us, as their Government, some of those
responsibilities, and before long, they must decide at the polls
whether we have kept faith with them.
Therefore it is important that we, as Liberals, should be
articulate in restating for the nation what we, as a Party, see
as our objectives and how we, as a Government, are going about the
business of achieving those objectives.
The Liberal Party shares with other parties of goodwill
the desire to create a society in which the individual can live in
peace and dignity, can enjoy the liberties which our civilisation
prizes and in which his enthusiasm and energy can find full
expression and potential. But unlike others, we are not a Party
representing sectional interests. Our concern is to build
Australia for all Australians.
In doing this, we look primarily to individual initiative and
enterprise as the dynamic force of proarss. Of course, if
experience shows the Government intervention is necessary to
protect the Australian people against exploitation, from whatever
source, then we stand ready to act and will act.
But the progress achieved since crld War 11, in the
development of this country within the private enterprise system,
vindicates our confidence in this approach.
Let us look at how our Party's objectives and its
pragmatic political philosophy relate to the issues of our time.
Take first our foreign relations. Proud as we are to be
Australians, we are also conscious that we are members of a world
community. All Australians want to assist in creating and
preserving for others the same freedoms and prosperity as we seek
for ourselves. / 3 
Our concern naturally focussos on the hunger and strifo affecting
the countries of our own region. It is for them alone to decidc
the road they wish to follow in seeking to better their lot. But
we think Australians are anxious to nurture their efforts.
Liberal Governments have assisted with material aid and
training, and by participating in joint economic and defence
endeavours. Following my recent visit to Indonesia, for example,
we are arranging naval exercises between the two countries. We
already play our part in the Five-power Defence Arrangements with
Malaysia and Singapore. During my recent personal discussions
with President Soeharto, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singap~ ore
and Prime Minister Tun Razak of M1alaysia, the single fact that
stood out above all others was the degree of confidence they have
in us: That is the degree of confidence they havo in you the
Australian people.
They know they can trust: us. They know the part we have
played and that we will continue to play in the region and I am
confident they also know that if we were to leave, if we were to
lose our interest in this region, a vacuum would be created, which
might well be filled hy another influence not as friendly, nor
as trustworthy. So that our efforts to contribute to the stability
and pros perity of countries in our region are not only a moral
responsibility. They help to lessen tensions and misunderstanding.
They also represent an important contribution to our defence.
Regrettably, tensions and misunderstandings still persist.
For these reasons, our policy is to continually strengthen the
capability of our defence forces and to effsctively maintain our own
defence alliances, as for example, our alliance under ANZUS and
with the United States and New Zealand. Our policy is also
designed to protect the liberties of others whilst emphosising
the primary effort must be our own dcfence, and then the contribution
we can make to world stability and prosperity.
Another important issue of our time, an&amp; ono that is of
immediate importance to us in the maintennce~ of public law and
order. One of the basic freedoms is the right of the inc'ividual to
build his life within a stable framework of just laws. No
individual c-an rest secure,/ or cnnfidently plan his own and his
family's future outside of such a framework. We in Australia have
been fortunate in the stability of our society, but we would he
unwiso to assume it is an inevitable featurc of Australian life.
Like all worthwhile things: it must be protected and preserved.
Today we see it threatened by a growing di srogard for the
observance of our laws and the processes by which wc arrive at
them, whether in the industrial or the political sphere.
Draft resisters are encouracd by individuals and groups
who themselves aspire to the responsibilities of office , protesters
resort to violence and vandalism in the name of goodwill. Unionists
blackmail the community and threaten the livelihood of their
fellows when arbitral decisions are not to their liking. The whole
basis ef public law and order within our community is threatened
by these actions. 
Unfortunately, many of the: people responsible are wellmeaning
individuals who fail to see the grave consequences which
can flow from these actions. Liberal Governments -and you who are
Liberals will know are committed by our Party platform to the
principle of " Parliament controlling the executive and the law
controlling all". My Government has stood firm and we will continue
to stand firm, to ensure respect for all constitutionally valid
laws. I should not let this opportunity pass without referring in
this context to the critical situation that has been reached in
the oil industry strike. On television last night I stated that
we as a GovernTment would not permit any one person or group to
determine who will or who will not receive fuel: We hold to that.
We are also determined that the arbitration system will be upheld.
The alternative, I repeat, is industrial anarchy.
Today's events have shown that the emergency proposals
under which only some of the strikers return to work are not good
enough. And to show clearly how political this is, Mr. Hawke has
now allowed free access to petrol in South Australia because it
happens to be a Labor-dominated State. The men on strike have
already received in an interim decision from the commission, a wage
increase of $ 4.80 per week for tradesmen and $ 3.60 for trades
assistants. Some of the strikers still refuse to accept the
umpire's decision. I ask those still on strike to return to work so that
their outstanding claims can be dealt with by the Arbitration
Commission. There is still time.
We are not seeking confrontation. The confrontation is
in the defiance of an arbitrated decision by a diminishing number
of union meCmers. Turning to the economy, we see an area whcre our philosophy
puts us furthest apart from our political apponents. Our primary
concern is with the creation of wealth in which employer and
employee can share as co-operators not with the re-distribution
of the community's wealth at the risk of economic stagnation.
We see our success not only measured by gross natinal
product, but also in terms cf our objectives of full employment and
improved living standards.
Running a government is just like running a business. In
any financial enterprise, one must expect some setbacks. This also
applies in the national context, where some of the difficulties are
not within our own national control.
Economic problems overseas have reacted to the detrir-ant of
our own economy. There have been seve; re difficulties in the rural
economy which are being steadily overcome, due in part to the
fall in overseas prices. 
Our difficulties hia becn compounded by inflationary
pressures, due in part to irrosponsible domnnds for unrealistic
wages and conditions. But I assure you now re~ covery is well under
way. With a continuation of the same prudent management, Australia
in 1973 will see a continuation of the prosperity which has been
a feature of successive Liberal Governments.
Finally, I want to speak about the wonderfully
descriptive, but ill'-defined term, the " quality of life". Our
Party objectives have long recognised that a government's
responsibilities go far beyond simply prctecting the individual's
freedoms and creating conditions of material well-bing.
We view the availability of comprehensive educational opportunities
for all as an essential element in the soci. pty we are working to
create. We do so, because it is essential to provide the skills
and knowledge needed by industry, and because we know education
develops the spirit of true citizenship, and provides a basis for
a fuller and a more meicaningful life. Liberal Federal Governments
have been responsible, together with the states, for the great
expansion of tertiary education ever recent years.
Now we are becoming increasingly involvK-in socondary
education. Policies dosigned to encourage cultur. al activities are
a logical extension of our educational objectives. We look
ultimately to tho time when community interest in the arts is
sufficient to provide the finance nccessary to sustain and encourage
national cultural activities.
Meantime, we are continuing to provide modest support and
broadening the basc of Australian artistic cndeavcurs, by
initiatives like the national film schoci.
We have also been responsive to the recently awakened
national concern for the protection and improvemont of the
environment in which we live. With the States we have established
the Australian Environment Council for consultation and co-ordination
between us in environmental matters. We are concerned to maintain
the fine qualities which have characterised life in our great country.
We take pride in our whole Australian heritage both the country
and its people. Wo will work to protect and nurture buth.
Time alone prevents mae giving further examples of how our
dedication to political liberty and the freedom and dignity of man
guides cur policies. But the matters I have touched on uc. onstrate
the continuing relevance of Liberal Party objectives to our national
destiny. Naither time nor events have outmoded them. Mo~ reover, our
Party has the human resources and the purpose to lead the Australian
nation forward towaras; the goals the people themselves have chosen
I certainly have an abundance of confidence. We are confident that
a majority of the Australian people share our ap~ preciation of the
important issues of our national life and will yet again place their
confidence in our Government when the elections occur towards the
end of the year.
My personal and my wholehearted belief is this. With a
candidate of the kind we have in our prescnce here tonight, with the
support I know we can expect and will in fact get from the people
who are here representing as they do Liberal thought, Liberal
ambitions and Liberal ideals, I feel absolutely certain that you 
will put Vince Bruce back thcre and you will make certain of
a magnificent victory in this election.
Give us the opportunity to govern, and I can assure
you that we will cary on the tradition of the last twenty-two
years. But above all, we will do more than carry on in that
tradition. With an economy as soundly-based as ours is, with
increasing diversity and increasing strength, we will be able to
do all the things that you want us to do better health,
better education, better transport, and above all, a feeling
of confidence in the community. 



FOR PRESS: PM. 1.10. 74/ 1972
IPSWICH COAL MINING DISASTER
Statem ent by tehe Prime Minister, the Rt.
Hon. William McMahon, M. P.
I and my colleagues were deep.-ly distressed to hear
today of the tragic loss of life which resulted from the
coal mine explosions at Ipswich.
I extend my own and the Commonwealth Government's
sympathy to the relatives of those who lost their lives.
I have been in touch with the Premier of Queensland
and have asked him to let me know whether there is any
way in which the Commonwealth Government can help.
I feel I can speak on behalf of all Australians in
expressing sympathy at this time of tragedy.
CANBERRA, 31 July, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 75/ 1972
INTENDED VISIT TO PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon
William 1" cMahon, C. H. M. P.
The Prime Minister announced today that it would not now
be possible for him to visit PaDua New Guinea as planned later
this week. He said he was deeply disappointed that circumstances in
Australia had made this change of plans necessary and expressed
the hope that it would be possible to visit Papua New Guinea at a
later date. The Prime Minister said he had been looking forward to his
discussions with the chief Minister and the new Ministry and to
the opportunities which the visit would have provided to meet
PGauoiunaea . New Guineans as well as Australians serving in PaDua New
The Prime Minister expressed his gratitude to all those
who had been prepared for his visit and said he was sorry it
would not now be possiblei to undetake the interesting programme
that had been planned for him and Mrs. McMahon or to meet with
the many people involved.
The Prime Minister said he had spoken personally to the
chief Minister Mr. Michael Somare, and had expressed his regret
to him and through him to the people of Papua New Guinea.
CANBERRA, 31 July, 1972. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 76/ 1972
OIL INDUSTRY DISPUTE
MEETING OF PARLIAMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, C. i. M. P.
On Sunday night in a national broadcast on the oil
industry dispute, I made an appeal to the men on strike to
return to work so that their outstanding claims could be
dealt with by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
I said then that if the men did not go back to
work, I would arrange for Parliament to be called together
this week. Whilst I am still hopeful that all the men will
return to work, I am, in accordance with my previous
announcement, requesting the Presiding Officers to take
steps to call the Parliament together for Friday, 4 August,
at 10.30 a. m.
CANBERRA, 1 August, 1972. _ j 



PF. No. 77/ 1972
OIL DISPUTE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt.
Hon. William McMahon, CH, M,.
All Australians will welcome the end of the oil strike,
with the prospect of the life of the community being quickly
returned to normal.
This solution by Mr. Justice Moore vindicates the value
of the conciliation and arbitration system. It also vindicates
the Government's determination to protect the public interest,
if necessary, with emergency measures by Parliament.
This action obviously created a favourable climate in
which a proper solution could be found.
I have accordingly informed the presiding officers that
I do not now seek a meeting of Parliament tomorrow.
CANBERRA, 3rd August, 1972.
FOR PRESS: 



MACQUARIE NETWORR WEEKLY PROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE P. T. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CIT, s1P. 3 AUGUST 1972
OIL INDUSTRY DISPUTE
Interviewer: Paul Lynch
Q. Prime Minister, the oil strike is now officially
over. I think the first thing we would like to know from
you is where does the Government go from here?
PM: I have already given the Presiding Officers of the
House and of the Senate advice that because the strike is
over it is not necessary to call Parliament together.
Q. it has been suggested over the last week or two
that perhaps the Government did not do the very best job
it could do to settle this strike, that your Government
could have done something more positive. How would you
answer these suggestions?
PM: I deny that. You first of all have to ask yourself
what power we have under the Australian Constitution.
And the simple fact is that we have only one power, and
that is arbitration and conciliation, and that is in the
hands of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
When it appeared as though the Commission might have failed,
I resorted to the only alternative that was available to
us to prepare emergency legislation as Ir Chifley had to
do in 1949, and I had to do in the case of the Stevedoring
Industry in 1956. Consequently, I gave instructions for
this emergency legislation to be prepared and I made
arrangements, too, to call the House, that is the Parliament,
together in order that the legislation could be put on the
statute books. This was done in the interests of the
community. / 2 
-2
Q. This amergency legislation w~ a2 popared for possible
use tomorrow morning. Now by that i would assumne that it
is all reody whenever you need it from now on?
PM4: Yes, it will be.
0. Can you enact it without there being an emergency in
the first place? In other words, can you add it to your
armoury of laws to help out, or must you wait for the
emergency before you can pass the law?
P! A: We could make it permanent legislation and therefore
it would not be necessary to introduce it as an emergency
measurc. But usually this is regarded as an affront to the
trade union movement, and for that reason, we p~ refer to
handle it on an emergency basis.
Q. Prime Minister, thera have been very strong suggestions..
. Mr 14hitlam particularly on this programme last Monday
night suggested that there has bacn collusion between your
Government and particularly the foreign-owned oil companies
in this country. The suggestion is that your Government,
as part of its attempt to curb inflation has tried to fOrce
the oil companies to refuse to negotiate with the unionists.
What do you ay to that?
PM: That is false, even dishonest. There has been no
colluginn. in fact, 1 have remained separated from this.
I have believed it was a matter for arbitration itself.
So I can't ag~ ree with them,~ and Mr Hawke himself last night
on television had to say that he couldn't prove there was
collnsion, but he thought because of a combilnation of
circumstances there might have bean. He answered for me
the accusation made by Mr ; Thitlam. I say emphatically
and I would say it over and over again there was none.
But I would have to go a stage further. We were acting in
the public interest, we were acting in accordance with our
donstitutional power, and we were determined that we would
do all in our power, first to end the strike, and secondly,
to prevent too much unemp~ loyment and too much damage to the
Australian people and to the Australian economy.
Q. Apart from forming this emergency legislation, have
you learnt anvthi ng in terms of ossible constitutional
change or have you in retrospect decided that there was
something else your Government could have done in the last
two weeks which wasn't done?
PM: I am what they call a federalist and consequently
I have never been what could be regarded as a very strong
believer in drastic changes to the Constitution. But I
have learnt, not only as Minister for Labour and National
Service but now as Prime Minister that there is one change
to the Constitution that must be made in time, and that is to
give the Commonwealth power to legislate in respect of
industrial disputes when they are of a national character.
And I believe the oil dispute and the failure in the transport
industry is a clear indication that this is a national
problem and that the Commonwealth Parliament should have the
cGunstitutional power to legislate. / 3 
Q. And 1.-: oking back over thczf? last t isturbcd
do you think thz-re is canything the Govcrnment
could hIave c&amp; hn that it didn't do?
PM: I don't think oi_ Th only action we could have
t: aketrn was to call the Parlia-: mcnt toq.: Ather and to introduce
ome rgcncy leagislatic-in to dt-; al with the kind of problem
that emerqca' as ~ a result of the strike. We did that, and
im ort: ! ntly, has to be remembcered that from theC moment
I announced th1-at we wr rprdtro recall Parliament,
so'. too, did all the other activities commence, As for
example, ' 4r justice M~ oore then docided that he would make
reccartuendations to the -t-q7o partCies for a resolution of
the dispute and to got tChe men back to work. So, too, did
you find other members of the trzde union movement,
particularly leaders of tho trade union, and in one case,
a Leade~ r in the Tracs Hall Council in Sydney, T,;, ere prepared
to make recor'xcncdtions to theic Australian Council of Trade
Unions that thev should let the men gn back to work. In
other words, T believe that our action was the beginning
of a process, and that process ended today when the men
decided overwhelmingly to go back tro wc-ir% and to accept
arbitration. Thanli-you very nuch Prime ' tinistcr. 



MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT HON.
WILLIAM _ McMAHON, CH, MP. 9 AUGUST 1972
WEEK
Interviewer: Paul Lynch
Q. Prime Minister, you, your Cab-' ret colleagues, and various
other Government spokesmen, including the Q. C. s whom you've
retained to appear before the Commonwealth Arbitration Commission,
have made it clear that you stand one hundred per cent
against a general increase in the number of people getting
the 35-hour week. Why is that
PR. The question that must be answered by anyone who thinks
about the 35-hour week, is this. What wv~ ill the effect be upon
the mother, and the children in the home? W'hat will be the
effect on people on fixed i.-Ct-, Tj-v2S, as for example on people
receiving superannuity payments? What will be the effect on
our export in competition with the exporters of other countries?
These are the problems we face. And I think it can be
crystallised in this way that if the 35-hour wieek were introduced,
and we tried to replace those hours, by overtime working
at penalty rates, or by fresh labour, then, we believe, the
cost to the community would be 3m:-r; of the order of
$ 2,500 million to $ 2,600 million per annum. And secondly, and
this is of crucial importance too. We believe that on the
evidence available to us at the moment, unit cost would go up
by as much as 18%, depending upon the effective reduction in
working hours. I want to emphasise those words ' unit cost
could go up by as much as 18% V under the conditions that I have
mentioned. That is the reason I believe wo have to oppose the
week whenever we have the opportunity to do so before
the Arbitration and Conciliation Commission.
Q. Prime Minister, you qualified your phrase ' unit cost'.
Now that is a technical term of course. What does it mean to
the average person listening at this m;. oment? Does this mean
that everything is going to go up 18% in price? ./ 2 
PM: It means that on the average, you would expect that those
costs would go up by the amount that I have mentioned, depending,
of course, as I said, on the effective reduction of the
working week itself. What it does mean is that unit costs go
up, then, of necessity, the price of goods in the retail stores
must go up as well, and these prices have to be paid by the
mother, and they have to be paid by her on behalf of the
children, and in time it must lead to a 1-Iqsning of purchasing
power by the other eonlo that I've mentioned, particularly
the oxnorter and the--ern-n -n fixed income.
Q. One argument put forward in favour of a shorter working week
is that if you have people working for fewer hours, more jobs
will be created. In a time of unemployment, do you see that as
a good argument
PM: There are many better ways of getting increased employment
and reduced unemployment than by reducing hours of work, particularly
under present circumstances. As an example, for the
last year or more, we have been creating opportunities for
greater employment. Wo gave additional funds to the States
in order that they could build up work opportunities. We
reduced income tax so that there would be greater purchases in
the stores, and this would reflect back into employment-giving
opportunities in the factories. This is the way of getting
greater production, greater employment, and giving greater
prospects for improving living standards, and this is what we
want to do.
Q. Prime Minister, twice in the past two months your Government,
through a has intervened before the Commonwealth Arbitration
Commission to try to prevent the granting of a 35-hour week in
two separate industry areas. Now in both cases your submissions
were rejected by the Commission. Does this make you feel that
perhaps this isn't the best time in the world to be opposing the
week?
PM: No, we wanted to make a point before the Arbitration
Commission. We wanted it to be known what we thought the impact
would be on the community. And above all we wanted to prevent
a flow-on to other industries. And in the most recent case,
that is in the container denots, the Commission itself stated
that this was not to be taken as a rule" to anply to all other
industries; it was not to be taken as a precedent. We hone the
Commission will be able to live up to that rule, and certainly,
whenever we get the opoortunity to intervene, we will do so to
prevent it becoming a crecedent.
Q. Is the 35-hour week going to be, do you believe, one of the
big electoral issues of this year:
PM: Not necessarily, but I think ople must continuously bear
it in mind, and the more they know about the facts, the more,
' I believe, public ooinion will be mobilised against the
week. But we don't want to make this a political issue. We
certainly don't want to make it an electoral issues. But if
there are strenuous efforts ma. de by the trade union movement,
and little or no control from the Australian Council of Trade
Unions, then inevitably it will become a political issue, and
consequently an electoral one. / 3 
Q. The retiring A. C. T. U. Counsel,( Mr Willis, from memory),
said some few weeks ago when he left his position to run for
office, that already ae Australian worker in five works for
hours a week. Do you know whether that is a correct figure?
PM: I don't doubt that it is because usually he is pretty
accurate, but I couldn't give you a precise answer because I
haven't checked on the facts myself. But I don't think that
gets away from the crucial issue that faces us. If we get a
week under the conditions that I've mentioned, then,
of necessity, people must pay more and get less. And that
must affect those who, we feel, it is our responsibility to
protect, the poorer sections of the community, and above all,
the family group. They'll pay more, they'll get less, and
their prospects for the future will be dampened.
Q. A final point, Prime Minister, on a lighter note, of course,
clerical grade officers of the Commonwealth Public Service
don't work a 40-hour week. In fact, they work pretty close to
a 35-hour week already. Does this mean that the Commonwealth
Public Service is not productive
PM: I can't make a comment about this because they got their
awards through the arbitration system, or through the Public
Service Arbitrator. As that award has been granted we have to
livewith it, and do the best we can. I want to prevent a
flow-on to other industries if I can do so.
Thank you very much, Prime Minister. 



EMARGO NOT FO IRNRISR D-TEI n P
PRIME MINISTER
MACOUAP. IE NFORK WPEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRICE . MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP. 16 AUGUST 1972
THE BUDGCT
Interviewer Paul Lynch
Q. Prime Minister, first of all, the Budget that was
brought down by Mr Snedden last night obviously not in any
sense a revolutionary Budget. It is pretty much the mixture
as before with some taxes raised, others lowered. What would
you say in response to this assessment of the Budget?
PM I don't think that is the correct assessment.
But naturally enough, the basic needs of life have to be
treated in the Budget first, such as pensions, and similar
types of matters. On this occasion, not only have we
introduced a number of novel features but they have all been
important. You rightly mentioned our proposals relating to the
abolition of the means test, but we have also introduced childminding
centres for those people who have to go to work and
can't have their kiddies looked after. We have introduced' for
the first time a totally new idea relating to the wives of
pensioners, the wives of invalids and of certain types of
beneficiaries of repatriation. They will now get pensions
even though they are not eligible at the present time. We
have introduced a very substantial change relating to payment
of estate duty. So, too, have we introduced a change of another
kind that I think will be invaluable to oeonle on superannuation
because we have introduced a means by which they will not only
get a greater pension but, as they get older, the pension or
their right to pension will increase. So these are all new,
and in addition, I think I should make one other comment to you,
and it relates to our National Health Scheme. Because we have
now adopted a practice by which we can ensure that to whatever
extent it is practicable, the neonle who go into a nursing home,
or who get nursing attention at home, or whose relatives are
willing to look after them, will receive ? ssistance of a kind
that has never been done in Australian history before. Now I
could go on like this for a considerable time, but I think that
is a big enough series of issues on which I can emphatically / 2 
-2
( PM Contd.)
state that I think there are more revolutionary changes in this
Budget than you mentioned and I think more revolutionary
changes than I have known in any other Budget for the twenty-two
years I have been in Parliament.
Q. Prime Minister, you have been talking very largely
in terms of benefits which will accrue as a result of this Budget,
that is the outgo side of the Commonwealth Government's
finances. on the incoming side of your finances, with this
ten per cent cut in personal income tax, do you feel there is
any risk you won't be able to pay the larger social service
bills?
PM: No risk whatsoever because the Commonwealth always
has the power to be able to pay for the promises it makes and
the legislation it introduces. But I think you do open up one
other subject that in time has to be answered, and that is whether
or not this could create what is called inflation by demand.
I. don't think so. The simple fact is that today the economy
is not ticking over as rapidly or as well as we want it to do,
and consequently this is an occasion when we should have
internal deficit financing even of a substantial kind. It is
my belief as one who has had a pretty good record for economic
management as the Treasurer, I believe what we have done is
just about right, and I think it will turn out to be right in the
long run too.
Q. Prime Minister, have you a figure for this internal
deficit that you were talking about?
PM: Yes, I believe it is about $ 60 million.
Q. So obviously you think this is sound economically,
the whole Budget picture. I would ask you, Sir, whether you
consider it sound in political terms. You have heard the
reactions or read the reactions of Mr Whitlam. and of Mr Hawke
and of other critics of the Budget. What do you have to say
about the points they have made?
PM: Well, I have answered the question already about
economic problems and whether I think this is sound economic
management from a national point of view. I know it is, on
the facts as we know them at present. But as to the political
items that arise by Mr Hawke who seems now to have assumed the
role of the titular leader of the Labor Party, and Mr Whitlam,
I have this to say. Mr Hawke is talking about everything, and
I do not believe that he has a proper understanding of the
problems that are involved and what should be done. But if you
saw him on television last night, I think he created the impression
that there should have been a greater deficit than the one
that we have agreed to. Our attitude has been flexibility, and
if we felt we were not doing enough, of course we could do more 
I It. 
3
( PPI Contd.)
on a subsequent occasion. But as I spid, on the facts as
we know them at the moment, we think ~ ehavea done exactly
what is right, and those viewas are supporteO. by the
financial authorities, those who give us the advice on
which the Budget is drafted. As to M-r Whitlam, quite
frankly, and I don't lik; saying thisr-too rpuch, blit Mr
Wqhitl-Yn k-nows nothing at all about economics or finance,
and those who listen to him in the H-ouse will know just how
barren of economic and financlal % nowledge hz is. He is
playing politics, he doe'-7n't care what the inipact of h.-is
statements might be. rWe have to take our action. We must
be responsible for what h'an
Q. Turning to w. 7-on's issue-s this year, thore have
been two leading issues that womien have been pressing for
this year so far asking for relief in the :, 3udqret in two
forms. One is child-minding centres, and the ot Lhor is the
reduction or the abolition of the salc! 3 tax on contraceptives
of 27 txor cant sales tax. You havno indeed entered the field
of Commonealth-funded child-minding centres. FWhy did you
not tacklle the iA* ssue of contraceptives?
PM: We didn't tacklc any of th-issu associated
with oales tax on any type of goods, or for that matter on
Motor vcehicles. ntd de-id not lookV at the question of
the abolition of sales ax on contraeceptives.
Q. Two ancillary poi , nts, Sir. FirstI of all, outside
the Budget tslyou IhFav announced that your Government's
policy on the povorty is.-uo h;: s changed and you are appointing
a national encuirY inti-novart". Why this change, Sir?
I perscmally acccp-ted the vi-ew1, -ind I have
said it over and over again, that TI believe it is the
responsibility of eve-ry Government to find out where the poverty
line is, and t-hen to make adequate provisi-on in the
Budget or outside the Bhudget if necessary in order to,
ensure that the pnverty line is at least cove-: red with.-something
to snare for the beneficiaries. Now wIe have had thIe
advantage in recent years of a Fo~ ndorsnn Group ' Report on
Poverty in Melb-ourne an invaluable document. a study in
dpth by pople wIho knrow, what they are talking a) bout. A-nd
in our Budget or -prior to the 3ud'-get I had decidod that
this would be our guideline to de-cide whe-: re reform should
take place; as for exaimple in the case of pensions, in the
case of widow),-s, in the case of invalids,, and also, a--s I
have mentioned before, in the case of hiealth, that is in the
nursing homes and home nursing attenticn. Now,%, my colleague 
-4
( PM Contd.)
the Minister of Social Services will, during the course of the
next few days, show exactly what we have done, and I think in
every case, with two or probably three exceptions, you will see
that the benefits we have given take t,. he people involved above
the pcverty line. Now, therefore, this is a remarkably good
achievement and one of which I happen to be proud. So this is
not a bad time in which a poverty enquiry can a new poverty
enquiry can be carried out. That is why I decided, because
the churches were pressing so strongly, and others were pressing
so strongly that against the background that we have created
or the foundations we have created, that I was willing once
again to look at the problem of whether we would have a poverty
enquiry, and we decided that we would do so, and I announced
it yesterday.
Q. And the other ancillary point, Sir, it struck some
people as curious that the day before the bringing down of the
Budget that the Treasurer would announce the terms of his
enquiry into income tax and other taxation reforms. Will it bc
a year before the results of these enquiries can be reflected
in any future Budget or Government fisacl policies?
PM: Longer than that, I believe, unless the Commissioner
in his wisdom desires, or intends to make preliminary or
reports from time to time. That is up to him. I have not
given it very great thought as to whether he should do so, but
I hope he does. But the report will take some considerable time.
I doubt whether we will be able to get the final report within
a period of one or two years. But we haven't waited for that.
In fact, on the average, we reduced income tax by ten per cent.
and we gave the greatest benefits to those on the smaller
incomes. And people on $ 20 or less per week will not be
required to put in income tax returns unless special
circumstances exist. So we haven't waited until this report
has been fully completed. As we believe the need or the
necessity arises, we will tcae action. We have already taken
action in fact, and if we have to take action in the future,
we will do so. Prime Minister, thank you. 



PRIM AUTAIAISTE
FOR PRESS: PAM. No 79/ 1972
TASMANIAN APPLE AND PEAR INDUSTRY
Statement by the Prime minister, the Rt. Hon.
William Mctiahon,
The Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon, said in Canberra today
that he was very concerned at the Position of the Tasmanian
apple and pear industry. He said market access problems and
rising costs of production were mainly to blame for the situation.
" The Commonwealth Government was taking several steps to
help ease the problems facing the industries," Mr. McMahon said.
" Since the United Kingdom devalued sterling in 1967 the
government has provided substantial sums of money to the industry
to offset the effects of the devaluation. In the three years
1968-69-70, payments of devaluation compensation to the industry
were $ 2.4 million, $ 2.1 tillion and milliontmaking a total
of $ 7.1 million. " Besides this initiative the Commonwealth has implemented
the apple and pear stabilisation scheme which commenced wit the
1971 season. In this season $ 2.6 million was Paid by the government
to the Australian apple and Pear industry, which Tasmania dominates.
In this week's Budget a further $ 3.15 million has been prcvided
for the 19072/ 73 season. The amount in this week's Budget includes
a special allowance totalling $ 0.4 million as a special provision
for the 1972/ 73 season.
Following a move instituted by the Commonwealth Government
earlier this year, the Australian Agricultural Council set up a
special committee to examine and report on the transport and
marketing problems of the apple and pear industry. This committee
which has been actively pursuing its enquiries into these problems
will be meeting again in the very near future. Besides all these
steps the Commonwealth Government has offered, and the states have
accepted, a proposal that the Commonwealth finance a fruit growing
reconstruction scheme which will initially cover fresh-apples
andpears as well as the canning Peaches and pears industry. The
assistance provided under this proposal will be additional to the
large sums already made available under the rural reconstruction
scheme. ./ 2 
2.
Of the $ 4.6 million which the ConmonwealtC. h is providing for the
fruit growing reconstruction schemrC, $ 2.3 million is to be allocated
to the fresh annle ana near industries and the
balance to the canning peaches and pears industry. Most of the
$ 2.3 million for the fresh apple and near industry will be
received by Tasmanian producers.
This scheme will apply in two types of circumstances.
Firstly to those producers who are in severe financial diffipulties
and wish to clear fell their properties and leave the industry,
and secondly it will apply to those producers who do not have
adequate financial resources to remove surplus trees without
assistance, but whose enterprise could contin'e to be viable if
redundant trees were removed and the land put to other uses.
in each state the scheme will be administered by the state
directed rural reconstruction authority.
A draft application form for assistance under the schemre
has been prepared by Tasmanian officials and applications will be
considered postdated to 14 July 1972.
In the determination of the rate of assistance, the
reconstruction authority will -take into account the age, the
variety and yield of the trees. The avorage assistance paid will
be about $ 200 per acre but maximum rates could be higher.
Earlier I made reference to the study by the special
committee of the Australian Agricultural Council into the problems
of the industry. The complexity of these problems means that it
could be some time before specific proposals coulAd be available for
consideration by governments. Because of thlis, the Commonwealth
Government has decided that some special measure of assistance
should be provided to the apple and pear industries pending the
completion of the studies. I-* am hopeful that the result of the
studies will lead to some permanent solution to the industry's
problems. However, while this study is being completed the
Commonwealth Government has decided, as as announced in the Budget
spneech, that leqislation will be brought down immediately to lift
the maximum tonnage of apples and pears eligible for payment under
the stabilisation scheme from 4.4 million bushels as at present
provided under the legislation to 4.9 million in respect of the
1972 crop. This will. add an amount of $ 400,000 to the maximum
Commonwealth commitment under the stabilisation scheme for the
current season. This move, together with all the other policies of
assistance the Co-mmonwealth Government has adopted with respect
to the Tasmanian apple and pear industry, will give the industry
greater security and stability.
CANBERRA, 18 August, 1972. 



' THIS WEEK'
TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. WILLIAM : IcMAHON, CH, MP, ON
HSV7, . ELBOURNE August 1972
Interviewers: John Boland
" ax Grant
Q. Well, Prime " inister, it seems that the
Government stock-: s were consid'erably restored after the
Budget on Tuesday. But I am wondering whether some of
this didn't fall awav when Sir Alan Hulme attacked the ABC
and you, yourself, subsequently lent your support to that.
This particular situation was likened by some journalists
this week to the situation in wartime when Mr Calwell, the
then Minister for Information, closed down certain papers
in Sydney. Now, did you feel that this may have detracted
from your efforts on the Budget, this particular conflict
that you had during the week
PM: Not a bit. Surely we are entitled to comment.
What I did say was this. I wa:, asked a simple question:
Do you believe that the ABC or the people of the ABC should
be permitted to ask any question in any way they like?;
And I said, " No, I don't. I believe they have to act
responsibly. I believe they have to act upon the truth."
But if I could take it a stage further, I don't believe,
as it were, that they should consistently put one set of
ideological principles and not put the other. But I
also believe very, very strongly that the ABC, that is, the
Commission, like the universities, must not be subject to
interference by a government outside the law. If the law
provides for something, then it is the responsibility of
the Commission to observe it. Having said that, I have to
make this one other comment. So far as I am concerned, this
is a problem for the Postmaster-General who has had a lot
of experience in these matters. He has not brought it to
the Government, and I certainly don't intend to take it any
further.
Q. Do you think, though, that Sir Robert Madgwick was
put in a terribly embarrassing situation when he had to
repudiate the Postmaster-General over his statements on the
Commissioners and the ABC? / 1 
2
PM: I said I don't want to take this anyfurther because
there were differences of opinion within the ABC, and as I have
said, the Post '' ter-General has not brought this to a Government
level, so I think it is appropriate that I should leave
it at his level.
Q. I would like to ask you this, though. Who really
runs the ABC, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, this is where there is some difficulty. We
believe that Parliament must oass the law, and it devolves
certain authorities on the ABC. It is then for the Commission
of the ABC to decide what the devolution of authority shculd
be, and this is where there is some problem, I believe, with
the Postmaster-General. But, as I said, he is handling it,
and until he decides if he does decide tat it is a matter
of Government policy, then I can't go any further about it.
I have some doubts as to whether he will bring it to the
Government.
Q. At the moment, is the ABC being vetted in any way
except for their current affairs programme?
PM: Not so far as I know. It may be done by the
Postmaster-General, but if it is being done by him, he hasn't
conveyed this information to me.
Q. You have indicated in what you just said that you
believe that the ABC is politically slanted.
PM: I didn't say that at all.
Q. Ygu did use those words but....
PM: I stated certain qencral principles, and I said
that I believed that in the act of Parliament under which it
operates that it should be indenendent and free. But I also
believe that it should observe certain canons. I can't go
further into those because I have informed you of what my
views are.
Q. Prime Minister, I think very few peonle could argue
about the Budget. It has been called a bonanza Budget and
described in all sorts of other glowing terms. It must be
very tempting to go to the nolls straight away.
PM: Yes, it's tempting, but at the mment and I can
give you an assurance of this as I have given it to other
people U? to the moment, I have not made up my mind. In
fact I have not considered on what date we should have an
election. I did on Friday have the professionals in the
Party meet me in Canberra, and they discussed the limit
the earliest and the latest date we could go. Beyond that
I haven't given it any further consideration.
What is the latest date you could go? 
-3
PM: If you don't mind, I have gnt no intention at all
of answering that-sort of a question.
0. Well the earliest would probably be a month away.
PM: About a month, yes. That is all the information
I will give you at the moment.
0. W. 7uld you considcr that, though? I mean, is that
a live possibility?
PM: It's not possible.
Q. What about Octo~ ber 21?
PM: I will go no further. I have given you all the
clues I intend to give you, because as I said, I haven't
given it deep? consideration, aind 1 am not the kind of person
to answer a question without a considerable amount of thought
beforehand.
0. It would seem though, Prime Minister, that with
the legislative ? rogramnc you have got in front of you to
wind up this year, it would he fairly difficult to do this,
and also you hava got the unemployment situation, to go
to the peonla before late November. Would that be a reasonable
sort of assessment?
PM: These are matters that every porson would take
into consideration when he is making up his mind what he
should do. But there are many other considerations as well.
And I can assure you of this, you will not be able to get a
precise date, or an indicain of a nrecise date from me
tonight.
Q. Do you think that if President Nixon is successful,
and it looks as though he will be, in re-election for
President, that this would help the Government?
PM: It would be some help, yes, but it wouldn't be
decisive.
0. Prime Minister, I wonder if I can, without trying
at this print for a specific date, put it this way. Are
there scme other things that you would like to do before
you go to the polls?
PMl: Yes, there are some other things. You menticoned
first of all the legislative programme. The essential
features of the Budget mnust be -asse d by the Parliament
before we can go to an election. We also have the problem
of administraticn of the election by the organisations of
the Party, whether the Parties themselves are ready and
on what date they will have the organistion in a fit state
for an election. These are but two of the problems. There
are others as well. As I said, you won't get any more out
of me tonight, so I personally believe it would be far
better if we moved on to something else 
4
PM:
Q. PM:
0. Unemployment, then, is a problem that you might
like to rectify before you went to the nolls.
I have said over and over again, and as I said on
this programme the last time I was he-e that full employment
is with us a cardinal princinle of policy. We have strenuously
since September of last year taken measures to ensure that
unem* loyment was kept as low as we could keep it, and if we
find that the measures we are taking are not sufficiently
strong enough, then we will take more. But we do believe
the big area the area where there was a tendency to
stop the growth of employment in the way we wanted-was
consumption expenditure, We have made it a feature of this
year's Budget to increase the capacity for demand, and through
that method to be able to work its way back through the
wholesale shops ito the factories, and through the fartories
to increased employment. In other words, a moment ago, just
before I came onto this orogramme, I listened to an economic
reporter, and he said the Government has now put a lot of
money into circulation. He was talking of a total deficit, I am now
talking about an internal deficit we have turned a big
interral surplus last year into a $ 60 million internal
deficit this year, That is a vast amount of purchasing
nower to put into circuiati If it gets into circulation
quickly, then I have no doubt it will have an impact. So
as the previous commentator said, it is up to you, it is
up to the viewer, it is un to the people in the community.
I believe this is an occasion when they can spend and they
should spjend. I believe now that most of the doubts have
been sweot away, and we want a happy economy and a happier
people and not one that is worrying too much.
You must be concerned, though, that the movement
of unemployment hasn't really shifted very far from 100,000
in recent months. Have you been disappointed that there
wasn't a big decrease, particularly last month
I have said, and in fact, if you look at the
words of the Budget, I said that even though our or
the Treasurer said that even though our unemployment is
low by international standards and it is it is too
high for us. And the views expressed there are my own.
In fact the words " for us" were specifically introduced
into the Budget by me.
Now getting on to the Budget. The Budget provided
million in long-term loans to farmers. Now is this the
start of a $ 350 million rural develonment bank for farmers
as the Deputy Prime Minister has indicated? 
PM: There is too much made of this nroblem. It is
correct to say that the objectives of the Liberal and the
Country Parties are identical. They can be summed up in these
words. We both believe that there should be better opportunities
for long-term finance on a commercial basis for some sections
of the rural industry. That is our objective. Where the
problem arises is as to how achieve that objective. As
for establishing a rural bank, my colleague, Tony Street, who
is the Assistant to the Minister for Labour and National
Service, some time last year presented a paper on behalf of
the organisation the Liberal Party organisation
recommending to the Government that we should have a national
rural bank. I, in fact, promoted that idea many months before
so that it is not new. The real difficulty that arises here
is as to how you do it, and whether you will cause greater
problems by the known methods than you will cure. At the
moment, I think it is fair ko say that we do not know how
we can overcome the problems associated with a separate
rural bank. But we are looking at it, and what we did in
this Budget was to provide $ 20 million for the Development
Bank to permit it to go ahead with the provision of long-term
finance for some of the rural industries.
Q. So it is not on $ 350 million?
PM: No, I don't think it is on, not in the immediate
future. Certainly not.
Q. Not when Mr Anthony has indicated that it is?
PM: Well I don't think he indicated that it is
immediately. In fact we gave this very careful consideration
during the discussions on the Budget and we came down with
a figure of $ 20 million to go to the Development Bank for
this financial year.
Q. Prime Minister, it was rather unsual for the
Reserve Bank to come out quite as strongly as it did during
the week and virtually say that perhans the Government should
consider revaluing up to counter inflation. Is that a
softening up for a Government move in that area?
PM: I contest the words " so strongly". It is implicit
in it, but it didn't express it directly that it came out
strongly in favour of upward revaluation. What I can say to
you is that when we looked at revaluation on the last occasion,
I personally took the initial view that we should revalue
upward against the US dollar by 6.32 per cent. And I did that
for various reasons, and I can explain to you if you want them,
and I will explain some of them to you because I think it is
critically important that we understand this problem. We
haven't to think only of pure monetary theory. On that we
would have gone up to 8.57 per cent. We also had to consider
our rural industries and the way they would have to compete
against others who devalued. We had to consider the mining
industries they lost about $ 8 million for every one per cent
of upward revaluation. And above all, we had to think of
confidence. I am sure that if we had gone further than 6.32
per cent, confidence would not have been restored and we would,
I believe, have increased the prospects of greater unemployment.
So as a Prime Minister, I took a view right at the beginning of
/ 6 
-6
( PM continued)
where we should go, and I finished up on that point, and that
is where we stand.
0. But now?
PM: Well, now, while I haven't been in daily contact
or even in regular contact with the Governor of the Resoerve
Bank, at least I know that on that occasion, he thought our
action was reasonable.
Q. Prime Minister, there are a couple of things that
I would like to get through just before our time is up, and
one is overseas investment and takeovers of good Australian
com anies by overseas firms. Now are we likely in this session
to see Federal l~ egislation to prevent this going on
selling off more of the farm, in other words?
PM: I don't like these takeovers, particularly of the
type associated with Kiwi. I don't like them at all and
while I believe in free flow of exchanges under, well, normal
circumstances, I believe that the sooner we can get Papers
from the Treasury based upon the in-depth survey they made
of the effects of capital inflow private capital inflows
into the economy thie l~ etter it will be. They are preparing
about five different neers and I do not know at the moment
how far they have gone ir cnmpleting them.
Q. Would you like to have le';-islation before this
Session closes?
PM: Yes, I would.
Q. So you aim at doing it?
PM: It depends how much we have got and when we have
the election which you pressed me so hard about at the
beginning. I want it as soon as I can get it, but it is a
mammoth task and there is a tremendous amount to be done,
particularly associating with those measures in the Budget
that will relieve poverty and will give incentive to people
in the middle and lower income brackets and that will also,
I believe, establish very solid! foundations f-r future
growth somewhere about 5 or 5h per cent.
Q. Prime Minister, national superanruetion. Peo~ ple
are still exnecting some move in the Government area in that.
What is the latest an that? 
7
PM: That was explained in the Budget, too, and is a
matter in which I have taken a very deep and personal
attention. We did say in the Budget that we would abolish
the means test within three years and I took a very decisive
part in seeing that that went into the Budget. But I have
also had to look very carefully at a national superannuation
scheme or some other means of ensuring that we would be able
to finance sensibly finance the measures that we have
adopted. I have given this matter at least eighteen months
consistent attention, but I have not felt satisfied that
wo were getting the right answers, so I had no other
alternative but to say that we would appoint an individual
or a committee to examine this problem of a national
superannuation scheme. Already I have got several people's
names in mind and I believe that it won't be long before we
will be able to get quidelines for the individual or the
commission. I hope to be able to announce this quite soon.
Q. What form will the poverty enquiry take, and when
will it get under way?
PM: We have already drawn un the terms of reference
for the pcverty enql ry and we have one or two or possibly
three names under consideration. We considered this last
week in Cabinet, we will consider it again on Tuesdl, and
I believe on Tuesday we ought to be able
Q. Release the details?
PM: Well, no, the details have been finished. It is
the names we have to decide upon.
Q. Very quickly, Prime Minister, following the meeting
of State Secretaries and Federal President with yourself at
the end of last week, what will you campaign on? There was
talk about selling the nolicies between now and the election.
Apart from the Budget, what else?
PM: First of all, as you have said, we have got to sell
our nolicies, and I hope that is what I was coming here to
do today because there is so much in this Budget that is so
good, we must let the Dcople know what is contained in it
as politicians. But apart altogether from that, when the
professionals and that is the professional officers of
the organisations in the six States and in Canberra when they
met, they prepared some papers for us. They admitted they
had not given the papers to us until Friday morning at ten
o'clock and they couldn't possibly expect us to give any
decisions on them by the time we rose at one o'clock lunch
time. So we will have to consider it again next Friday
and then the professionals and I and the other two Ministers
will be meeting again next week.
Q. If you win the next election, would you consider
bringing John Gorton back in to the Ministry in the light
of recent Galluo Polls? ./ 8 
8-
PM: I have never ever spoken about John Gorton one
way or the other since he left the Government. I have
no intenion of doing it.
Q. Could you give some indication if that may be
a consideration?
P. M: No, I would g~ ive none. q3ut I would not say
that he is ruled out.
Q. In terms of time to sell the policies, that
would tend to suggest November?
PM: You are a very persistent nerson, but you will
not get an answer about it from me.
Q. Well you haven't ruled John Gorton out, so that
is one interesting thing, Prime Minister. The other is that
it is being said that this year's Budget is a politially
designed Budget for the uncommitted voter. Now is that a
fair assessment?
PM: It is one of the ingredients, yes, but there are
many better ones, because I know what was in my mind and
what was in the mind of the Cabinet when we designed
the Budget.
Q. To win the election
PM: Well, no, the first one was that we realised there
were some nTe ople who had a fear of old age and that had to
be removed and it has been removed. We knew there were areas
of need that had to be covered, and I believe most of them
have been covered. There was the area of poverty I referred
to the Henderson Inquiry. And I believe in most of the areas
we have looked at, we have covered this question of poverty
and we have done it effectively. We have had the problem of
nursing homes and home nursing attention. I am sorry that
this hasn't been em; phasised and the benefits not known because
I believe it would be a help to a great number of people.
That was our number one concern.
Q. But it is also an election-winning Budget, you feel?
PM: Yes, it is an election-winning Budget, too.
They are both important. And the third one was that we had
to have sound economic and administrative reasons for the
change. And that is why we have a deficit a total deficit
of $ 630 million, and an internal deficit of $ 60 million.
This is sound economic manae., ement and will be the basis
of our success.
Q. Prime Minister, one final question. You mentioned
yourself when you were hero some months ago in March, you
talked about unemployment and you wanted to get it down
then. But it's not down, it is still up around 100,000.
Would you be happy to go to the polls with unemployment
at that level? / 9 
9
PM: I dc-In't think it will be cuite at that level.
We have done so much that we should have achieved the
response that we expecte, by now. iut our expectations
have not been achieved. I believe this Budget, with a
deficit as I have said, of overall $ 630 million, internally
millicn should do the trick. But as I have said again,
our attitudes to Budgeting are not the hard and fast rules
of other days. We believe in flexibility, and while I don't
think it will. be necessary, it would take a little time before
we could make certain of this. But if we felt it was
necessary, of course we would act, as we have done, because
ever since the days when Sir Robert inherited government,
we have always been willing to take action whenever we have
thought it was necessary and we have never thought it was
a cast iron rule that you had to wait until the actual
day of the next Budget itself.
Q. So you think that this is an election-winning
Budget?
PM: Yes I do.
Q. Prime Minister, if I thought it was going to be a
case of third man lucky, I, too, would ask you when the
Federal election was going to take place, but I don't think
that theory is gning to work.
PM: I can assure you it won't work!
Thank you, indeed, for joining us. 



FOR PRESS: PM's No 80/ 72
TEXTILE INDUSTRY DEPUTATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon,
M. P.
The Prime inister and the Deputy Prime Minister in Canberra
today met a deputation from the Australian Textile Apparel and Related
Industries Conference.
The &amp; putation was led by Sir obert Webster, Chairman of
Directors of Bradmill Industries Ltd. and President of the Australian
Textile Apparol and Related Industries Conference. Other members
of the deputation included " r Warren Adcock, representing the
Australian Confederation of Apparel 7anufacturers; Mr John Brady,
Chairman of Crestknit Ltd., representing the Australian Knitting
Industries Council; and Mr A. J. Burgess, Director of the Textile
Council of Australia.
The Deputation outlined some of the difficulties confronting
the textile and apparel industries and there was a full and thorough
discussion. The Ministers assured the delegation that the Government
was looking closely and sympathetically at the problems of these
industries. The Prime Minister repeated the views he had expressed in
Adelaide last month when he emphasised the Government's recognition
of the important place occupied by manufacturing industries in the
Australian economy. The Prime ninister referred again to the fact
that -the Government was negotiating for voluntary restraint
arrangements with low cost overseas countries in order to ensure
protection for Australian manufacturers of textiles and apparel.
The Prime Minister also commended the efforts of Sir Robert Webster
and the industry itself in recent negotiations to bring about
voluntary restraints by countries exporting to Australia.
24 August 1972
CANBERRA 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RE BEFORE 6.30 PM ( EST)
PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP. 24 AUGUST 1972
Interviewer Paul Lynch
Q. Prime Minister, quite obviously poverty is going
to be one of the big issues in the election in 1972
You have spoken, and Mr Snedden has spoken, about the
Government's endeavours to stamp out poverty, particularly
in the areas of pensieiners, particularly widows and
aged and invalid pensioners. Now what exactly have you
done?
PM: This covers a pretty broad canvas, but what we
did was to study the Henderson Report on Poverty, a limited
rep6rt though it was, and we tried to ensure that in each
case, that is of aged pension, invalid pension, widow's
peasion, and in the case of a standard family, that at
least we gave them increases in benefitsthtt took them
above the poverty line as defined by Professor Henderson
and his group., The Professor's Report is npt yet fully public,
as I understand it?
Oh yes, it's fully public. It was published
a year or more ago, I believe, but it has been brought
up to date. But what we have done is we have increased
the poverty line in accordance with the movement of, say,
the Consumer Price Index, and we have compared that with
the increases we have made in the -rious benefits.
Prime Minister, one of the suggestions that has
been made this year is that pension benefits should be
tied to the cost of living index in some way rather than
being announced in the B et on an annual basis. Do you
accept this point of view? / 2 
-2-
PM: No, I don't. I think it is better we make up our
mind based upon the Consumer Price Index of the kind of
increase that we should give. But what we have done, and I
think it is much more important, we have gone much further
than the increase in the CPI Index would indicate. As for
example, you take, as it were, a married couple where under
Professor Henderson's criteria they would have got about
$ 19.50, the actual rate for us and if it has been updated
by the Consumer Price Index, would have been about $ 24 or
they will receive about $ 38.50 from us. In other
words, we do better than tying it to the Consumer Price
Index.
Q. How exactly will this $ 38.50 be made up, Prime
Minister?
PM. It will relate to the actual pension rate itself
together with what we call supplementary assistance and
endowment.
Q. I see. The supplementary assistance and endowment
has to be applied for separately is that correct?
Pm. Yes, they have to be.
Q. one of the complaints that I have heard voiced by
people calling Open Line to this station has been that whenever
something like this happens with pensions all that
happens is that such people as the pensioners' landlords take
it away again. Can anything be done about this?
PM. That is difficult because we have no power here, but
what we have done in this Budget is to provide that
supplementary assistance, that is assistance to those
pensioners who have to pay rent, would also be increased by $ 2
to Regrettably, we haven't a direct influence here. I
only wish we had.
Q. Another issue I would like to raise with you this
evening, Prime Minister, is the National Health system. There
have been a number of revolutionary ideas put forward in the
last year about the National Health system. There is, of
course, an alternative Labor scheme and various things like
this. One of the ideas I believe Labor is putting forward is
one for compulsory medical insurance. Can you see that
within a year or two your Government will be interested in
adopting a need for compulsory medical insurance?
PM. . I don't think so. What we are trying to do is to
work with the Australian Medical Association in order to get
a common fee, and we had a committee of inquiry, first of all
it started with Mr. Justice Kerr and then continued when he
went to the Supreme Court, that made recommendations to us
that would bring the doctors' remuneration was increased but
also had the effect of ensuring that the patients themselves
were protected to the maximum extent. In other words, that
if we in government were prepared to pay an additional amount
to the medical practitioner for the common fee, it would
overcome the necessity of the patients themselves having to
make an additional coantribution. We believe that with the
AMA that now has the power to recommend and to decide upon
common fees for domiciliary attention, for attention in the 
surgery, or for major surgical operations, we believe if we can
S get an accommodation and agreement with the AMA, that this will
really make the National Health $ cheme, whether for hospital
or medical attention, not only well balanced but in the best
interests of the patient.
Q. One final point, Prime Minister, with the National
Health Scheme, is the Government looking at all at the
possibility of insurance for the cost of dental care or
various ancilliary services like the cost of glasses and
things like this?
PM: We have had a look at them on several occasions,
not in this Budget because we thought there were other
matters to which we had to give very urgent attention. We
decided in the past that it was a little too difficult to
supervise and for that reason we have not gone ahead with it.
But this is a matter more, I believe, for my colleague, the
Minister for Health, than it is for me. I will certainly
direct your question to him as soon as I get back into the
House.
Q. That is very kind of you, Prime Minister. Thank
you % ery much. 41.. i4 
j 



PRIME MINISTER
TALKBACK
BRIAN WMITE = INTE~ rrIEW1S THE. PIUI MINISTER, ' THE
RT ON. _ WILLIAM. -MC. M4ON, CH, M4P, FOR THE
M-ACQUAYE NETWORK 24 AUGUST 1972
Well, now, one of the major subjects which is
occunying Federal political attention at this.' moment
is Ithis matter-of re-aluation-of the Australian dollar.
In its annual report this week, the Reserve Bank camne.
out quite definitely. it -would appear in support ofthe
notion of revaluation. The report. does not specifically
mention the word " revaluation"~ but nonethele!: s, the ,. hole
tenor of the remarks.-iJt made on this-subDject seem to
indicate that it war-.. in ' favour of it. Then we had onwhat
night was it T'uesday night, the Leader of th-e
O) pposition in an interview macte a statement to the effect
that he ondorsed what the Bank,-had to say. Yesterday
as sor'e nowspaper-report-ri today for example, the
Adelaide Advertiser -renorted today that Mr Whitlam
came undar sustaincd attack from Labor MPs yesterday
for advocating revaluation of the-dollar. On This
Day Tonight last night, the. Deputy Prime Mini, 7ter, 1" r
Doug PAnthony came out flatly in op~ position to revaluation.
In Parliament today, the Prime !-inister has-endorsed that
stand. On the line from Canberra at this time, I have
tho 1Prime MinIster, the Right Honourable William McMahon.
Prime M4inister, can i ass you if there is any
disagreement in Cabinet on whether or not there should be a
revaluation?
PM.-Not so far as I am awire. I di-d say in Parliament
today that in the course of the last twoc days ycsterday and
today, I had discussed this question both with the Deputy
Prime Minister and the TreaSurer w: eo Js functionally responsible
for those problouis. Thcere was no disagriement between us.
0. WFere you aware that Mr :, anony planned to make his
statement against revaluation last night?
Q. You were not?
PN1-INo. I don't think thpt mattered because I had
discussed it w Ith him oarlier in the day.
Q. The suggostion which arose last nig~ ht which has been
taken up by some people is that Mr A1nthony simply took matters
into his own hands. 
-2
PM: I don't think that is true because I : iscussed it
with him earlier in the day. But I confirm that he didn't
discuss with me beforehand the question o f going on
television.
Q. On a matter of this importance, perhaps, some
people might think that would have been expected?
PM: Oh, I don't think so because I had only on the
previous Sunday gone on television myself and I had made
the Government's position clear. in other words, as I
listcned to what he said, I don't want to say he necessarily
did this, but it did appear as though he had followed
exactly the same lines as I had. So I couldn't object in
a caso like that.
Q. Can I ask you what factors would lead Cabinet to
a new assessment of this matter?
PM: If it were brought up by the Treasurer and I
don't think it will be because I h-ave already mentioned
it to the Treasurer -we could consider it again. But I
gave four good reasons why we should remain w, hee we were,,
and I stick to them.
0. Would you like to go into those again?
PM: Yes, I indicated that when we revalued on the
last occasion, I had five important problems in mind. The
first one I had to consider the interests of thcse primary
producers who would have to meet comnetition from the
producers of countries that devalued, and I didn't want to
affect them more than they had been, The second point was
that in the case of our mineral industrics, we were going
through a particularly tough time, and who lost about
$ 8 million ( Australian) for every cent we revalucd against the
American dolhr and those who had their contracts made in
US dollars would suffcr further losses, and I didn't think
it was appropriate at that time. Then we had to think of
the manufacturers Australian manufacturers who had to
compete with the manufactured goods of the people from
overseas and, for that matter, import-competing manufacturers.
Then, most importantly, was the economic climate of
confidence in Australia itself. i did not beliovc it would
help our cause by revaluing upwards any further than we did.
In other words, when unemployment is proving tough to handle,
when confidence has to be restored then further revaluation
would, in my opinion, havo done harm and I wasn't prepared
to permit that to happon.
Q. You think those factors still apply?
PM: Yes. ./ 3 
-3
Q. What about the economic climate? you think
it is no different?
PMI: It has moved a lot further, yes. it's a lot
better. But I would like to sea it much better before TI
would contemplate any change.
Q. The Reserve D~ ank, while not spociF-ically
using the word l" revaluati. oni, su) ggested it pir etty clearly
in its report this week as a means of ccmbatina, inflation.
You do not agree with thatT
PM: ImpJlicitlvr thle Reservc-Ban'! said that it thought
there should be further rev'aluaition, that is appreciation
of the P.. 1. stralian currency. It looked at it from a purely
monetary point of view, i, as the head o~ government, had
to take a wiAdor vie,-, part ' icularly with relation to
unem-ploymcnt and clonfidcnce and sus3taining Australian industry.
Q. The Opposititon Leader, M4r Whitlam, has been accused
in the House today of committina a nnlitical crime by suggesting
that the dollar shnu.' i. be revalued. Do you go along with
that?
PM: I wudtusc those T. o rdo, no. But what I will
say is that I thin, ihe ' Wa-S extremol&gt; foolish, and he made it
-aooear that he has little no knowledge of economic or
financial problems. 1 am amazed that lie e-von got involved
in the problem becau~ e ilt becamye ovu3he did not know
what he was talking about.
Q. Mr Trritlam's attitude wvas that he w,, as endorsing
Sirfllv what the Reszerve:. Bank said.
PM. N-0, it is not. No it is not. He was endorsing that,
but he went much further. Hie accepted personal responsibility
for what he said. ; Lid for that -xitter, there was a second
question in the D3ouse toda. y that confirmed that as the view
of certainlv a la~ rqe section of the Lab: or Party.
Q. There a feeling abroad that w-, hichever Party wins
the ncxt olection,...... bo~ th the Government and the 0Opposition
at the momcnt !, ould. l stand against revaluation, but come the
election when it is ver there will be a revaluation.
Dco you have anx, cormment on that?
Ptl : oJ -lW e are putting , hv-o
f irst o.-f all, sc. far as I an conccrned and the Gcvernment
is co-ncernead, wc: -arc not contemplating revaluation. We are
not;-conteriolating changes in the value of the currency. It
is obvious, too, that thcre iL, a T. 7ide differance of opinion
wi1 thin the Lab'or Party itsclf. Ane'. th ose who ara exoressing
o-pini( ns believe that thero shoul,' be a rcv., luation. I
don't know which side would triui--th. .14 
A--
Q. Do vou believi that tjie
-Co~ nmlet-ely uitcd e n revaluaton.?
PM: believe.-they fie Y-es.
Q. All right; Sir. Tha. nk you for talking to me. 



" THIS DAY TONIGHT"
Interview given by the Prime Minister, the Rt.
Hon. William McMahon on ABC National Television Network
Interviewer : Tony Joyce AUGUST, 1972
Introduction ( Bill Peach)
To revalue or not to revalue, that is the question.
Whether it is noble or not seems to be anybody's guess. Mr.
Whitlam and the Reserve Bank seem to think we should revalue right
away, they think the Australian dollar is undervalued. But no
sooner had Mr. Whitlam said this on TDT last night, then he was
being publicly contradicted by the Labor spokesman on rural affairs,
Dr. Rex Patterson. The Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Anthony, weighed
in to accuse Mr. Whitlam of'a political crime", and the Prime
Minister, Mr. McMahon, said he thought the Australian dollar should
stay right where it was. The value of the Australian currency has
obviously become a political issue at least the politicians
themselves obviously see it as a political issue. The voters might
be finding it a bit hard. to work out which way the political benefits
would flow from this controversy since it appears there is
disagreement within both the Liberal and the Labor Party on what
we should do about the Aussie dollar. The Prime Minister, Mr.
McMahon, talks with Tony Joyce.
Q. Prime Minister, your Government's own advisers, the
Treasury, the Reserve Bank and most financial experts seem
to agree that a revaluation would ease inflation. Why then
has the Government decided against a revaluation?
PM. We must look at every single effect of the Budget
itself I'm sorry, of the valuation itself. In pure monetary
theory, you can probably justify an increase in the value of
the Australian dollar but when you look at other angles as,
for example, you look at what would happen to our rural
industries and the increased competition they would get and
the lower price they would receive, then you have to think a
second time.
Q. Well the Treasurer, Mr. Snedden, has not yet said
that he is against a revaluation are you going further and
arguing against the revaluation? / 2 
PM. My opinions are exactly t-he same as the
Treasurer who is the Minister most involved' in this and it
is exactly the same as the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Anthony.
None of us wants revaluation.
Q. Mr. Snedden has said thouqh that he hasn't said
that there shouldn't be a revaluation.
PM. Has he? I didn't know he'd said that, but I do
know in a conversation with me he has indicated clearly that
our ideas are the same.
Q. Mr. Snedden last night on this programme said that
statements on the currencycould cause speculations. Do you
agree with this?
PM. I agree that statements of the kind made by
Mr. Whitlam could cause problems for us, and that is why I
believe that we have to be clear and definate that we have
no intention of revaluing.
Q. Yet Mr. Anthony has come out quite clearly for
the status quo. Is he not equally culpable with Mr. Whitlam
for making a positive statement?
PM. I think we have to make the positive statement
that revaluation will not take place, neither will devaluation
take place, and that is to make it certain that people will
be able to carry out their transactions without fear of
change in the value of the currency.
Q. You don't think that Mr. Anthony's clear
statement that he doesn't want any revaluation could itself
cause some sort of speculation?
PM. I don't. I think it became critically important
after Mr. Whitlam had made his statement that positive
statements be made on behalf of the Government that no change
would take place.
Q. Tc what extent did Mr. Anthony's public
statements both against revaluation and for an early election
embarrass you and the Government?
PM. Certainvly there could be no embarrassment so far
as changes in the value of the currency were concerned,
because only on Sunday night I went on and said exactly the
same as he had said so that couldn't have caused any
embarrassment to me. The other question hasn't caused much
embarrassment either.
Q. You say it hasn't caused much embarrassment?
PM. Yes.
Q. Mr. Anthony didn't, I believe, consult you before
he made these public statements? 
PM. He talked to me about it, yes, and I knew his
views, but he did not think to tell me that he was going on
television, that is correct.
Q. Would you have preferred that Mr. Anthony had
consulted with you?
Pm. I don't think there would have been any difference,
anyhow.
Q. Might this not be seen though in a sense as the
Country Party tail wagging the Coalition dog?
PM. It obviously didn't happen, because I will make
up my own mind, I will listen to advice that is given, but the
decision will be made by me, so your impression of the tail
wagging the dog just couldn't be right.
0. Might this not be an impression that the
electorate could get?
PM. No I don't think so, I think on the contrary it
comes out as a decisive action on my part.
Q. Mr. Anthony seems to see revaluation as an election
issue which could be of some advantage to the Government.
Do you agree?
PM. Yes I do. It will be a marked election advantage
to the Government not only in the country areas but amongst
business and those who want the highest level of employment.
Because if we did revalue I think it would have a bad impact
on employment.
Q. Do you now see an early election as a more
attractive prospect?
PM. I just won't give you an answer to this no matter
how much you might try and encourage me to give the exact
date. I think I have the date in my mind and when the
proper occasion, or the prover moment comes when I'll
announce it, I'll announce it in the House and nowhere else.
Q. If the Budget is a good Budget and revaluation
is a good issue what then would be the advantage of waiting
to a later date?
Pm. Well, I'm asked, and I believe this is critically
important for me. We've made certain promises in the Budget.
They are some of the most humanitarian and profound or
wil1espread of any that I know since I've been in the Cabinet.
I believe that those that give benefits to the people should
be put into law before we go to the polls,
Why then does Mr. Anthony want to go now? / 4 
PM. You must ask him those questions, but the
country is perhaps a little different, substantially
different, from the rest of Australia. That is a question
you'd better ask him not me.
Q. Mr. Snedden, too, has said that he's quite
happy to have an election.
PM. Yes, but the decision is mine and I will make
it and announce it at the appropriate time.
Q. Do you think the electorate is going to be
affected by this apparent split in the coalition?
PM. No I don't because it's a question as to date
not of substance, and I believe the electorate itself will
want to know the promises made are fulfilled before we in
fact go to the people.
Mr. Prime Minister, thank you very much. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH. mp, JN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, CANB3ERRA
ENQUIRY INTO POVERTY
29 AUGUST 1972
I am pleased to announce that Professor R. F. Henderson,
Director of the Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research
3 in the University of Melbourne, has undertaken to conduct the
Enquiry into Poverty on behalf of the Government.
The terms of reference of the Enquiry are as
follows: To investigate-The extent of poverty in Australia, including
changes in its level;
The incidence of poverty in Australia upon
special c~ tegories of persons or localities;
Factors which cause poverty in Australia;
The ways in which Commonwealth and State
Governments, Local Government bodies and
other bodies apd persons currently assist
the alleviation of poverty in Australia;
the extent and effpctiveness of existing
measures and services; and differenqes between
and within States in the efforts of State
Government, Local Government bodies and other
bodies and Persons to alleviate aspects of
poverty in Australia;
Any diesirable changes that would contribute to
the reduction of poverty in Australia; and
Any associated matters relevant to the general
objects of the Enquiry.
The Government will ensure that Professor Henderson
has the necessary supporting staff and that relevant Commonwealth
Departments provide him with assistance where practicable. ./ 2 
Prolfessor IRenderson will himself determine the
method of Enquiry to bo adopted, and the time necessary for
the work to be finalised.
Professor Henderson is well known for his work on
poverty. Honourable Members w-, ill be aware that he and the
Institute of which he is Director were responsible for " People
in Poverty: A Melbourne Survey which has been of great use
to all those interested in the dimensions and quality of the
problem of poverty in our land. The Government is, I think,
fortunate to have obtained his services for this Enquiry.
It will be seen that the terms of reference for the
Enquiry are very wide, having been drawn so as to enable the
Enquiry to be as far-reaching as possible in its field, whilst
concentrating on the solution of the immediate problem of
reducing poverty in Australia.
I feel confident that the decisions which I have
just announced wi11 commend themselves to both sides of the
House. 



' ACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP. AUGUST 1972
NURSING HOMES
Interviewer Paul Lynch
Q. Prime Minister, taking calls from listeners to
radio stations on this and other sations. it is quite obvious,
I believe, that while everybody knows that your Government is
planning to do something to assist people requiring nursing
home care, most people, including those eligible for such
care, don't yet know, two weeks after the Budget, exactly what
this eligibility is and exactly what you will be doing for them.
PM: I can understand that and for that reason I asked
my colleague the Acting Minister for Health to make a statement
about it in the House yesterday. I will have a word with him,
as soon as I get back to the House, to see if we can do more to
make known to the public what the benefits are and how valuable
they will be to people who require three or four different
kinds of attention that is for pensioners themselves, for
non-pensioners and what we call domiciliary care that is
lookinq after peoDle who require nursing attention in their own
hrmes. We will als give substantial subsidies to organisations
that will go to people's homes and give them nursing
attention when needed.
Q. As I understand it I have had a look at the
speech made by your colleague as I understand it, certain
pensioners will, in fact, be able to get nursing home care without
having to get anything out of their pockets or their
family's pocket from January 1. Is that correct?
PM: That is correct. You have got two different kinds
of benefit one, intensive care and the other is ordinary
care. Now the Commonwealth benefit will be in the first case
that is, intensive care, $ 56 a week, and ordinary care,
Now, this will mean that the pensioner himself, or herself,
should be able to keep $ 6 themselves, and that is a marked
improvement on anything we have had before. / 2 
-2
Q. Non-pensioners will still have to shell out,
I understand, something like $ 15 or $ 20 a week?
PM: Yes. Well, between that I think it is about
$ 18 a week, because the non-pensioners will be covered by
the National Health Insurance Scheme, and of course they
will be expected to make some payment, remembering, of course,
that some nursing homes will be treated as a home f~ or them,
and they will be living there and not in their own home or
with a relative.
0. Prime Minister, one point which I discovered from
Dr Forbes' speech, about which I had not been aware befDre,
and this is that the Federal Government is from now on going
to insist that any nursing homes that want to raise their fees,
and which are participants in this scheme, will have to
justify any such increase. This is something of a departure.
PM: Yes, it is a departure, but I think a necessary
one and a desirable one, too. Because if we are providing
large sums of money, then we cannot have these institutions
pushing up the fees that have to be paid immediately we
increase the Commonwealth benefit. So we will require them
to justify price increases, either before they become
eligible for a payment, or if they wtqfl to increase the
amount that has to be paid by a patient, they will have to
justify that, too, or they will not get the increased
benefit.
Q. trime Minister, I am curious about one point,
as discussed by the various Ministers of your Cabinet, and
this is that not all nursing homes will be eligible for these
new benefits, and only people who are attending the justified
nursing homes will be enabled to get the new benefits. Now,
why is this, and how many Australians do you think will be
denied these new benefits as a result?
PM: Look, I couldn't give you those figures, because
I haven't had that problem posed to me before. But if you
are asking me why is it that you requirB them to justify their
prices, then it is simply for this reason. The Commonwealth
itself is making a substantial amount of money available in
order that the new type of nursing attention can be given
whether it is domiciliary or whether it is in : he home itself.
And, similarly too, with other kinds of benefits. Now we
just couldn't put up with the idea that if we granted an
additional amount, as we have, say, in the case of New South
Wales of $ 10.50 for each pensioner requiring attention, that
immediately the hostel, or the nursing home itself pushed
up its fees so that there was no real benefit to the
pensioner himself or herself, it would be intolerable. That
is why we require them to justify the increase in prices.
Prime Minister, thank you very much. 
t1y K
4. 



FOR PRESS PM's No 81/ 1972
MEETING WITH N. S. W. COUNTRY MAYORS'
DEVELOPMENT COM? 4ITTEE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP.
This afternoon the Prime Minister met a deputation from the
New South Wales Country Mayors' Development Committee. The
representatives were
Alderman R. Gillard Mayor of Lithgow and Chairman of
the Committee
Alderman J. C. Matthews Mayor of Bathurst
Alderman R. Brown Mayor of Cessnock
Mr J. K. Madden Tovm Clerk of Lithgow and Honorary
Secretary of the Committee.
The Minister for the Interior, the Hon. Ralph J. Hunt, M. P.,
and the Minister for the Environment, Aborigines and the Arts,
the Hon. Peter Howson, were Dresent at the meeting.
Alderman Gillard presentcd a submission on decentralisation.
The Mayors said that to be effective, a decentralisation programme
required Commonwealth as well as State assistance.
The N. S. W. Country Mayors proposed a decentralisation
concept based on selected growth centres.
Canberra August 1972 



OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE
OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
APPEAL FUND
CANBERRA
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. lion William McMahon
M. P. 31 AUGUST, 1972
S This is a pleasant occasion for me and I hone your appeal
on behalf of the Australian year Of National Development of the
Australian Institute of International Affairs, will attract widespread
support throughout Australia.
In the time I have this evening I want to emphasise two
points that the making and public explanation of Australian foreign
policy is of great and increasing importance to t-he future of this
country; and that our foreign policy should be based on the
understanding and support of the Australian people themselves.
No-one should underestimate the importance of Australia's
involvement in the world around us at a time when there is a
tendency to concentrate on our domestic issues. To underline the
point, may I remind you of a remark made by the late President
i: ennedy. He said once and I quote him: " Domestic policy can
defeat us but foreign policy can kill us."
I endorse and support this view that the survival of
man and the continuing search for progress towards a stable and
peaceful world is very much a practical ani necessary daily
problem for the governments of the world.
A policy of isolation would not be in the best interests
of Australia. Desnite the fact that we are a prosperous island
with relatively few problems, w are directly involved in changing
world conditions of continuing importance to our own future security.
If peace is to be securc in the Asian and Pacific region
in this decade the United States, the Soviet Union, Japan and the
People's Repub'lic of China must come to some accommodationn and a
balance must be found in which each will live with an understanding
of the different systems, goals and aspirations of the others. / 2 
2.
Arrangements must also be made which accommodate the determination
of the smaller countries in the region to preserve and strengthen
their own independent societies. It must be obvious that we in
Australia have a constructive and helpful role to play in the
Pacific threatre. The other point I want to emphasise is that we believe
that Australia's foreign policy should rest on the understanding
and support of an enquiring and well-informed public opinion.
Ideally, in an educated democracy like Australia, foreign
policy should grow out of the people. We want to see a more
outward-looking Australian community with a great feeling of
involvement in the affairs of the world around us, and I would like
this informed public opinion to have more influence on the shaping
of foreign policy. Our own foreign policy will obviously be more
effective and stable if it enjoys widespread support based on the
interest and understanding of an informed public.
An active Australian Institute of International Affairs can
and must play a vital role in improving such interest and
understanding in seeking to inject informed ideas into public
discussion of foreign policy, and in stimulating a greater feeling
of public involvement in international issues facing Australia.
I believe that the work of the Institute is steadily and
surely becoming of greater importance. Indeed, at this stage of our
development, it is a role the Institute is well fitted to play.
More than ever before, we want to establish a more distinctive
Australian identity in a changing world. I therefore welcome the
vision and energy the Institute is showing in seeking to strengthen
its role. The target of the apneal $ 300,000 is a sizable one
and it will not be achieved without considerable effort on the part
of the organisers and without widespread and strong co-operation.
I emphasise that the Institute is independent of the government
the success of the aopeal will strengthen this independence and the
capacity of the Institute and add depth to areas from which the
government may draw in shaping official foreign policy. A
successful appeal will also ensure that funds will be available for
the national headquarters the Institute certainly should have.
For all of these reasons I have the greatest pleasure in
launching the Institute's year of National Development and in
asking you and your friends to contribute to this cause. 



FOR PRESS: PM No 82/ 1972
LABOR'S HEALTH NATIONALISATION PLANS
Statement by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William McMahon,
C. H. M. P.
The statement of Mr. W. G. Hayden, that Labor
would not attempt to introduce a system of salaried medical
services and that such an action would be constitutionally
impossible requires the closest analysis.
It is in direct conflict with the Labor Party platform
and the statements of his leader Mr. Whitlam and his colleagues.
The simple truth is that there is no constitutional
disbarment at all. The Labor Party could and would nationalise
the medical and hospital professions by the process of " squeeze".
Its policies are aimed to do just that.
A penetrating insight into the Labor Party's mass
Socialist intentions was given by Mr. Whitlam in his 1972
Fabian Lecture in Melbourne on 25 July.
The main theme of that address was his rejection of
the argument that the constitution offers any obstacle to full
socialisation. He said: " It would be intolerable if a Labor Government
were to use the alibi of the constitution to excuse failure to
achieve its Socialist objectives doubly intolerable because
it is just not true that it need do so".
He added: " My basic proposition is this: If Section 92
is held up as the bulwark of private enterprise, then Section 96
is the charter of public enterprisc Section 51 the key to
National responsibility and national regeneration".
Section 96 permits the Commonwealth to make grants to
the States for special purposes. By this device by the
offering or withholding of funds a Socialist central government
could reduce the States to mere puppets. ./ 2 
-2
But fir. Whitlam has been even more specific with
regard to Labor's health policies. In the same lecture he said:
" The major act of nationalisa-io in the traditional sense, to
be undertaken by a Labor government in the next term, will be
through the establishment of a single health fund, administered
by a Health Insurance Commission w-ith contributions' made accorded
to each tax payers means and treatment accorded to each patient s_
needs'.' Those are plain enough words. Everyone should know
what " nationalisation in the traditional sense" means. The
warning is clear.
The A. C. T. U. President, Mr. Hawke, at the opening of
the Federal campaign in the Shortland seat confirmed on
3 September that the A. L. P. was a Socialist party and that he had
no respect for any person who denied this.
The Labor Party h1as made it clear that all medical
specialists at public hospitals under its policy would be fully
salaried and not on a fee-for-scrvice or sessional payment.
This is the essential instrument of nationalisation of
medical specialists call of whom must have full access to
hospitals in order to pursue their profession.
Two other squeezes will operate on the specialists.
T~ rhe Labor Party's single nationalised health insurance commission
will provide benefits for public wards only, unlike the existing
voluntary schemes which provide full cover for intermediate and
private wards. Labor's policy, which must reduce drastically the
number of intermediate and private wards in public hospitals and
force almost everyone into public wards, would seriously restrict
the many specialists now in private oractice who function today
mainly in non-public wards, except in the discharge of their
honorary duties. / 3I 



FOR PRESS PM No. 83/ 1972
TERRORISTS ATTACK AT MUNICH
Statement by the Prime Plinister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon,
M. P.
The Prime Minister said today that the Australian
Government condemned the outrage by the terrorists at the
Munich Olympic Games.
The attack was reckless, barbarous, and horrible.
Such attacks shocked the conscience of the entire civilised
world. The Prime Minister extended his sympathy and the
sympathy of the Australian people to the families of those
Israelis who had been the victims of these murders.
The fact that such an attack had occurred at the
Olympic Games which were designed to promote the brotherhood
of man added a dimension of horrible cynicism to the
savagery of the attack.
CANBERRA 6 September, 1972.. 



MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEK~ LY BROA. DCAST
By the Prime Miinister, thie Rt. Hon.
William McMahon, CH, MP
BUDGET MIEASURES
Interviewer: Paul Lynch 6 SEPTEMBER, 1972
Prime Minister you were reported in the Press some
weeks ago as having said to members of your Party that they
had a good Budget and now was the time to go out and sell it.
It's quite obvious however, receiving calls at radio stations
from listeners, that most people don't have a very' clear
picture in their m'inds of just how good the Budget is for
them. Why do you think that is?
Pm. I think that the media in Australia doesn't give anywhere
enough publicity to what has been done in a Budget and that's
been a practice for years past. They're interested in
contemporary news not in explaining what has been done in
the past no matter how valuable it might be to the beneficiaries.
So therefore if I could just continue this, I believe it is the
responsibility of every member of Parliament, and of every
responsible Denartment, and particularly of members, of the
Cabinet itself to explain wh-at has to be done and to let people
know how they can go about getting the benefit of the Budget
itself.
Q. Teien you announced income tax cuts these were really
the only major cuts which were announced. How significant
are those cuts?
P! 1. W,, ell no there were others too, such as family allowances
or the allowances for dependants and many others as well. But
the cuts are pretty substantial. For example, you will not
now have to submit a return if your income is below S1,041 per
annum. Secondly with a person on an income of $ 2,000, his
taxation will now be reduced by something of the order of
$ 2.75 per week. So that his take home pay will be to that
extent increased. But I believe also that it is a pretty fair
Budget in that T~' e do concentrate on the lower and middle income
groups. ./ 2 
0. There--has been a suacr-etion for Gorm. e time-that -the
figure of .$ 317, -the incnme tax'allowance--for * a iAfe-i---hould
be raised?
P~. Yes, tha! t is alwayo * being raised. What we did do is to
increase the allowances for all de endants and in this Budget
we did increase thos; e allo-ances bly $ 52 per annum. That
covers all dependants.
Again its quite obvious nearing calls from people to
open line progre-mmes that neorple anroaching nensionable age
or nensioned neonle have very little idea of ' That your
programme is a!) out easing and finally eliminating the means
test.
PM. Well 1,7ave said that we -yould abolish the means test
within three years. That is clear cut and there can't be much
doubt ab-out it. P~ ut if there is then advise everyone who in
doubt to go to thei--r local , em! er or to the local Dep artment
of Social Service! 3 anP,. have it clearly explained to them. On
the -first part of the question you as,-ed that is, what we call
liberalisingq the means test, I think this should be ex * plained
because it is generous, it clives large benefits to an
increasingi num. ber of People. I've just jotted down a few noten
here and I think they igh behlpu because * try'v
nroposed to do is to increase the limits of w,. hat we call the
fremeans from $ 10 to 20 a -eelk in the ca~ e of a single
nensioner and from '$ J7 to $ 34.5f) a week in the case of a
married couple.
0. That's immediate?
That is immediate. Then That this means is that thie
proposed rates of pension, full p. ens: ion ill be payable until
the combined pension and means a3 assessed exceed douhle the
nenoion. T'hat'-, 40 a '. eek in the case of a single nensioner
and $ 69 a week for a married counle. And! we go further on this
occasion and say that eligibility for a part pension Will
not now cease until means as assessed reaches thiree times the
pension. 71hat'r. $ rO a week for a single nerson and $ 103.50 a
wTeek for marrieJ couples. " low w-hen w,, e look at the average
earninga -ihich are now about $ 98 a -, reek we can see how
generouq this chancre in nolicy is.
0. Prime M11inister in recent months, ' 4r. TThitlam on this
station and other critics have said there isi a fundamental flaw
in our income tax system~ hecause neople on higher salaries,
suclh as ' Ir. Mhitlam and indeed such as yourself, get larger
rebates for necesiary expenses such as narticipation in health
schemes than tVie neonle who earn much smaller salaries?
Pi I don't agree w:-itlh hirm. I think our present system is
a fair one b!: ut when you are answerin. 7 this you would ' have to
look at each incqredient of the rebate svstemi or tlie
concessional zystem. I couldn't give you a nroper ansNer to
that unless you were exnlicit as to w~ hich area you were talking
about. But I Ibelieve that our Budget this one that we've
just introduceO.--ras not only humanitarian, but I 13elteve-it
was fair. And T think it dealt witih-each section of t-he
norulation on a fair basis. And that I think re. Futes
! Ihitlam's argument at least in _ this area. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
THIRTY-FIVE HOUR WEEK
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 12 September 1972]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)--
I ask for leave to make a statement
about the 35-hour week.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted? There
being no objection, leave is granted.
Mr McMAHON-I do so because it is a
matter of national importance about which
the facts should be made clear, and
because the campaign for its widespread
introduction throughout industry threatens
to damage confidence in the economy and
in the Government's programme to secure
full employment, industrial stability, economic
growth and price stability, and a
better quality of life for all people.
The Government is opposed to any
extension of a 35-hour week at this stage
of Australia's development, either on an
industry by industry basis or as a maximum
working week to replace the standard
40-hour week of the past 2 decades
for the whole of the Australian nati onal
work force. The Government has already
demonstrated its opposition by its intervention
in wage cases which include claims
for a reduction in hours to 35 a week, and
by frequent ministerial statements designed
to warn the community of the price it
would have to pay if the Labor Party and
the trade unions had their way. The Gov-
18988172 erment wishes to have this matter freely
debated in this Parliament now so that the
people of Australia will be alert to what is
happening, and so that the reasons for the
Government's attitude are better understood.
At the outset, I want to state that the
Government is not opposed to the concept
of more real leisure for the Australian
working man any more than it is in any
way opposed to the concept of increased
real wages for the work force of this
country. It applauds both concepts, and by
its progressive policies over many years it
has worked steadily to achieve both objectives.
But it also believes that in moving
towards them the gains made must be genuine
and can be supported by the resources
of the country without undue strain on the
economy. If they cannot, there will be an
inevitable wastage of those benefits through
crippling costs, runaway inflation and economic
instability. Then full employment
will be a myth and more leisure a mirage.
This is not the time for a 35-hour week.
I repeat that we are opposed to it at this
stage of the country's development. f stress
that poinit-at this stage of the country's
development. The country cannot afford it
now or in the immediate future. Before I 
tell you why, let us look at the facts as
they are known. The present position is
that a 40-hour week is worked generally in
industry throughout Australia although a
shorter working week applies in some areas
of employment. These include some Commonwealth,
State and local government
employees; some white collar workers in
private industry; certain mining industries,
and stevedoring and container depots associated
with the waterfront. However, it is
sufficient for me to say, in this context
that a standard working week of 40 hours
applies widely throughout the country for
most of the work force. And on that standard
the nation's business, industrial and
commercial activity has been based. It
would be folly to upset it now.
As a point of history, the movement
over the last half century or so has been
from 48 hours to 44 hours, and then to 40
hours in 1948 at which point it stahiised
until recently. Obviously, there cannot be a
continuing downward progression in hours
because theoretically we would be moving
towards the absurd position of no work at
all. A whole complex of factors has
dictated the level of the standard working
week over the years but today the overriding
consideration has to be the capacity of
the economy to bear the cost-in truth,
the capacity of the citizen himself to bear
the cost of new concessions. That is the
position we are facing now.
The campaign for a 35-hour week has
been stepped up in the last two or three
years. The Australian Council of Trade
Unions Congress declared for it in 1969
and again in 1971, and the official policy
of the Labor Party lays it down and it was
confirmed at the Launceston Conference of
the ALP last year. Spokesmen for both
organisations have stated the case for it, in
a variety of forms, on many recent
occasions. In some industries trade unions
have succeeded in their claims before the
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission,
the most recent being in certain container
depot unions. In other industries, claims
have yet to be resolved and strikes, stoppages
and limitations on work have taken
place in an effort to apply duress on government
and employers. The Government
cannot stand aside idly while such a buildup
is taking place, especially when new
pressures on the economy have to be avoided and when there is abundant evidence
from recent polls that a majority, a
sizeable majority of Australians, is opposed
to a 35-hour week at this stage.
I have noted that in recent public statements
Labor Party and union spokesmen
have sought to justify claims for a
working week on the grounds that it would
increase job opportunities, and give more
leisure to the work force as a whole. Both
are assumptions without any basis in fact
and both, in real terms, are far more likely
to be wrong than right. So far as job opportunities
are concerned, a shorter working
week would be more likely to involve overtime
at penalty rates. This would inevitably
mean more wage-cost pressure and more
inflation. Increased leisure, for the minority
who might want it and get it, would mean
a costly personal sacrifice in material benefits.
The simple fact, Mr Speaker, is that
as a nation, we cannot have it all ways.
We cannot expect and get increased social
welfare benefits, reduced taxes and other
concessions-be paid more and then work
less. In the national context, a shorter working
week must be set against the wishes of most
people for improvements in social services,
housing, education, health, and other services
of a practical kind affecting the individual
and the community. The national
acclaim given to last month's Budget which
concentrated on these matters, while the
polls said ' No' to a 35-hour week, shows
where the public preference lies. The cost
of a 35-hour week, whether it comes piecemeal
or as a whole, would be staggering.
It is more than the economy could bear at
this stage as it is emerging from a sluggish
period with inflationary pressures still at
work. Let us look briefly at some of the effects
if a shorter working week was introduced.
The critical factor is the impact on unit
labour costs and prices. What would the
effect of a 35-hour week be to the national
wage bill and to inflation? The increase in
the wage bill would be something of the
order of $ 2,500m to $ 2,600m and, in some
circumstances, could exceed $ 3,000m a year.
Add these figures to the known effect of
recent wage increases on our inflationary
problem and all the danger signals start
flashing. 
The ramifications of such a huge increase
in the national wage bill would be felt right
through the economy. The surge in labour
costs would force prices up, compromise
employment prospects in some areas, create
inequalities in income distribution, and add
new burdens to our manufacturing and rural
industries, our transport services and our
trade. My colleagues directly concerned
with various aspects of the economy will
have more to say about all these problems
later. The sum of it all would be a serious
assault on our standard of living. It would
mean a cutback in real purchasing power,
that is, in our capacity to buy material goods
and services. This capacity is, of course,
fundamental to achieving a desired standard
of living.
Honourable members may fairly ask:
' Will not increased productivity help to
absorb the increase in unit labour costs?
Will not the incentive of more leisure improve
work performance?' There is no evidence
at all that it will. It is appropriate
here to look at figures relating
to wage increases and productivity.
In the decade or so prior to 1971,
the trend of average earnings showed
an annual increase of 5.4 per cent.
Productivity, in the same period, showed a
growth rate of 2.6 per cent. But in the
year to the December quarter 1971, average
earnings went up 11.5 per cent, and in the
year to the March quarter 1972, they went
up 9 per cent. That is roughly double the
rate for many years prior to 1971.
Productivity in 1970-71 was down to 1.4
per cent, almost half what it had been for
many preceding years. So what we have
been tackling in the last year has been
an abnormal rise in wages and a downturn
in productivity. Are we going to compound
that problem just at a time when we are
turning the corner and getting the trends
on the right track again? Everything the
Government has done has been directed to
keeping the economy on an even keel and
to getting it moving forward in an orderly
way. A 35-hour week would punch a hole
in our policies at a critical time. There is
little evidence, as I have said, to suggest
that a shorter working week would have any
real influence on productivity. The evidence
in other countries on the effect of reduced
working hours on productivity shows that any gains in productivity from a
week are not likely to offset to any substantial
extent the inevitable decline in output
from the shorter week.
One of the most comprehensive studies
available is that carried out by an American
research scholar, Dr F. J. Poper of New
York University. Dr Poper made a critical
evaluation of the empirical evidence underlying
the relationship between hours of work
and labour productivity. He concluded that
at a level of about a 48-hour week, a 1 per
cent decline in hours tended to be offset
by an 0.33 per cent increase in productivity,
but he also expressed the view that at around
40 hours per week decreases in hours are
not likely to bring significant hourly productivity
gains. There is also evidence that
once the working week is reduced generally
below 40 hours, the factors on which a
campaign for reduced hours was based
ceased to apply. In other words, the pressures
for increased leisure ceased and were
replaced by the financial attraction of taking
a second job.
Mr Speaker, let me summarise briefly
what the effects on the nation would be if
the 35-hour week came about, bringing
with it the extra leisure which its advocates
claim as a primary objective. Presumably
they would set their faces against increased
overtime, and presumably they would expect
industry to engage more labour, irrespective
of its fitness for the work to be done and
whether it was qualified. If this happenedthat
is, a reduction in hours, no overtime,
and more leisure-then there would be a
drop in material standards, no matter what
money there was in the pay-packet. That
money just would not go so far. Prices
would be higher, because labour costs would
be greater, and all sorts of inequalities would
arise. There would be no benefit from increased
leisure for the persons on fixed incomes
and on superannuation. There would
be disturbance in industries, costly readjustments
to make and a general disinclination
to plan for growth and expansion.
It is an act of responsible government to
warn against the dangers of a 35-hour week
at this stage of Australia's development. I
am satisfied that the Australian people are
not ' time-servers', concerned only with the 
pursuit of leisure. Nor do they include idleness
in their aspirations for higher standards
of living and a genuine improvement in the
quality of life. They do not want to pursue
a 35-hour week when they know it is only
there to be bought at a price which the
community as a whole has to pay. This is a
time of great opportunity for all Australians
and we should use it well. It is not the way to a better life to sit back and say: ' Let
us do less and ask for more'. Let us be
practical. Let us be realistic. Let us not
put the brake on progress just when we are
moving forward to a period of growth and
increasing prosperity for all people in the
community. I present the following paper:
Thirty-five Hour Week-Ministerial Statement,
12 September 1972.
W. 0. MuuiY, Government Printer, Canberra 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEAS PM ( EST)
JjAUSTRALIA,,. l
PRIME MINISTER
MACQUAF. IE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, C, MP
EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE
Interviewer: Paul Lynch 1.4 SEPTEMBER 1972
Q. Prime Minister, in the Budget Speech of Mr
Snedden last month, it was announced that the amount the
Commonwealth Government will spend on education is to be
$ 426 million, which is an increase of approximately
per cent on the figures for the current year. First
of all, why have you decided on such a large increase
per cent -for education?
PM: Because we give education very high priority in
our social welfare programme and we think that every
Australian in every Australian school is entitled to a
decent education. That is why we agreed to the increase
of $ 72 million in this year.
Q. How is the extra $ 72 million to be spent?
PM: In very many ways. Probably the first one I
should mention is the universities and colleges of
advanced education. That is, we make grants to the States
so that assistance can be given in these two quarters.
We are also giving very substantial assistance to the
States relating to capital grants for school construction,
secondary school science laboratories and libraries,
technical colleges and teachers' colleges, and we are
also giving ner capita grants for independent schools.
Could I go back a little and just remind you that on May
11, of course. we embarked on a totally new programme when
we decided to give unmatched capital grants for the public
schools and per capita grants of about.... oh, a substantial
amount that would take up to 40 per cent of the cost of
educating a child at a private school. / 2
-J 
2
Q. Prime Minister, you put one fot in the pool of
child care pre-school child care with this current
Budget. You announced that you will spend $ 5 million to
benefit children from low-income and other special need
families. What is the thinking behind that?
PM: We believe that people in need who have to go to
work and who have children have a right to have those
children looked after while they are at work. And, consequently,
we have given priority for admission to kiddies who are in
special need. That is in the case of single parent families
and to the children of sick and incapacitated people. Mow!
what we have done here e have given a subsidy so that the
cost to the person sending the child to the school can be
reduced. W-will give unmatched capital grants to non-profit
organisations so that they can equip the schools and we will
also provide staff subsidies. In other words, this is
concentrating on the area of greatest need and to ensure that
the kiddy is looked after.
Q. Earlier I used the phrase " putting a foot in the
pool," Prime Minister because it has been suggested by
organisations such as the Women's Electoral Lobby that you
could go much further in this area. Could you see that
happening in future years and in future Budgets?
PM: Yes, of course I could, but do you mean child
care, or...
Q. Yes, child care.
PM: Child care... well, this is a good start, and so far
as I can make out-and I was one of those who pushed this
relentlessly to ensure that it came into the Budget-I believe
it is a very, very good start, but of course we would only
regard it as the beginning of a process.
Q. P'. de Minister, the matter of giving State aid to
private schools is still a controversial one. We have had a
number of calls on this statbn from people calling in saying
the Government should not do this because it steps over the
margin of separation there should be between Church and State.
What is your response to that?
PM: I don't agree with that. My attitude is clear and
so is the attitude of the Government. And I stated it a few
moments ago. We believe in giving aid to all children,
irrespective of their denomination or whether they go to a
church school or not, whether they go to a public school or
whether they go to an independent school. And why shouldn't we?
They are Australian kiddies. They are entitled to be looked
after. They are entitled to have a good education. / 3 1 
Q. Arnd you feel if there were no State aid for these
children, they would in fact be penalised?
PM: Well their fam~ ilies would obviously be severely
penalised, and in many, many cases, the kiddies themselves
would bc ponalised. But I ., onder if I can come back to one
of the s'it-jects you mentioned earlier of what we were doing,
because I think there are two areas where; it is not yet
understood about the kind of assistance we are giving and
the extent of it. And that is in universities that is,
the scholarships at universities that we have increased to
20,500 per annum, and in the case of secondary scholarships
where we have increased them from 10,000 to 25, OO0per annum.
I think more should be known abhout these scholarship because
it will be of great help to the people who will be able to
go, not only for the secondary scholarshipq but for the open
entrance university scholarships, the later year scholarships
and the advanced education scholarships. This is a wonderful
reform. Prime Minister, thank you very much. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIA McMKAHON, CH, MP. IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, CANBERRA
FXPORT INCENTIVES
14 SEPTEMBER, 1972
The Governmient has decided in principle to extend export
incentives beyond 30 juflC, 1973 the date on which legislation
providing for these incentives expires.
The existing incentive scheme has been under review and
details of the new scheme wil1l be announced as soon as practicable.
It is the intent of the Government that tho benefits under the
new scheme will be comparable in nature and scope to those under
the existing scheme.
The Government is aware of the need for an early and
positive statement of its intentions when the current scheme
expires. Otherwise, doubts and uncertainties could arise in the
business community, with dctrimental effect on forward planning
and export sales together with doubts on investment decisions.
The export incentive scheme was introduced in 1961.
The operation of the scheme has coincidcd with a period of
sustained export grow;~ th from $ 2,150 million in 1961/ 62 to
$ 4,900 million in 1971/ 72. There are income tax rebates for
oxpenditure made on export promotion and payroll tax rebates or
incentive grants linked to e-xport growth. 



MACC ' UARIE NETWORK
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT SEPTEMBER 1972
Interviewer: Paul Lynch
Q. With the announcement of your plan to set up the
National Urban and Regional Development Authority, we have for
the first time a clear programme from the Governiment to ease
the strains of urbanisation in AustralIa which are considerable,
I understand that you have a number of targets for this
Authority. Coull you tell us what they arc, please?
PM: I wouldn't like to call them targets. I doubt whether
that is the correct term. But what we are doing is to promote
two different concepts. The first one is what we call submetropolitan
centres around existing cities and the second is
the development of regional growth centres. what we will do is
provide the finance to the States in order for these two concepts
to be made a reality. Those are the concepts that we hope to
achieve.
Q. Sir, in foriving your plans for this, have you any
figures in front of you in terms of foreign experience, of
what has been achieved in countries such as the United Kingdom,
which has tried this sort of thing?
PM: Yes, we have had documents relating to overseas
experience. That has not been the decisive factor with us.
We want something that is peculiarly suited to Australian
conditions, and so we hope to develop something that will be
imaginative, that will secure a better quality of life for
Australians and that will truly reflect the Australian environment
and the 5pirit of the Australian people. ./ 2 
Q. The-New South Wales State. . Minister-for Decentralisation
has suggested that initially, the Commonwealth Government will
simply be co-ordi-nating--oth6 State Departments of Decentralisation.
Would you accept that?
PM. No, I don't. I don't think that is a correct concent.
Naturally we want to have the closest co-ooeration with the
States. This is essential. But what we will be doing is
establishing the Authority itself that is the Regional and
Urban Development Authority under an authority itself, and
then, we will be developing feasibility studies and plans for
the development of these areas, submitting them to the States for
their approval, and if they are approved, we will provide finance.
So it is not a co-ordination in that sense. It is a dramatic
new initiative to improve the quality of life in Australia.
Q. Prime Minister, this is, of course, a very large
canvas on which something like this would be painted, and I
imagine you will have considerable research to do before the
first active steps are taken. What will you be studying?
PM-That is why I have decided to appoint an Authority
immediately and have the Act passed in the Parliament before
the next break occurs at the end of another four weeks. We
will require the authority to make recommendations to us.
But there are two other organisations that are imoortant.
The approvals will mainly be on the basis of Prime Minister/
Premier relationships, and we will also establish a technical
committee with the best brains that we can get in Australia
to assist the Authority itself to develop plans for the new
regional and urban centres.
0. This could take a couple of years, I take it?
PM: No, we will be starting work in the course of a few
days, and I hope that Sir John Overall will be able to collect
a staff around him and we will be getting to work fairly
quickly. We want these plans developed as quickly as we can,
and that is why we made the decision to bring down a statute
immediately, to make it a reality and to let us get on with the
job as quickly as we can.
Q. A final point, Prime Minister. This could be seen as
a Commonwealth intervention in a State area. What would your
response to that be?
PM: I wouldn't use the word " intervention". It will be
Commonwealth/ State co-oneration in the best way that is
practicable, and particularly designed to ensure that people
have better standards of living, won't have the difficulties
of travelling and will not have the problems associated with the
isolation in big communities, or alienation in big communities,
and we hope that this will permit individuals to develop their
characters and their opportunities to the maximum. I don't regard
it as in any sense interfering with the States It must be based
on co-operation. Prime Minister, thank you very much. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, 14P, IN THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES, CANBERRA
ROYAL VISIT SEPTEMBER, 1972
I wish to inform the House that it is being announced today
from Buckingham Palace that The Queen will open the Sydney Opera
House on Saturday 20 October, 1973.
The announcement arises from an invitation which as Prime
Minister of Australia I was most happy to convey to Her Majesty
with the full support and concurrence of the Premier of New South
Wales. Her Majesty's visit will be a short one, limited to a brief
stay in Canberra and then her visit to Sydney. It will follow the
pattern of Royal visits for specific purposes in this case the
opening of the Opera House.
The likely dates are arrival on Wednesday 17 October and
departure on Sunday 21 October.
The opening of the Sydney Opera House will be a great national
and international occasion, and it is fitting that Her Majesty will
be here to perform the ceremony.
I share with the Premier of New South Wales great pleasure
that Her Majesty and The Duke of Edinburgh will visit Australia
for this purpose. I am sure they will be most warmly welcomed. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
Overseas Investment in Australia
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 26 September 19721
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)-
by leave-Last May, the Treasurer
( Mr Snedden) tabled in this House a Treasury
economic paper entitled ' Overseas
Investment in Australia'. In doing so, he
identified 3 problems associated with overseas
investment. They were the high level
of capital inflow and the potential problem
that creates for managing the domestic
economy; the suggestions of exchange rate
speculation to which such inflows give rise,
and the -possible consequences of that; and,
the sheer growth of foreign ownership and
control of important elements of our economy.
Since May this year, the Government
has been conducting a review in depth of
our policy towards overseas investment.
We were aided in this by the public debate
which the Treasury economic paper generated.
Today I want to announce the Government's
decisions to date arising out of that
review. Before doing so, however, I wish
to make clear the Government's view of
the past and future role of overseas capital.
Overseas capital has played a vital role
in Australia's development. It has added
considerably to the resources available for our growth. It has brought with it valuable
technological know-how and access to
overseas markets; it has created new industries.
As a result, Australia is a larger
nation, and a more prosperous one. The
inflow of capital has been associated with
increasing overseas ownership and control
of industry in Australia. This has -been one
cost of the increased growth which has
come from welcoming overseas capital. In
the past, this has been a cost which, in our
judgment, has been outweighed by the
benefits. Nonetheless, our policy has been
to encourage overseas capital to come insofar
as practicable on a joint basis-and in
close co-operation with Australian-owned
enterprises. But circumstances change and
so must -policies.
In the past 2 years, capital inflow has
increased dramatically. In 1969-70, net
apparent capital inflow was $ 797m. In
1970.71, it was $ 1,418m. Last year, it was
$ 1,841m. A very high* level of capital
infloyw seems in prospect again this year.
Until 2 years ago, capital inflow, by and
large, was -broadly matching our defcit on
the current account of the balance of payments.
That is, the overseas capital was 
being used to add to the resources available
in the economy. Without it we could
not have sustained a large net inflow of
goods and services from the rest of the
world. That situation has now changed. In
1970-71 net apparent capital inflow
exceeded the current account deficit by
S598m. In 1971-72, the excess rose to
S1,443m. Between end-June 1970 and end-
June 1972, official reserve assets rose from
$ 1,538m to $ 3,764m. They now exceed
$ 4,100m. In brief, in the past 2 years, capital
inflow has resulted chiefly in a build-up of
international reserves rather than an addition
to resources actually being used in the
economy. The greater part of this recently
increased inflow has been in respect of
company borrowings. Exchange control
approvals of gross borrowings abroad rose
from $ 568m in 1969-70 to $ 1,222m in
1970-71 and to $ 1,681m. in 1971-72. With
the existing unimpeded access to overseas
lenders, our ability to use monetary policy
effeotively has been called into question.
The House may recall that the Treasury
economic paper said that ' private capital
flows have now acquired a practical potential
to nullify the effects of monetary policy
on internal economic conditions.' To
date, this has not happened. But the buildup
in liquidity which is proceeding will, if
allowed to go unchecked, produce some
headaches for the future.
As a separate but related matter, the
Government has also -been considering the
growth of overseas ownership and control
of Australian industry. We need to be sensible
about this. We all want to see a bigger
Australia. We all want the tangible
benefits that access to overseas capital and
skills ' brings us. Yet there is legitimate
cause for concern. The right balance
between our desire for an Australian Australia
and for greater growth and prosperity
must be struck. After 20 years of
vigorous growth, we are today a relatively
wealthy nation. We have less need to
depend on overseas capital for our growth
today than we did some years a-go. We can
afford now to trade off, at the margin,
some of the benefits of overseas capital for
a greater Australian share in our industry
and resources. We can do it, too, without
frightening off overseas capital. Overseas
investors -are expecting us -to move. In brief, the policies which have serveL US
well in the past now need modifying.
I turn now to the 4 specific decisions we
have taken as a result of our review to
date. Three relate to the problem of net
capital inflow and the fourth to the problem
of overseas control of our industry. I
begin with the first of the 4 dec'isions, that
is: Exchange Control on Short-Term
Borrowings Overseas
The largest part of net capital in-flow is
accounted for by borrowings overseas * by
Australian residents, including foreign
companies resident in Australia. We have
decided to act to reduce the level of short
term borrowings. The ' Reserve Bank will,
from tomorrow, refuse exchange control
approval for all overseas borrowings which
would be repayable, or carry options to
repay, in 2 years or less. Loan agreements
which have already received exchange control
approval will not -be affected.
With a view to rendering the proposed
measure effective, the present sterling area
exemption, under which, inter alia, borrowings
in Australian dollars from sterling area
residents are not subject to exchange control
approval, will be terminated forthwith. For
the sake of administrative simplicity, at any
rate in the early stages of the scheme, borrowings
totalling less than $ 100,000 in any
one year will be exempt. The appropriateness
of this exemption limit will be reviewed
from time to time. I come now to the second
decision which concerns:
The Borrowing Guidelines
Since May 1965, the Government has
laid down certain guidelines which have
limited the freedom of overseas-owned companies
to borrow in Australia. One effect of
the guidelines has been to require overseasowned
companies to bring in funds from
overseas in place of the funds which they
have not been permitted to borrow locally.
This effect was appropriate to the circumstances
formerly prevailing, but the circumstances
have changed. The need now is to
limit overseas borrowings, not to encourage
them. Accordingly, the Government proposes
to abolish the guidelines forthwith. 
Portfolio Investmuent Overseas by
Australian Residents
At present, portfolio investment abroad
by Australian residents is not permitted.
Our decision is to relax this policy while
retaining the need for exchange control
approval of such transactions. Details will
be announced shortly by the Governor of
the Reserve Bank. The effect of these decisions
Will be to moderate the level of net
capital inflow from overseas. They may, as
a result, have some effect on the Australian
capital market and will, incidentally,
restore to Australian financial
institutions some of the business which, in
recent times, has been going abroad. I
want to emphasise that developments in
our own market will be watched very
carefully to ensure that there are no untoward
consequences. With liquidity presently
at a high level, no transitional
difficulties are foreseen.
Mr Speaker, at this point 1 turn to the
question of overseas ownership and control.
In this area of policy, the Government
has long made it plain that the most
welcome overseas capital is that employed
in partnership with Australian-owned capital.
However, the trend towards increasing
overseas ownership has gone on. The time
has come to consider more direct action to
influence that trend. Our balance of payments
on current account has improved
greatly and, with that, our need for overseas
capital has lessened. Our own Australian
industry is more advanced and
technologically capable than 10 or 20
years ago and can, if given the chance,
effectively partner overseas companies.
Action in the field of foreign ownership
and control generally raises complcx problems.
We have undertaken an initial study
of these problems, but their resolution will
require more detailed study and further
time for careful consideration. That work
is now in hand. Its results will be
announced as soon as practicable. However,
in respect of one particular form of
overseas ownership and control, we have
decided that action can be taken without
awaiting the final outcome of that full
review. I refer to the subject of our fournh decision: Foreign Takeovers
No aspect of overseas investment has
excited more attention than this question.
Foreign takeovers result in control as well
as ownership passing from Australian to
foreign hands. This aspect causes particular
disquiet. Sometimes foreign takeovers also
have the objective, or at any rate the
effect, of limiting competition. In such
cases, disquiet is justifiably intensified. On
the other hand, foreign takeovers can
revive an ailing company or may be made
at a price permitting the Australian recipients
to reinvest the proceeds at a considerably
increased return. Australian as well
as overseas investors have rights at stake
and our policy must be such that their
interest is not prejudiced-except when the
interest of the nation requires it. The Government's
longstanding policy has been
that it reserves the right to do all in its
power to prevent a particular takeover
when, in the circumstances of the case, it
is considered by the Government to be
against the national interest. Moreover,
under the policy announced on 24th May
last by the Attorney-General on restrictive
trade practices and monopolisation, takeovers
which are likely to limit competition
will be subject to examination and report
by the monopolies commission which is to
be established. This applies whether the
bidding company be foreign or Australian.
We think, however, that the time has
now come to introduce a new approach
for the control of foreign takeovers. The
Government intends to legislate for the
prevention of foreign takeovers it considers
would be against the national interest ion
the basis of criteria which I shall indicate.
The legislation will apply to acquisitions of
shares or other assets by overseas interests
which might reasonably be expected to
result in control of an Australian business
passing to overseas interests. In the case of
company takeovers, there will be a presumption
that acquisition by any one overseas
interest or associated group of 15 per
cent or more, or by overseas interests in
the aggregate of 40 per cent or -more, of
the voting power of an Australian company
could constitute a takeover. For this
purpose, overseas interest will include an
Australian-incorporated company ink wvhich
any one overseas interest or group holds 
per cent or more of the voting power
or in which overseas interests have in the
aggregate 40 per cent or more of the voting
power. Cases where control of a business
would pass into overseas hands
through acquisition of all, or a substantial
part, of the assets of the business will also
be subject to the measures.
The measures may also apply to the
transfer of a significant part of the ownership
or rights over a valuable or potentially
valuable mineral area, such as can
occur through transactions known in the
mining industry as ' far-m-ins'. If overseas
interests demonstrate that an acquisition
would not give a significant degree of
foreign control, the measures -will not
apply. They will also not apply if the takeover
would simply transfer control from
one overseas interest or group to another.
The measures will, in general, apply to
cases where the company concerned,
whether listed or unlisted, has assets of
more than $ Im. Australian governments
have already taken action to restrict
foreign investment in certain industries of
national sign ificance-notably banking, airlines
and radio and television broadcasting.
Cases may arise where an Australian company
involved in a takeover proposal is
considered by the Government to be an
economically strategic industry leader or to
be so large that the takeovers would
significantly affect the relative balance of
Australian-overseas ownership and control
of the industry concerned. The proposed
legislation will include -a power, in those
circumstances, for the Government to take
direct action to prevent the takeover if it
judges such action appropriate.
~ Foreign takeover proposals judged by
the Government to warrant detailed investigation
as to whether they would be
against the national interest will * be
referred t o an independent authority-including
official Government representation-
which will analyse each such proposal
and report on it to the Government.
Decisions on individual cases will be
taken-I stress this--by the Government,
after consideration of the independent
authority's report. There will be a time
limit of one month, measured from the
date of notification of a takeover to the
Government, or the date of the making of a public announcement concerning the
takeover, for reference of takeover proposals
-by the Government to the independent
authority. Proposals not referred in that
time will be free to proceed. There will be
a further time limit of 3 months maximum
from the date of reference for report by
the authority, unless extended by the Government
in special circumstances.
For the purpose of references to and
reports by the independent authority, the
first criterion to be applied in judging
whether a proposed foreign takeover would
be against the national inerest will be:
Whether, against the background of existing
circumstances in the industry concerned,
the takeover would lead, either
directly or indirectly, to inet economic
benefits in relation to such matters as production,
prices, quality and range of products
and services, and efficiency and technological
change which would be suicient
to justify the increased degree of foreign
control of the particular industry that
would result from the takeover.
If the proposed takeover is judged to be
not against the national interest on this
basis, the following additional criteria will
also be taken into account: Whether, after
the takeover, the firm concerned could be
expected to follow practices consistent with
Australia's interest in matters such as
exports, imports, local processing of materials
produced, research and development
and industrial relations, including employee
protection; and whether the takeover
would have adverse consequences in terms
of the Government's objectives for
defence, environmental protection or
regional development.
In making judgments as to whether particular
foreign takeovers would be against
the national interest on any of the foregoing
grounds, due weight will be given to:
The extent of Australian participation in
ownership and management that would
remain after the takeover; and the interests
of shareholders of the company subject to
the takeover and the attitudes of its board
of directors. Pending the enactment of legislation
and establishment of the independent
authority to be provided for in it, the
measures I have outlined for the control of
foreign takeovers will be brought into
immediate effect on an interim basis. 
Uti. er the interim arrangements departmental
machinery will be used in place of
the independent authority and on the basis
of application of the criteria I have
indicated. These measures will apply from
tomorrow and will embrace foreign takeover
proposals already current.
The decisions I have announced are firm
and positive: They have not been taken
lightly. Australia has benefited greatly
from overseas capital in the past and we
continue to welcome it on fair and reasonable
terms. The steps we are taking are designed to deal with some of our main
concerns. We believe they do so fairly and
judiciously. As I have said, we aim to see
greater Australian participation in overseas-
owned companies. In addition to the
steps I have announced this evening, the
Government is examining further means of
giving effect to that aim. In the meantime,
however, we make it clear that our concern
is to see that overseas capital is
employed in Australia in real partnership
with Australian owned capital. I comiend
the proposals to the House.
19840/ 72-2W 0. Mua. AY, Government Printer, Canberra 



MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRI111 MINISTER4 THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP.
OVERSEAS INVESTMENT IN AUSTRALIA 27 SEPTEMBER 1972
Interviewer Paul Lynch
Q. Prime Minister, there has been much agitation in
Australia, of course, over the last year about foreign
takeovers. It has been suggested that some of the takeovers
of the past year have not been in the interests of this country.
Do you feel that that is so?
PM: Many of them, in my opinion, have not been in the best
interests of Australia, or perhaps I could put it differently.
Attempts, in many cases, have not been in the interests of
Australia. And I personally intervened in those cases to fire
a shot across their bows to stop the takeovers taking place
until I was able to introduce legislation into the House.
Q. Which cases would they have been, Prime Minister?
PM: Well I mentioned them before and it created a bit of a
furore, but I didn't like the idea of , e International Telegraph
and Telephone Company taking over Fresh Foods. That was one
example. And while they might not have been directly influenced
by political consieeratons, they must in some respects have been
influenced by them and the takeover didn't take place.
Q. Now, with the announcement of this new Board, this
independent Board, hiow exactly would a foreign company wanting
to take over an Australian company have to approach it to the
Board?
PM: First, the company attempting to make the takeover could
notify the Goverr: ient, or could notify its intention publicly.
As soon as that w.-is done, we would refer the matter to the
independent authority and we would give them a timetable within
which they would have to make r commendations to the Government.
They would make their report and the Government would then decide
what action it should take, either to prevent the takeover
completely or tD take some other kind of remedial action. Until
the act is passed and we have 3stablished this independent
authority, the Government will do exactly the same as the
independent aut: hority would do, but this occasion we would
be advised by a: i interdepartmei. tal committee. / 2 
Q. As '-understand it, Prime-Minister, you do not fntend
to stop all foreign -takeovers. Youhave to chart a course
between the ones which you think are acceptable gxthe ones
which you think are not acceptable. How wil-ou chart that
course?
PM: That is correct. Your statement is correct. But it is
a kind of a syncopation of what we have-done. We have set out
guidelines and there are about ten of them that have to be
complied with. If they are not in the public interest,
manifestly not in the public interest, and there are other
qualifications that cannot be met, then we will prevent the
takeover. But if it is felt that the qualificatins can be
met, a recommendation can be made accordingly, and we will
look at it and it will be for the Government to make the
final decision.
Q. Sir, you as Prime Minister, and Prime Ministers over the
last few years have said that the inflow of foreign investment
capital into Australia, in some cases takeover capital, is a
good thing. Do you still feel this?
PM: Yes, I do, because circumstances can change so quickly.
At the moment we don't need large amounts of overseas capital
in the way we needed it say, two, three, four, five years ago.
But you can never tell when circumstances will change again
and we may need it again. Under present circumstances, we
would like, if we think it is in the nation's intzrosts, to
reduce the quantity of the flow into Australia and we are
attempting to do sc.
Q. Sir, do you feel that any takeovers that there have been
in the last few years, without n. aming n. ms, are takeovers
which have damaged Australia?
PM: I couldn't say " damaged" in an economic sense, because
they have brought know-how, and they have permitted the
Australians who have been the investors in the taken-over
company to be able to invest their money somewhere else. But
I don't think that is the point today. The point today is
that we have an abundance of overseas reserves and, much more
importantly, Australians want to own Australian companies and
they want an increasing share of ownership in overseas
cornorations. I think it is this attitude of Australianism
that is of vital importance to us now.
Q. Sir, can you see a situation in % hich you might in the
future adopt a practice or the board might adopt a practice
which has been recommended by various authorities which would
be that foreign comipanies would be allowed to buy in to Australia
but they would not be allowed to control what they buy in?
PM: Yes, we would have no exception to them buying in, and
in fact, the law will provide that they can have a shareholding
of up to 15 per cent without it being regarded as a takeover.
Or, if there are a number of corporations involved, they could
have up to 40 per cent without it being regarded as a takeover.
So we are not excluding them completely and for all time.
We will set out in the legislation the conditions under which
they can have a shareholding in Australian companies.
Q. Prime Minister, thank you very much. 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PM's 84/ 72.
AUSTRALIA/ JAPAN MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP..
e The Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon, announced
today that the. f. ir'-meeting of the Australia / Japan Ministerial
Committee uould be held in Canberra on 12 and 13. October.
Mr McMahon recalled that the establishment of the Committee.
ad. been agreed when the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade
and Industry, Mr J. D. Anthony, had visited Japan last year. The first
meeting had. been tentatively scheduled for earlier this year, but had
been postponed because of the change of Government in Japan.
The. Prime Minister said that -the meeting would discuss the
general setting in which the Committeewas beginning its work and the
broad directions in which bilateral relations between Australia and
Japan were developing; international and national-economic and
financial issues; multilateral trade matters; bilateral trade;
ergy and -natural--resources; transportation matters;. . and Papua
w Guinea-matters.
The Japanese., side, Mr McMahon said, would be led by the.
Foreign Minister, Mr Ohira, who would have with him Mr Nakasone,
ae Minister for--In-ternational-Trade and Industry, Mr Sasaki, the
nister for Transportation, Mr Adachi, the Minister -for Agriculture
and Porestry, and Mr-Arita, the Director-General of the Economic
Planning Agency. The five Japanese Ministers would._ beaccompanied
by their wives. Mr McMahon said that the Australian Ministers involved in
the. meeting, which would be chaired by the Foreign Minister, Mr
Bowen, would. be.-the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade
and Industry, Mr Anthony the Treasurer, Mr Snedden; the Minister
for Primary Industry, Mr Sinclair; the Minister for National
Development, Sir Reginald Swartz; the Minister for Shipping and
Transport -Mr-Nixon; the Minister for CiviLA" iation-,--Senator -Cotton;
and the Minister.. for External Territories, Mr Peacock, who would be
supported by the Chief Minister of Papua New Guinea, Mr Somare, in
the discvssion of matters affecting Papua New Guinea. / 2 
In drawing attention to the significance-which each. side,
by the strength of its representation, clearly attached-to-. the meeting,
the Prime Minister emphasised " the importance of the Ministerial
Committee in developing further the economic, trade and commercial
relationships between Australiaand Japan to the advantage and
satisfaction of both, and as part of the overall effort to strengthen
the whole range of links between the two countries".
Mr McMahon said he was confident thathe value of the
initiative taken by the two governments in establishing the Committee
would be demonstrated over the years by the work of the Committee.
Important developments were afoot in the world economy, and Japan
and Australia were each playing their full part in those developments.
It was clearly of the first importance that the two countries,
already closely linked in many ways, should continue to consult
closely both in respecct of their bilateral relations and of the
Smany issues arising in multilateral forums. " The Ministerial
W Committee will play a principal part in ensuring this," Mr McMahon
said. Canberra 27 September 1972 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRT-! E MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM 1-cIYV\ HON, C11, ~ P
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, CANBERRA
OUTWARD PORTFOLIO INVESTVIENT
28 SEPTEMBER, 1972
Following my announcement on policy changes in respect of
overseas investment, I now wish to give details of the new exchange
control policy which will apply for the time being to portfolio
investment abroad by Australian residents.
Persons or companies wishing to invest abroad should apply
by letter through their bankers for the necessary Reserve Bank
authority. Applications by individuals for amounts up to $ 10,000
in any period of twelve months in total will normally be readily
approved. Institutional investors, public companies and the like
can normally expect to be permitted to make inves-tments up to
$ 1 million in any period of twelve months. Applications for amounts
in excess of the amounts mentioned will be considered in special
circumstances. Eligible investments will include portfolio investment
overseas in stocks and shares and purchase of real estate, but
will not include investment in loans or other fixed interest
securities. The general arrangements will, of course, be subject to
review from time to time.
This policy change is the first significant relaxation in
the almosta~ mplete embargo on Portfolio investment overseas which
had operated since exchange control measures were introduced in
1939. Policy towards direct investment overseas has, however,
been very liberal for a number of years and will continue unchanged. 



REDISTRIBUTION OF STATES INTO ELECTORAL DIVISIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP,
in the House of Renresentatives 23 September 1972
I desire to inform the House that as required by the
Representation Act 1905-1964, the Chief Electoral Officer has
ascertained the numbers of the people of the Commonwealth and the
numbers of the people of the several States consequent upon the taking
of the Census on 30 June 1971. Copies of the Chief Electoral Officer's
certificate specifying the said numbers have been tabled.
Pursuant to Sections 9 and 10 of the Representation Act, the
Chief Electoral Officer has determined the number of members of the
House of Representatiaves to be chosen for the several. States. As a
result of that determination the representation for Western Australia
will be increased by one member as from the first general election
held after that State has been redistributed into electoral divisions.
Section 25 of the Commonwealth Electoral Act provides as
follows-A re-distribution of any State into divisions
shall be made in the manner hereinbefore provided
whenever directed by the Governor-General by
proclamation. Such proclamation may be made
whenever an alteration is made in the number
of members of the House of Representatives
to be elected for the State; and
whenever in one-fourth of the divisions of
the State the number of the electors differs
from a quota ascertained in the manner provided
in this nart to a greater extent than
one-fifth more or one-fifth less; and
at such other times as the Governor-General
thinks fit.
It will be noted that Western Australia qualifies for a
redistribution under the provisions of Section 
2.
The Chief Electoral Officer has advised the Government that
there is not now sufficient time to give effect to a redistribution
of any State before the forthcoming House of Representatives elections.
Nevertheless,-the Government believes that it has an obligation to
set in motion the machinery for a redistribution of Western Australia
so as to ensure that that State gains its entitlement of an extra
member from-the beginning of the 29th. Parliament. The Government
therefore proposes to recommend to the Governor-General the appointment
of distribution commissioners for Western Australia.
Although there has been some shift of population in the
other States, there is no requirement at ' present for a redistribution
in any State other than Western Australia and consideration in respect
of those States will be deferred for the time being. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. MeMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
Redistribution of States into Electoral Divisions
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 28 September 1972]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
-by leave-I desire to inform the House
that as required by the Representation Act
1905-1964, the Chief Electoral Officer has
ascertained the numbers of the people of
the Commonwealth and the -numbers of the
people of the several States consequent upon
the taking of the census on 30th June 1971.
Copies of the Chief Electoral Officer's certificate
specifying The said numbers have
been tabled. Pursuant -to sections 9 and 10
of the Representation Act the, Chief
Electoral Officer has determined the
number of members of the House of
Representatives to be chosen for The
several States. As a result of that determination
the representation for Western
Australia will be increased by one member
as from the first general election held aftcr
that State has been redistributed into
electoral divisions. Section 25 of the Commonwealth
Electoral Act provides:
25( 1.) A re-distribution of any State into divisions
shall be made in the manner hereinbefore
provided whenever directed by the Governor-
General by proclamation.
Such proclamation may be madewhenever
an alteration is made in the number
of members of the House of Representatives
to be elected for the State; and
20374172 whenever in one-fourth of the divisions of
the State the number of the electors differs
from a quota ascertained in the manner
provided in this part to a greater extent
than one-filth more or one-fifth less; and
at such other times as the Governor-
General thinks fit.
It will be noted that Western Australia
qualifies for a redistribution under the provisions
of Section 25
The Chief Electoral Officer -has advised
the Government that there is not now sufficient
; time to give effect to a redistribution
of any State before the forthcoming House
of Representatives elections. Nevertheless,
the Government believes that it has an
obligation to set in motion the machinery
for -a redistribution of Western Australia
so as to ensure that that State gains its
entitlement of an extra member from the
beginning of the 29th Parliament. The
Government therefore proposes to recommend
to the Governor-General the appointmeint
of distribution commissioners for
Western Australia. Although there has been
some shift of population in the other States,
there is no requirement at present for a
redistribution in any State other than Western
Australia and consideration in respect
of those States will be deferred for the time
being. W. G. MuRRAy, Government Printer, Canberra 



PRIME MINISTER
EMPLOYMENT OF THE HANDICAPPED IN THE
COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William McMahon, CH, MP
The Government has approved a recommendation of the
Public Service Board, made after consultation with other interested
Commonwealth authorities, for a further relaxation of the basic
medical standard for permanent appointment to the Commonwealth
4 Public Service. Subject to maintenance of the requirement of efficiency
for the duties to be performed, greater flexibility will in future
be observed in assessing the medical fitness of candidates for
permanent appointment.
At present the general practice is to expect appointees
to the Service to meet a medical standard designed to ensure a
Period of at least seven years' efficient service.
In future, a three-year minimum * period will be used as
a general guideline. This guideline will be flexibly administered
according to the duties to be performed and any other relevant
factors so as to allow consideration, on their particular merits,
of borderline cases. on the other hand, as at present, a longer
period may be required in some cases -for example, where lengthy
Utraining as a Cadet is involved.
This decision represents the second general relaxation
of the basic medical standard.
Until 19621, the general rule was that permanent appointees
to the Service ( other than returned soldiers) should be in sound
health and likely to remain so until retiring age. In May 1962,
the Government approved a recommendation of the Public Service Board
Which gave opportunities for many handicapped people to be
permanently appointed. These people contribute to the Provident
Account. / 2 
Upwards of 10,00Y handicapped people have been
accepted for permanent aopointment as a result of the 1962
decision. The manner in which the handicanpped can be employed
in the Commonwealth Public Service has received continuing
attention by the Public Service Board. In its 1971 Annual
Renort, the Board indicated that an officer in each of its
Branch Offices in the States and Territories had been
nominated to assist with the placement of handicaoped persons.
The revised standard to be followed in the future
will significantly increase the emnloyment ooportunities in
the Commonwealth Public Service for the handicapped, a
development which should be well received by all interested
in their welfare.
CANBERRA, 1 October 1972 



CONFERENCE OF THE PRESIDENTS OF THE
NATIONAL MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
ASSOCIATIONS
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, M. P. 4 OCTOBER, 1972
Mr. President and Gentlemen:
This visit gives me the opportunity to welcome you
collectively to Canberra and also to say something about the
matters of special interest to both Government and industry.
First, let me say that I am giving close attention
personally to the representations you have made in recent months
about the future of manufacturing in Australia, about current
matters like the tariff review and trade practices, and about the
Government's administrative system for dealing with manufacturers
and manufacturing policy, and about the state of the economy in
general. Let me take this last point first because it is against
the background of the state of the economy that we measure the
progress and the prospects of manufacturing industry.
I believe that the worst is well behind us and that
steadily and deliberately the economy will continue to gather
strength, providing there are-no self-inflicted injuries resulting
from prolonged industrial trouble and industrial lawlessness, and
always providing that when wage increases take place, productivity
increases are not far behind.
The level of unemployment is being watched closely and
the Government has already taken corrcctivc measures, through the
Budget and other ways, to ensure that-unemployment falls.
I am completely confident that we can overcome the
problem to the satisfaction of the Australian people and the
discomfort of the Labor Opposition and ' he President of the ACTU.
To my mind it is tragic that there are sufficient numbers
of people about who seem to have a ves~ ted interest in unemployment
for purposes of political advantagi! that they can conmmand
headlines in the media to the ext _ nt t:. iat they do.. 2 
-2
This is a time when by word and deed we should
demonstrate confidence, each in our own way and in our own field.
I ask manufacturers to join the Government in approaching the
problems of the day in this fashion because manufacturers have
an honoured place, a vital place, indeed an indispensable place,
in this industrialised society of ours.
Now I want to mention two or three matters
as a positive act of reassurance by me, because i am aware that
some of you are a little uncertain and anxious about the effect
of Government policies on manufacturing industry.
I refer to policies like the Tariff Board
review which is already in progress and the revision to the
Trade Practices legislation which has yet to comb before the
Parliament. Here and now, I want to assure you that our
fundamental political philosophy is unchanged. We are committed
to the free enterprise philosophy, because we know it works to the
benefit of the whole Australian community and that our policies are
related to, and do not displace, that philosophy.
I have told manufacturers on other occasions
that neither I nor the Government will do anything to compromise
the future of economic and efficient Australian industries, and
more than that, we will continue to encourage and provide incentives
to those industries. We seek your counsel and co-operation regularly.
And we are Prepared to give the most careful consideration to
ways and means of developing both those practices, if necessary
by new arrangements. Mr President, in the last eighteen months, the
Government has taken a new look-at every major field of Government
activity. We have restored the investment allowance
decided to continue the financial incentive
provided under the Industrial Research
and Development Scheme for a further five
years
-decided to extend the export incentives
scheme beyond 30 June, 1973
-made the most significant amendments to the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act since 1947
-announced important new measures on overseas
takeovers
and we will table the llono-, Dlies Commission and Trade Practices
Bill and we will give time for informed public de-bate before we
legislate. 
3
This to my mind is a sensible way because we get
the benefit of public reaction, suggestions and criticisms before
the final commitments are made.
Of course, you have to live with criticism that
you can't make up your mind quickly. But surely there is merit in
such a course. A " hit and miss" policy would be as dangerous as
the application of doctrinaire socialism to the business life of
this country. And, believe me, those are the only alternatives
to the way we act. Now, Mr President, may I say a word or two about
tariffs. It's pretty clear to me that our tariff policy is still
under fire from some groups. So let me go over some of the ground
again very briefly. As a general principle, let me say this. In
all industry matters within its jurisdiction, including tariffs,
the Government is the body which makes the final decisions. It
does so with a full exposure of the facts. It does so after taking
the advice of its experts and considering the recommendations of
its committees, tribunals and appointed authorities.
The advice it seeks is objective and non-political.
It comes from specialists, researching, studying and examining
specialised fields. It is a major factor in political decisionmaking
but it is not the only one. The decision a Government
takes has to be made in practical terms. The theorist has his
value and he is important. But he is not the decision-maker.
The Government is the decision-maker and has to
take into account the national interest, the industry interest
and whether a proposal can really work or not. It has to make
its decision against a far wider background than the one against
which its advisers, by the nature of their specialty and their
brief, have tD work. Now, I've heard the Tariff Board described as
a " bunch of theorists". That isn't fair to the able men on the
Board. And I think that kind of criticism stems from an over-ready
assumption that a Board recommendation becomes the Government
decision as a matter of course.
The Tariff Poard's current review of the high areas
of the tariff which should be completed in about six years is, as
you know, concerned with identifying any excess protection which
may exist. 
-4
In recent months, some manufacturers have sail"
they would like to have advance indication of the timing of the
enquiries under this review as far ahead as possible to help them
in their policy making. Yesterday, as you no doubt know, the Tariff
Board issued a publication which sets out its timetable for the
thirty-five industry references which will take it up to 1978.
The Board's programme gives proposed. sequence and duration of
individual enquiries. This publication is avaiable from the Tariff
Board in Canberra and I hope it will go a long way to meeting
your wishes in this matter of timing.
You will appreciate as the Deputy Prime minister
has said yesterday, that it was desirable to have a broad
timetable and that somne flexibility will be needed by the
Government in the exact timing of references. I want to assure
you, too, that you will have advance indication of the timing
of review enquiries as far ahead as Practicable.
Now I want to emphasise that the Government does
not see this review as challenging either the principle of the
practice of protection. The Tariff Board works in the knowledge
that the Government's long-established policy is one of full
adequate protection for economic and efficient Australian
industries. That hasn't been changed and won't be changed.
Both my colleague, t%-he Minister for Trade and.
Industry, and I have repeatedly stated this in the past year or
SO. But what I do want to do today is to stress
those " other factors" which arc taken into, account when the
economics of an industry are under study. These " other factors"
have their relevance in any study of the best way to allocate
and use our national resources.
One is a defence consideration. An industry
which has a 3otential contribution through somne sector of its
operations to our defence resources is entitled to, and will
get that potential recognised in any tariff decision.
Another is the industry which may not be able
to survive without protection above the level assessed exclusively
in terms of its cost disability against imports, but which employs
special classes of labour which we want to encourage, or which
may be developing special skills and technology.
I remind you of our recent decisicns in the
case of woven and knitted shirts. We decided that to achieve an
orderly transition to a lower level of protection, the existing
level would be maintained for a longer period than was recommended
by the Tariff Board. 
In the meantime, the Government negotiated for
voluntary restraint arrangements with low-cost countries to ensure
that the manufacturers were able to keep going. However, despite
these negotiations, it was not possible to reach acceptable
agreements, and the Government therefore decided to establish tariff
quotas on competing imports to ensure that the local industries did
not " go to the wall". The point I want to emphasise over and over again
is that if tariff actionisconsidered necessary by the Government to
achieve rationalisation, then firms would not be expected to adjust
overnight. Special care would be taken not to put job opportunities
for Australians at risk.
Mr President, there are other examples, but my time
is short. The message I want to leave with you is that the Government
regards a strong, growing and prosperous manufacturing industry
as a great pillar of economic strength and wants it to grow and
expand. I state further that in the Tariff review and the
Government's approach to it, and in the proposed Trade Practices
reforms, the Government is encouraging healthy progress in a
competitive, free enterprise economy.
Our recent decision on foreign investment in
Australia is, I submit, further clear evidence of our desire to
foster Australian industry and to make it stronger, more efficient
and affluent. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR PUBLI TIL 6.30 PM ( EST)
PRIME MINISTER
1ACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAJ Mc1AHON, CH, MP.
FOREIGN TAKEOVERS
UNEMPLOYMENT 5 OCTOBER 1972
Interviewer: Paul Lynch
Q. Prime Minister, last week you spoke to us about your
plans to control foreign takeovers. What has happened in
the week since then?
PM: Immediately after I madethe statement, I gave directions
to my Department to prepare a bill relating to the creation
of an independent authority to vet takeover proposals for
Australian companies. The bill has been completed now, and
I put the final touches on it yesterday with the technical
experts, nd I very much hope I will be able to introduce
it into the House in the coming week. In other words, the
newspaper reports that you have read that the bill won't be
put on the table of the House are wrong. And what we will
do is to have this independent authority that will have
guidelines set down, and unless it can be proved that the
takeover is in the public interest, then a recommendation
can be made by the independent authority, submitted to the
Government and it is up to the Government to make up its
mind what it will do. But it will be an independent authority
with people outside the Government analysing the facts and
making reoresentations to the Government about them.
Q. Prime Minister, have you received any representations
from foreign interests at all about your proposals to affect
the way they can invest in Australia since you first announced
this last week?
PM: No, I have not had any. But I have read comments in
the newspapers a. nd those comments seem to indicate that they
were accepted by the internatimalcorporations. In any event,
it doesn't matter whether they are accepted or not. The
simole fact is that they are going into law. We are going
to protect Australia's interests. / 2 
-2-
Q. Prime Mlinister, when would you hope that this au4Jaarity
could be set up and--could pass on foreign -takeove-s-nd also
inflow of capital investment?-
PM: Very soon, but the time factor is not of a great amount
of importance for thase reasons that I did say in my statement
to the House that we would have an interim authority
comprised of civil servants within the Commonwealth Government,
and they will act in the same way as the independent authority
will act when it is created. So already we have got the
Departmental authorities working. They can make recommondations
either to me or to the Cabinet and we will decide what
action should be taken either to prevent or to permit
foreign takeovers. All in all, it is going to be a very
difficult project for the so-called international conglomerates
to get their hands on Australian companies. They will have to
submit very strict proof that it is in Australia's national
interest to permit it to happen.
Q. Do you consider this in any sense interim legislation,
or do you feel that it is so tight and so clear-cut that it
will make future guidelines under any government for foreign
takeover p,. roposals?
PM: At least it is the outline of what my Government will
follow in the future. We may refine it a bit but the essentials
are there. what a government of a Jifferent texture would
do I don't ' know, but they will find it very difficult to
get away from our decisions. And in any event, I believe we
will be there to administer it.
Q. Turning to another matter, Prime Minister unemployment.
In a matter of a few days, the September unemployment figures
will come out. There has been a certain amount of discontent
in the Press and elsewhere about the fact that the previous
set of unemployment figures showed higher unemployment. Do
you have anything to say about that?
PM: Well, there are two things that have to be said. The
first one is, without any doubt at all) that there was a
reduction in unemployment in the month before last. In fact,
there was a drop of about 4,500. But we also have what I
regard as a somewhat complicated system called seasonally
adjusted figures. Now those seasonally adjusted ficures
over-emphasise the degree of unemPoloyment and even the
Government Statistician warns whenever he issues the figures
that they must not be taken as definitive. They are only
there for the purpose of scientific analysis and they must
not take the place of scientific analysis, and if you do, you
are bound to be wrong. So that puts the matter in perspective.
There will be, I believe, and I have talked to my colleague,
the Minister for Labour and National Service about this, there
will be a quite substantial reduction in unemployment for the
month of September and that will be published quite soon. It
will be, I believe, a bigger reduction than normally takes place.
I am looking forward with a little bit of anxiety but
nonetheless with, I believe, a great deal of confidence that
' when the figures come out, even those who want to misrepresent
them will be hard pittto to do so.
Q. Prime Minister, thank you very much. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 86/ 1972
AUSTRALIAN INVESTMENT OVERSEAS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt.
Hon. William lcMahon, CH, MP
The Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon, said today that the
Government is undertaking an extensive review of its policy on the
promotion of direct Australian investment in neighbouring countries.
Mr. McNallon said that during his recent visit to Malaysia,
Singapore and Indonesia, he had discussed with the Heads of States
of those countries ways of furthering cemmercial relations between
them and Australia. It was clear from these discussions that
these countries would like to receive more joint investments by
Australian firms. Mr. rYcMahon had assured those countries of his
own desire to see increased Australian investments in the region.
Mr. McMahon said that the Australian Government fully
recognised the mutual benefits accruing from direct Australian
investment in these countries. Such investments, involving the use
of Australian technical know-how and managerial skills, were an
important means by which Australia can contribute to the
development and growth of other countries, particularly those in its
neighbouring regions. Moreover, such investments were an important
way of promoting Australia's own commercial and other interests.
Mr. McMahon added that, under existing policy, exchange
control approval is readily given for direct investments overseas
which involve-a significant measure of Australian managerial
participation in the overseas enterprise and the export of
managerial and technical skills. Approval is also readily given for
all types of investment which promote Australian exports or protect
existing Australian investments abroad.
Against this background, Mr. McMahon had requested the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Industry, Mr.
Anthony, and the Treasurer, Mr. Snedden to put in hand an
examination of possible measures which the Australian Government
might take to facilitate increased direct investment overseas by
Australian residents in neighbouring countries. 
Mr. McMahon said that the examination would include the roles that
double-tax agreements and bilateral investment guarantee agreements
could play in facilitating worthwhile Australian investment overseas.
In conj unction with this examination, an official
Australian investment survey mission, comprising members of the
Export Development Council, representatives of Australian banks,
and senior officials of the Departments of Trade and Industry and
Treasury, will visit Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia in the near
future. Mr. McMahon said that the main purpose of the Mission will
be to discuss with relevant investment authorities in Malaysia,
Singapore and Indonesia the possibility of greater direct investment
by Australians in local enterprises, particularly those in
preferred areas of activity. In addition, the Mission will
investigate the desirability of establishing Australian Business
Co-operation Committees with Malaysia and Singapore along the lines
of the recently-formed Australia/ Indonesia Business Co-operation
Committee. The establishment of such committees could assist in a
very practical way to promote better commercial relations within
the region. Mr. McMahon said that the Mission will report to the
Government on its return to Australia and will also conduct
seminars and arrange by other suitable means to inform senior
Australian businessmen of the investment opportunities available
in the countries visited.
CANBERRA, October, 1972. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRITIE MINISTER, THE RT.
HON. WILLIAM McMAHON, M. P. IN
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, CANBERRA
FEDERAL ELECTION OCTOBER, 1972
The General Election for the House of Representatives
will be held on Saturday, 2 December 1972.
It is proposed to recommend to His Excellency
the Governor-General that he dissolve the House of Representatives
on 2nd November 1972.
The date proposed for the issue of the writs is
2 November 1972 and for the close of nominations is 10 November
1972. The Prime Minister confirmed that the Policy
Speech would be made on 14 November. 



STATEMENT BY TilE PRICE MINISTER, THE RT.
HON. WILLIAM icHiAHON, H. P.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, CANBERRA.
I REPORT OF THE COMtONWEALTH-STATE OFFICIALS'
COH14ITTEE ON DECENTRALISATION
OCTOBER, 1972
As I have indicated in answers to Parliamentary Questions,
the Commonwealth and State Governments received the Report of the
Commonwealth-State Officials' Committee on Decentralisation in June
of this year. I also indicated that the Commonwealth was agreeable
to the publication of the Report and that I was seeking the
agreement of the States to this course.
All the States have n'ew indicated their agreement to its
public release and the printing of the Report has now been completed.
In undertaking its task the Committee commissioned a number of
studies in some cases involv: ng outside bodies which are listed
as Attachment A of the Report. The printing of the studies in a
separate volume is proceeding, but because of their size and for
technical reasons it will be some time before the printing process is
completed. In the meantime, arrang w'ts have been made for copies of
the individual studies to be made available in the Parliamentary
Library. I mention that the Report is the work of officials of the
Commonwealth and the States and it does not therefore necessarily
represent the views of the Commonwealth and State Governments. The
Premier of New South Wales has asked me to point out that the views
expressed by the New South Wales' Department of Decentralisation and
Development in the supplementary statement to the Report should not be
taken as necessarily representing the views of the State Government.
As far as the Commonwealth is concerned, I said in my
Ministerial Statement of 19 September 1972 on Urban and Regional
Development that the Government endorses ' he view of the Committee
that the only type of decentralisation which offers significant
prospects of success is selective decentralisation. I also said that
we propose to establish a 1. inistexial Council, consisting of the Prime
Minister and Premiers: as the prinipal body for consultation and
co-ordination in the fields of urban and regional development. / 2 
2.
The Premiers have been advised of the Commonwealth's initiative in
this area of urban and regional development.
So-far as Commonwealth machinery is concerned, we will
be introducing interim legislation shortly to establish a statutory
organisation to be known as the National Urban and Regional
Development Authority. 



MACQUARIE NETWORK( WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIM4E MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP.
IMM4IGRAT ION-11 OCTOBER 1972
Interviewer Paul Lynch
Q. Prime Minister, on Macquarie stations las~ t night, I
conducted what is called a " Five Cent Poll". People were
invited to call in and talk about what they consider to be
the issues of the 1972 election. Many, many people who
called in said they considered immigration to be one of the
major isaues. The ALP, of course, has brought out a number
of proposals on immigration. You have not spoken out very
much on this issue. How do you feel about the ALP programme
for immigration?
PM: I-think it would be disastrous for this country, both
in economic terms, and of course, they would destroy our
policy of having one single Australian community. In other
words, when we allow, or we attract migrants to come here,
we want them to be integrated into one homogenous society.
That is our policy, and I believe the alternative the
Labor policy would destroy both of the objectives that we
seek.
Q. A brief summation of the ALP policy would be in effect
that they seek to remove racial discrimination, they wish to
reduce the numbers of migrants coming to Australia and they
would want migrants to come to this country who had been
nominated by their families. Ibw do you s-ethat as being
disastrous to this country's economy?
Q. Well, at least 50 per cent of the migrants who come here
now were nominated by the Commonwealth or State Governments
and not by individual nomination. When we nominate them in
the Commonwealth or the State4, it means that we pick the people
we want, and to a very large extent they go to the developing
areas such as the North-West where our mineral development is
taking place or up around the Gladstone area and places of that
kind. What it would mean, therefore, is that we would cut
down on our development substantially and our growth would be
stunted. You would also find that migration from the United
Kingdom would be reduced by probably as much as 60 per cent.
Migration from North America and Northern Europe and South
America would be practically cut out and there would be a
big reduction in migration from Southern Europe. All this
would have a bad effect on us because it would take away from
the traditional migration links between the two countries. / 2 
-2-
Q. You seem -arti-cunarJy worriced about this orocess of
personal nomination -t~ ie ALP is n-utting torvrard, rarticularly
in respsct to -non-. Eron2ear~ iiraigrantF,. Wrhy is that?
PM,: i am interested in this for.-s-cia1 pixrposes because
we want, as I have said a few minutes age , rr-integrated
Australian societyr. We don't want little enclaves scattered
-all over the lcewith the dif ficulties that they create.
Ncw, if you adopt a policy of non-discrimination, this would
mean that over time, in the long run not in the short periodthat
we would greatly harm this policy becausa the non-Europeans
nominate large numbers of relatives and friends, and as they
do this and the numbers in~ crease and they go on multinl ' ving,
then you would find that you would have disproportionately
large number of non-Euro ' ncans coming into the community. That
I believe would bo contrary to our nclicY ( and contrary to the
best interasts of the Australian people and, I believe, too,
of the migrants thcmselves.
Q. In view of the oublic interest in immigration in the
election castwaign, do you plan to announce any reforms or
chanqe-,: S of goal in your Party's and your Government's
immigration poli. c 1r
PM: No. What we havo done is to establish a committee of
enquiry on population, and we want that committee to look at
every aspect of nopulation birthrq and. deaths, immigration
and emigration, the numbers that we can absorb and the best
distribution of vonuiation in order to ensure that w~ e can
devAeultoapJi. o the full but at the same time nrotect
environmental conditions -nd establish qualities of life that
we think the Australian people want.
You would want a revort from that commission bofore
ycu decided on any change in plans?
PM: Yes, and as it is an in-depth study, we do not think we
would be able to get that repaort until the 1973-1974 Budget
year. Prime M~ inister, thank yrou very much. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH B3Y
The Rt Hon. W. MeMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
National Urban and Regional Development
Authority Bill 1972
Second Reading
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 11 October 1972]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
( 11.40)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
On 19th September, I made a statement
to the House announcing that the Government
proposed to take new initiatives to
work with the States towards urban and
regional development objectives. I said that
the Government had decided that it will take
immediate steps financially and in other
ways in a co-ordinated programme with the
State Governments. The introduction of this
-Bill fulfils the commitment I then gave to
introduce interim legislation into Parliament
this session. Although the legislation
is interim, the new authority set up by the
bill will nevertheless be required to operate
with vigour and in accord with its charter
from the outset. In a vast country which is
developing as rapidly as Australia, it is
most important that the Government take
responsible action which will influence the
distribution of population and economic
activity to the economic and social advantage
of the nation.
The stresses and strains of growth are having
an impact on the living conditions and
the environment of the entire Australian community. These pressures which are
being felt in many countries, present issues
of national moment warranting co-operative
action between the Commonwealth and
the States. We have the experience of the
United Kingdom, France and Canada
amongst others to draw on. The Government
believes that unless we embark on a
vigorous, imaginative and responsible programme
of urban and regional development,
in partnership with the States, our
efforts to secure a better quality of life for
the Australian community through a wide
variety of existing programmes will be
compromised. The consequences of the
imbalance caused by the concentration of
population and employment around the
principal Australian cities with the resulting
problems of congestion and pollution
are such that action must now be taken.
The trend to increasing concentration is
already evident to a degree which is causing
concern. If no action is taken, the
problem will become more acute as our
population grows from 13 million to possibly
22 million over the balance of the
century. The increasing concentration of
population in our great cities will magnify
the consequences of increasing population 
growth. It is the geographical distribution
of population and industry rather than total
scale which calls for our attention.
We believe it is widely accepted that
these are national problems requiring urgent
attention, and that the Commonwealth
should participate with the States in solving
them. We believe too that a properly conceived
and well managed programme of
urban and regional development will be
approved and welcomed by the community
generally. It is clear that the Commonwealth
and States must work together. It
is also clear that there will be a need for
additional expenditure and the Commonwealth
stands ready to contribute its share.
As, importantly, we will shape our own
policies and programmes where appropriate
so as to ensure that urban and regional
implications are fully taken into account.
The implementation of a successful national
programme of urban and regional development
could mark a turning point in the
social and economic life of this country.
Our efforts must be successful. Therefore,
they must be properly conceived. The
Commonwealth/ State Officials' Committee
on Decentralisation which conducted its
researches in the Australian context concluded
that the only type of decentralisation
which offers significant prospects of success
is selective decentralisation. As I stated on
19th September, the Commonwealth endorses
this conclusion and favours the
development of a small number of carefully
selected centres, having regard to factors
likely to be favourable to their
growth. Later on, with the benefit of more
experience and the availability of more
resources, it can be expected that additional
centres will be selected for accelerated
growth. We will want to identify and encourage
the balanced growth of submetropolitan
centres as an alternative to
growth in the existing city areas.
In co-operation with the States, we will
look for those sub-metropolitan centres that
offer the greatest potential for rapid development.
These will be centres near to but
distinct from the existing major cities. It is
our view that the development of regional
growth centres and sub-metropolitan centres
-projects capable of being defined, programmed
and financed-offers the most
direct and beneficial means of immediate
Commonwealth involvement. As I have
emphasised, however, the action to be taken must be taken in consultation and
partnership with the States. Our early discussions
with the States will have as their
first objective the fullest understanding of
the nature of the problems to be overcome.
We will be seeking to establish how best
the combined resources of the Commonwealth
and State Governments can be marshalled
to tackle these in an economic way
and in the interests of the nation as a
whole. As I have said previously, it will be
necessary to guard against the cost of
development of selected centres being inflated
by increases in land values directly
attributable to the policy initiatives of the
States and the Commonwealth. This bill is
the first step towards implementation of a
new Commonwealth initiative. It is, however,
designed to establish the National
Urban and Regional Development Authority
on a proper and sound basis and to enable
it to commence its work immediately. The
nature of any later legislation will, of course,
be determined in the light of experience.
Nevertheless, the name given to the
Authority clearly indicates the Government's
longer term interest. We are concerned
with national objectives in urban
and regional development and we are concerned
with development itself. Ours is a
practical approach and the concept of a
statutory authority and of the title chosen
for it reflects our practical aims.
It is proposed that the Authority be constituted
by a Commissioner. I have already
announced that with the passage of the
legislation, the Government proposes to
invite Sir John Overall to serve as the first
Commissioner and to guide the new organisation
in its initial establishment period. The
Government is fortunate in having a person
as experienced and so able as Sir John to
call on until his retirement in July next
year. The bill also provides for the Commissioner
to be assisted by a Deputy Commissioner.
The appointment of statutory office
holders will be effected as soon as possible
after the bill is passed. The duties of the
Authority are stated in Clause 12. It will
be required to investigate and report to the
Prime Minister on matters relating to urban
or regional development. This investigation
and advice would be designed to assist the
Government in making decisions having
urban and regional implications. It will also 
be designed to assist the Government in
its consideration of the grant of financial
assistance to a State in connection with
urban or regional development.
Such matters as the selection of centres
for the promotion of rapid growth, the
particular steps by which this might be
encouraged, practical arrangements for
rapid development, and financial questions
including the scale of Commonwealth support,
are relevant to the establishment of a
co-ordinated programme. Advice would be
available to the Government from the
Authority on the terms and conditions on
which financial assistance for urban and
regional development might be granted by
Parliament. The bill provides for the Authority
to have power to do all things that are
necessary or convenient for the performance
of its functions. It may undertake pilot
or experimental projects, studies, including
feasibility studies. It may enter into consultative
engagements with professional groups
and Government agencies, and provide information
and advice to other authorities.
Provision is made in the Bill for the
Authority to comply with any directions
given by the Prime Minister with respect to
matters to be investigated by the Authority.
This clause will ensure, for example, that
decisions reached by the Ministerial Council,
consisting of the Prime Minister and the
Premiers, to which I referred in my statement
in this House on 19th September, are
followed through in the operations of the
Authority. In addition to the normal provision for
an annual report, the Authority is required
to report to the Prime Minister not later
than 30th June 1973 on matters relating
to urban and regional development during
the 5-year period thereafter. It is not the
Government's intention that the Authority
should produce by that time a definitive
statement on a national urban and regional
development strategy. The Government
does, however, propose to move in an
expenditure sense commencing from the
financial year 1973-74. It will be the
responsibility of the Authority, therefore,
to advise the Government in time for its
Budget considerations in 1973 of the broad
direction in which Commonwealth activities
in urban and regional development
might be shaped over the 5-year period.
This will not be a final blueprint but rather the first statement of an active programme.
The steps involved in its preparation will
be discussed by the Ministerial Council.
Funds will be made available during this
present financial year 1972-73 for the initial
operations of the Authority.
The Bill, of course, contains appropriate
provisions relating to officers' rights, staff,
audit and finance. The Bill establishes an
advisory committee of up to 12 members
including the Commissioner. The committee
will be comprised of persons who, by
virtue of their knowledge and experience,
can assist the Authority in the performance
of its duties. This is a formal committee
created by the statute with membership
appointed by the Prime Minister and
designed to ensure the availability of a
wide range of advice and response to the
Authority. At the level of governments, I have
already mentioned that we propose the
establishment of a ministerial council consisting
of the Prime Minister and Premiers
as -the principal body for consultation and
co-ordination in the field of urban and
regional development. I have already
written to the Premiers about the Commonwealths
intentions. Honourable members
have already noted from my remarks
that the Authority will be responsible to
me as Prime Minister. This central place in
the machinery of Government will add
strength to the discussions between me and
my State colleagues.
This Bill is amongst the most important
legislation introduced into the Federal
Parliament during the post-war years. It
marks our recognition that there is a direct
contribution that the Commonwealth Government
can make in national urban and
regional development for the benefit of all
Australians. Commonwealth assistance for
urban and regional development is not new.
What is -new is Commonwealth participation
with the States in a co-ordinated programme
of urban and regional development.
Our objectives-the objectives of the
Liberal and Country Parties-will not be
achieved easily or overnight. But it is
important to make a start in -the prevailing
climate of accord about the need for new
initiatives and the broad nature of them.
We will pursue these objectives vigorously.
I commend the Bill to the House.
2054817220581G7.2 . MuRRAY, Government Printer, Canberra 



CIECY AGAINST DELIVERY
aAUST RALI
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. WILLIAM
McMAHON, CH, MP, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
CANBERRA
NATIONAL URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY BILL 11 OCTOBER 1972
I move that the Bill be now read a second time.
On 19 September, I made a statement to the House
announcing that the Government proposed to take new initiatives
to work with the States towards urban and regional development
objectives. I said that the Government had decided that it will
take immediate stens financially and in other ways in a co-ordinated
programme with the State Governments.
The introduction of this bill fulfils the commitment
I then gave to introduce interim legislation into Parliament this
session. Although the lecgislation is interim, the new authority
set up by the bill will nevertheless be required to operate with
vigour and in accord with its charter from the outset.
In a vast country which is developing as rapidly
as Australia, it is most important that the Government take
responsible action which will influence the distribution of
population and economic activity to the economic and social
advantage of the nation.
The stresses and strains of growth are having an
impact on the living conditions and the environment of the entire
Australian community. These-pressures which are being felt in
many countries, present issues of national moment warranting
co-operative action between the Commonwealth and the States. We
have the experience of the United Kingdom, France and Canada amongst
others to draw on. The Government believes that unless we ermbark on a
vigorous, imaginative and responsible programme of urban and regional
development, in partnership with the States, our efforts to secure
a better quality of life for the Australian community through a wide
variety of existing programmes will he compromised. / 2 
-2
The consequences of the imabalance caused by the
concentration of population and employment around the principal
Australian cities with the resulting problems of congestion and
pollution are such that action must now be taken.
The trend to increasing concentration is already
evident to a degree which is causing concern. If no action is
taken, the problem will become more acute as our population
grows from 13 million to possibly 22 million over the balance of
the century. The increasing concentration of population in our
great cities will magnify the consequences of increasing population
growth. It is the geographical distribution of population and
industry rather than total scale which calls for our attention.
We believe it is widely accepted that these are
national problems requiring urgent attention, and that the
Commonwealth should participate with the States in solving
them. We believe that a properly conceived and well
managed programme of urban and regional development will be
approved and welcomed by the community generally.
It is clear that the Commonwealth and States
must work together. It is also clear that there will be a need
for additional expenditure and the Commonwealth stands ready
to contribute its share.
As, importantly, we will shape our own policies
and programmes where appropriate so as to ensure that urban and
regional implications are fully taken into account. The
implementation of a successful national programme of urban and
regional development could mark a turning point in the social and
economic life of this country.
Our efforts must be successful. Therefore, they
must be properly conceived.
The Commonwealth/ State Officials' Committee on
Decentralisation which conducted its researches in the Australian
context concluded that the only type of decentralisation which
offers significant prospects of success is selective decentralisation.
As stated on 19 September, the Commonwealth
endorses this conclusion and favours the development of a small
number of carefully selected centres, having regard to factors likely
to be favourable to their gro. wth.
Later on, with -he benefit of more experience and
the availability of more resonrces, it can be expected that
additional centres will be selected for accelerated growth. We
will want to identify and encourage the balanced growth of submetropolitan
centres as an a. ternative to growth in the existing
city areas. / 3 
' 14p 
In co-operation with the States, we will look for
those sub-metropolitan centres that offer the greatest potential
for rapid development. These will be centres near to but distinct
from the existing major cities.
It is our view that the development of regional
growth centres and sub-metropolitan centres projects capable of
being defined, programmed and financed offers the most direct
and beneficial means of immediate Commonwealth involvement.
As I have emphasised, however, the action to be
taken must be taken in consultation and partnership with the
States. Our early discussions with the States will have as their
first objectiv the fullest urderstanding of the nature of the
problems to be overcome. We will be seeking tc establish how best the
combined resources of the Commonwealth and State Governments
can be marshalled to tackle these in an economic way and in the
interests of the nation as a whole.
As I have said previously, it will be necessary to
guard against the cost of development of selected centres being
inflated by increases in land values directly attributable to
the policy initiatives of the States and the Commonwealth.
This bill is the first ston towards implementation of a new
Commonwealth initiative. It is, however, designed to establish the National
Urban and Regional Development Authority on a oroper and sound
basis and to enable it to commence its work immediately. The
nature of any later legislation will, of course, be determined in
the light of experience. Nevertheless, the name given to the
Authority clearly indicates the Government's longer term intent.
We are concerned with national objectives in urban
and regional development and we are concerned with development
itself. Ours is a practical approach and the concept of a statutory
authority and of the title chosen for it reflects our practical aims.
It is proposed that the Authority be constituted by
a Commissioner. I have already announced that with the oassage
of the legislation, the Government proposes to invite Sir John
Overall to serve as the first Commissioner and to guide the new
organisation in its initial establishment period.
The Government is fortunate in having a person
as experienced and so able as Sir John to call on until his
retirement in July next year.
The bill also proviles for the Commissioner to be
assisted by a Deputy Commissioner. The appointment of statutory
office holders will be effected as so on as possible after the
bill is passed. The duties of the Authority are stated in Clause 12.
It will be required to investigate and report to the Prime Minister
3 / 4 
4--
on matters relating to urban or regional devclopment. This
investigation and ;!~ lvice would be desiqnel to assist the Government
in making decis. o: ns having urban and ragional implications.
It will also be designed to assist the Government in
its consideration of the grant of financial assistance to a State
in connection with urban or regional development.
Such matters zas the selection of centres f or the
promrotion of rapid growth, the particular stops by which this might
be encouraged, Practical arrangements for ranid develonment, and
financial questions including the scale of Commonwealth supportF
are relevant to the establishment of a co-or* dinated progratmme.
Advice woculd! bfe available to the Government from
the Authority on the terms an6 co-nuitions on which finincial
assistance for urban ana regional develomment might be granted by
Parliament. The bill ,-rovides for the Authority to have power
to do all things that are necessary or convenient for the performance
of its functions. It may undertake nilot or experimental projects,
studies, including feasibility studies. It may enter into consultative
engagements with professional crrounps and Ge-v, rnment agencies,
and provide information and a( dAvic2 to other authorities.
Provision is mad e in the Bill br the Authority to
comply with any O. irections qivi~ n &gt;-the Prim_-minister with respect
to maltrs to be invest igated bythe Authority. This clause will
ensure, for examni; le, that -1ecisions reached by the 1r1inisterial
Council, consisting of tlhe Prime Minister and the Epremiers, to which
I referred in my statement in this House on 19 Sentember, are
followved through in the o~ perations of the Au-th1ority.
In addition to the norma. provision for an annual
rczport, the Authority is required to report to the: Prime Minister
not later than 30 June 1973 on matters relating to urban and. regional
development during the five-yoar T.) eriod thc-reaftar.
It is not the ' 1ovevrnment'-s interntion thp~ t the_
Authority should produce th time a definitive Stato. ment on a
national urban and regqional cevcoont strategy. The Governmient
does, however, propose to rmova Jin an expnendiUture seanse commencing
fro~ m the financial year 1973/ 7,1. It will be the resi~ onsibility of the
: Iu t ho r ity, therefore, to advis the -Government in time-L for its
Budcaet considerations in 1973 of the broad directicn in which
Commonwealth activities in urban and regional kdevelopment might
be sha'e-O over the f ive-vyear perioO. Th'Lis will not be a final
bluonrint but rather the f-irqt stateme= nt of aun active--nrogramme.
The stceps involved in its rre'-ration -will be discussed by the
Ministerial Council. Funds will be' made available during this
present financilal year 1972/ 73 ' or the initial operations of the
A uthority. The Pill, inf course, contains aporonriate provisions
relating to officers' rights, staff, audit and finance. 
The Bill establishes an Advisory Committee of up to
twelve members including the Commissioner. The Committee will be
comprised of persons who, by virtue of their knowledge and experience,
can assist the Authority in the performance of its duties. This is
a formal Committee created by the Statute with membership appointed
by the Prime Minister and designed to ensure the availability of a
wide range of advice and response to the Authority.
At the level of Governments, I have already mentioned
that we propose tho e! 3t. ablishment of a Ministeria'l Council consisting
of the Prime Minister and Premierzs as the-orincipal body for
consultation and co-ordination in the field. -f urban and regional
development. I have alroady written to the Premiers about the
Commonwealth'~ s intentiono.
Members havct already noted from my remarks that the
Authority will be responsible to me as Prime Minister. This central
place in the machinery of Government will add strength to the discussions
between me and my State colleagues.
Mr Speaker, this Bill is amongst the most important
legislation introduced into the Federal Parliament during the postwar
years. It marks our recognition that there is a direct contribution
that the Commonwealth Government can make in national urban and
regional development for the benefit of all Australians. Commonwealth
assistance for urban and regional development is not new. What is
new is Commonwealth participation with th~ e states in a co-ordinated
programme of urban and regional development.
Our objectives will not be achieved easily or overnight.
But it is imnortant to make a start in the prevailing climate of
accord about the need for new initiatives and the broad nature of
them. We will pursue these objectiv2s vigorously.
I commend the Bill to the House. 


AUSTRALIA/ JAPAN MINISTERIAL COMMITTEEOPENING STATEMENTBy the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP.12 October1972
Good Morning! On behalf of the Australian Government, I welcometo Australa five Japanese Ministers the Foreign Minister,Mr Ohira; the Minister of Agriculture and Fishery, Mr Adachi;the Minister of International Trade and Industry, Mr Nakasone;the Minit.; er of Transport, Sasaki, and the Minister of Statefor Economic Planning, Mr Arita.
This is the largest group of Ministers ever tohave come to Australia from any single country-and I can assureyou, we in Australia welcome you just as the Australian delegationof eight AMinisters is, I understand, the largest group we have hadat an international conference in Australia.This important gathering is the inaugural meetingof the Australia/ Japan Ministerial Committee which it was agreedlast year should be established:" to hold consultations on bilateral and multilateral tradeand related proble s, as well as other matters of commoninterest concernin the trade and economic relationshiobetween the two countries that may subsequently beconsidered necessary."In accordance with this policy, the Committee isto discuss economic and financial issues, multilateral tradematters, bilateral trade, energy and natural resources, transportationmatters and Papua and New Guinea. / 2
2The creation of the Committee underlines the greatimportance of the many-faceted relationship between Australia andJapan. Our trade has grown to the point where Japan is our largesttrading partner and Australia is Japan's second-largest tradingpartner after the United States. Australia recently had its firstloan placement ever in the Japanese capital market.But while the economic relationship forms the bulkof te bilateral contacts between our two countries, our dealingswith each other extend into many other fields political,scientific and cultural, and we co-operate extensively and intimatelyin international organisations.So we look at this Ministerial Committee Meetingas a particularly important means of supplementing the establishedpattern of Ministerial visits, and of way of furthering the frankand friendly exchanges which are now a settled part of ourrelationship that is the relationship between our two countries.I am confident that Australia and Jaran can enlargetheir friendship and co-operation to the benefit of both nations,and can together contribute, each in its own way, to the prosperityand peace of the region in which we live.If I can make this comment to you, Mr Foreign Minister,Mr Ohira, I very much welcome the statement you made yesterdayimmediately after you arrived in Australia. It was, I think, avery helpful beginning to what I can hope to be a successful meetingbetween your Ministers and my own, and I am sure that our belief insuccess will turn out to be a reality.
As Treasurer, it was my -llr. sure to be involved withmany contacts in economic and financial matters between theAustralian and Japanese Governments. And in truth, I think I cantake credit for the formation and the subsequent working of theofficial meetings as between the officials of the Government ofJapan and my own officials which were established at the time Iwas the Foreign Minister.
And at that time, too, as Foreign Minister, I was evenmore closely involved with the strengthening of the warm relationshipbetween our two countries, and was able to give a great deal of thoughtto the methods by which that relationship should be able to develop.It was during my period as Foreign Minister, as Ihave said, that the initiatives by our Governments were taken toestablish the Ministerial Committee as well. As Prime Minister, Iwas naturally delighted to give my full backing to the proposalto establish this Committee.
I am certain that it will prove to be one of themost significant steos our peonles have taken in furthering ourcommon goals of friendship, co-operation, prosperity and of peace.It therefore gives me great pleasure, Mr Chairman,to declare open the inaugural meeting of the Australia/ JapanMinisterial Committee.


PM. No. 87/ 1972RELEASE OF LXND FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LIVING ANDOTHER AREAS FOR RESIDENT ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES IN_THE NORTHERN TERRITORYStatement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. R~ on. WilliamMcMahon, CH, MP. 12 OCTOBER 1972Following discussions I have had today with LordVestey, the Government has accepted with pleasure the offer byLord Vestey to give some 35 square miles of land ( about 22,400 acres)from the Vestey lease of Wave Hill Station in the NorthernTerritory. The offer by Lord Vestey has been taken up in thecontext of the Government's acceptance of the recommendations of theGibb Committee that a policy be adopted to enable community livingareas for aborigines to be established on land in pastoral propertiesand under the control of the aborigines themselves.In accordance with this policy, the area of Crown landon which the Government welfare centre at Wave Mill is located willbe extended to include land at Wattie Creek which has been the siteof a camnping area for aborigines for some time.The offer by Lord Vestey includes an area of 1lC squaremiles near Wattie Creek which the Gurindji People have asked beleased to them for use in a cattle mustering project. Governmentof ficials will be discussing with the people at Wattie Creek inthe near future their proposal for a lease and the sort offinancial assistance they would need to enable the best use to bemade of the land.The land to be released by Lord Vestey will enable thesite at Wattie Creek to be further develoned with Governmentassistance and made available for le2asing to the local community. / 2
The area-includes the site of-ths-new-bores whichwill provide additional supplies of water to Wattie Creek Endthe Wave Hill centre. Mater is now being piped to Wattie Creekfrom these bores and this has overcome the water supply problemexperienced there in recent months.I am pleased to be able to say that a number ofother pastoralists in the Northern Territory have also agreedin principle to the release of land for the development ofliving areas for resident aboriginal communities. Thesepastoralists have responded to the Government's announcementof the acceptance of the Gibb Committee recommendations.Further discussions about implementing recommendationsof the Gibb Committee report will be undertaken at a meetingof the Northern Territory Pastoral Lessees Association atKitherine next month.CANBERRA, 12 October 1972 I



PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON 1I,_ MP.
UNEMPLOYMENT FIGURES 18 OCTOBER 1972
Interviewer Paul Lynch
* Prime Minister, some weeks ago in your weekly
report on Macquarie stations you said that you would be
pleased with the unemployment figures to be released
this week and that they would be figures not capable of
misinterpretation. The figures have come out and evidently
people on your side of the House in Canberra are very pleased
with them. I wonder what you would like to say about these
figures now that they are public?
PM: I want to confirm what you have said that most
people would have to be pleased with them because both in
actual numbers, that is, the fact themselves, there was a
substantial reduction in unemployment, and as well, there was
a reduction in the numbers of people seasonally unemployed.
And as I think I pointed out on that occasion, you didn't
want to take too much notice of seasonally unemployed figures.
They are for the experts and not for the ordi! r., ry person,
the average person, because the average person wants to look
at the numbers and the facts, and doesn't want to care too
much about analysis.
Q. There was, of course, a lot of speculation about
the improvement you are talking about. A lot of people said
the figure would be something like 5,000 more people that is
of course about 8,000. Were you, yourself, surprised that the
decrease in unemployed was so great?
PM: Yes. I thought that it would be about 5,000 and
I had taken the view that unless it was more than 4,500, we
would have to take some supplementary action to reduce the
numbers. When it turned out a reduction of 8,000, I can assure
you I was delighted. ./ 2 



FOR PRESS PM's 88/ 1972
DOCTORS FEES
Statement _ by te Prime ! inista%.. r, the IRt Hon. William 10c!, ahorn, CH,. MP.
This afternoon i had a meeting with the President of the A. M. A.,
Dr. J. G. Johnson. Dr. Johnson was ac ! rompanied by Dr. L. L. Wilson, the
Treasurer of the and by Dr. ES. Stuclk-ev, the Secretary-General.
The A. M. A. reoresentatives caxv~ to see me at my rcqueast. I had
asked them to Canberra on receint of a report from the 1-iiister for
Health, Sir Kenneth Anderson, yesterday, that th' Feconomic Ldvisnry
Committee of the A. M. A. was conteinnilat--ng reco=. oending to the Federal
Council that fees for gonoral oractitioner consultations and home
visits and for some other scrvicDs might be increased shortly.
The fovernment was concernod to know more about the A. M. A.' s
proposals because the arrangement betweeon the Gcvernment and the
A. M. A. is that, unless tllare were extraordinary move-. ments in national
economic indices, the next general fe increas..: . qculd not be made
before 1 July 1973, whichi is the end of the current two yearly period
for fee reviews.
The last general practitioner feec adjustment made through the
A. M. A.' s normal two-yearly fee review arrangements took: place from 1
July 1971. The recommendation made from that date was for a fee
increase of 15% in N. S. W. ( wit: h minor variations in other states) on
the fees being charged as at I July 19% cO.
A dispute developed earlier this year regarding the appropriate
baseline for N. S. W. general practitioncr consultation and visit fees.
This led the Government teo establish, in Iqarch of this year, a judicial
enquiry on the subject of medical. fces for these services in N. S. W.
Ifr Justice Mason, who conducted the Enquiry, reported Ito the
Government in May and, as a rosult, consultation fees and benefits were
increased in all States from 1 July 1972. 
Besides putting into-effect Mr Justice Mason's recommendation
for N. S. W., this decision of the Government represented an increase of
about 6% to general practitioner fees for consultations and home
visits for all other States from 1 July 1972.
For some time past the A.. k and the Department of Health have
been developing a consultative procedure under which adjustments to
common fees and bene-fits could be determined equitably and by agreement
between tha parties at intervals of two years.
It was in the course of these consultative procedural discussions
between A. M. A. officers and representatives of the Department of Health
that it came to the notice of the Government that the A. M. A. was
contemplating an increase in fees before the expiration of the two-year
period, The Governmcint's position is clear. It believes that the
two-year agreement should run its course before any adjustments are
made unless there have been some quite exceptional developments which
would justify a departure from the timing of the agreed review.
The A. M. A. representatives put it to me that national economic
indices had moved upwards at an abnormally high rate since December
1970. I told them that the movements in the indices could ' not properly
justify a departure from what had been agreed.
The A. M. A. representatives said that the decision on thi s matter
would be one for their Federal Council, which is scheduledto meet at the
weekend. I stated plainly to them that while the Government was willing
to continue to participate in consultative procedures, its officers would
not be permitted to enter into commitments with the A. M. A. on the basis
of claims which could not be fully justified. I also indicated that
action on the line mentioned would be contrary to the interests of the
medical profession and would not be acceptable to the public.
The A. M. A. representatives will be in touch with the Minister for
Health after the Federal Council's weekend meeting and the Government
will then consider the situation further.
CANBERRA, 18 October, 1972 


SPEECH BY THE-PRIME MINISTER, THE RT HION. WILLIA4McMAHON, CH,. MP, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,CANBERRANATIONAL RFTIREMENT BENEFITS 19 October 1972I wish to announce to the House the terms of reference fora committee of enquiry into the best way of abolishing the means testover the next three years and -f responsibly financing this significantmeasure in association with the possible introduction of a nationalsuperannuation scheme.The Government's decision to introduce means-test-freepensions for people aged 65 and over represents a major social advancewith considerable financial, economic and social implications.We accordingly announced in the 1972-73 Budget speech ourdecision to appoint a committee of enquiry to examine and report onthese matters, including the question of how the proposal formeans-test-free pensions could be responsibly financed with particularreference to national superannuation.As announced in the 1972-73 Budget speech, the Governmentis committed to abolition, within the next three years, of the meanstest on ae m. nsion eligibility for residentially qualified men andwomen aged 65 years and over.The Government has also decided that the free-of-means testpension will be subject to tax but, following past practice, provisionwill be made to exempt or partially relieve from taxation persons inthe lower income groups receiving free-of-means test pension.In addition, the Government has determined that eligibilityfor supplementary assistance and for Commonwealth ancillary pensionbenefits will be conditional, as now, on satisfaction of the relevantspecial means test../ 2
The terms of reference of the committee will be" Having in mind the policy of the Government to abolishthe means test within the next three years on age pensioneligibility for residentially qualified men and women agedyears and over, as announced in the 1972 Budget speech,to report on1. Matters involved in the implementation of theabolition of the means test in accordance with theGovernment's announcement as set out in the Treasurer's1972-73 Budget speech.2. Appropriate ways and means of financing the free-ofmeanstest retirement benefits associated with a possiblenational superannuation scheme, includingthe type of national superannuation;the persons to be covered;whether the scheme of national superannuationshould be voluntary or compulsory.3. The relationship of the new free-of-means testretirement benefits and national superannuation ( if any)to private schemes and to life assurance.4. The method of adjusting the new benefits over time.The taxation treatment of the new benefits.6. Methods of making the administration of the newscheme as simple as possible.7. Any associated matters that the committee considersrelevant to the objective of the enquiry."I am glad to be able to announce that the committee ofthree to enquire into these matters will be under the Chairmanshipof Sir Leslie Melville, C. B. E. With him as members of thecommittee will be MR T. P. Scott and MR J. E. M. Dixon. On behalf of theGovernment, I express our thanks to these gentlemen for agreeing toundertake this important and substantial task.CANBERRA



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS PM. NO. 89/ 1972
AUSTRALIAN HIGH COMMISSIONER LONDON
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, CH, MP
The Australian High Commissioner in London, the
Hon. Sir Alexander Downer, KBE, retires from his post on
Tuisday next, 24 October.
Sir Alexander was appointed High Commissioner in
1964, prior to which he had been Minister for Immigration and
Member for Angas.
The Prime Minister paid tribute to the long and
effective service of Sir Alexander and to his contribution
to the maintenance of the traditional close links with
Britain during a time of changa and reorientation.
Until a new High Commissicner is appointed, Mr W. B.
Pritchett, who has been Deputy High Corm~ nis: oner since 1969,
has been appointed by the Executive Council to act as High
Commissioner. CANBERPA, October 1972 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 90/ 1972
ACCESS TO WAR-TIME CABINET RECORDS
Statement by the Prime Minister,-the Rt. Hon. William
Mc~ ahon CHi, MP
The first group of Cabinet records from the
war-time period will be available for public access from
Monday, 23 October. In January last, the Government decided that
a 30-year access rule should in future apply to Cabinet
papers as it does to the generality of Departmental documents.
Because of the special interest in them, however, the
remainder of the Cabinet papers for the war years 1942-1945
are also be be released for public examination.
The first group of pap ers to be released
will cover t~ he years 1939-1941 inclusive. Work on the
indexing of these records has beon completed.
Applications to study the papers should be
made in the normal way to the Director of the Commonwealth
Archi,-' es office in Canberra.
CANBERRA, October 1972 



LOCAL GOVER. NM'ENT ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE LUNCHEON
CAN BE IRMA
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP.
2.3 October 1972
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to come to such
a wonderful meeting as this in Canberra. I think it indicates not only
the approach of the Local Government Authorities themselves, but it also
indicates clearly that you recognise that the Commonwealth Government
must take its part in assisting Local Government Authorities and permitting
them to participate in government as the third tier. And I believe, Sir,
it's proper that I should say to you as Chairman, that there can be no
doubt at all that * part of the credit.-for attracting so many people to
come to a meeting like this is due to you and the efforts that you've
made in Local Government for so many years in the past.
I do appreciate the efforts that you have made to give
me the opportunity to speak on behalf of the Government, and to speak
about Local Government itself and what it means to this country. I do
so because as you know, we are approaching a Federal election and we.
are doing so at a time when crucial decisions relating to the concepts
and structures of Governments which have guided the progress and development
of society for so many years are now un~ der review, and very substantial
review too.
It is true to say that there's no exaggeration in the
phrase ' that what is at stake is the system of Federalism and the
three-tiered system of Government'. No matter what phrases you might
use, no matter how you might care to disguise intentions, it becomes
clear that that is the choice that faces us.
And that three-tiered system is one of Federal, State
and Local Government. This is, I assure you again, and I want the
words to sink in, no vague and undocumented threat. Nor is it an
invention of Liberal Party politicians for electoral purposes*
Let me quote the evidence of this by one of your own
most respected Local Government experts, Mr Roy Stuckey. In commenting
on the radical proposals of our politic-al opponents to attack and
ultimately destroy the role of State and Local Governments as we know
them today, he said, and I quote him " In effect, in one fell swoop,
Mr Whitlam proposes doing away with the State Parliaments and 900 Local 
Government-uni ' ts and-replacing them by what must * become a centralist
and bureaucratic control from Canberra". And he goes on to say, and
I completely agree with him in this, that " the people of Australia would
never stand for such a proposal".
But it is the last few words of Mr Stuckey's comment
that I want to particularly draw to your attention today in looking at
these dangerous designs for centralism. He said, and these are his
words, " it would provide initially a dictatorship for the Party in
power". No warning could be in clearer or in more distinct terms.
Before I go on to delineate this serious threat to
Local Government in more detail, I first want to describe to you my
own attitudes to this problem as a Liberal and as a person who can
claim a very long experience in Government. I am unashamedly a
Federalist, and I believe that my record bears this out, particularly
in the period since I took office as Prime Minister.
Inherent in the Liberal philosophy of the individual
is a distrust of, and A' emphasise these words, great concentrations
of power and authority. And from this flows our commitment to the
principle that Government should be as close to the people as possible
through effective decentralisation and through maximum voluntary
participation in Local Government.
Now the.. proof : 6hat these principles are the ones which
are more acceptable to Australians lies in the fact of the existence
of the three-tiered system of government itself. It is the natural
result of our history and our geography. And we intend to preserve
and to strengthen it.
A few months ago we had in Australia Professor David
Donnison. Many of you will no doubt remember his presence here. And
he is theC" Dir~ ctor of the Centre for Environmental Studies in London
and an expert in these matters. He had an important message. He said
" We should be suspicious of over-ambitious proposals which start from
the top and work downwards. Since we barely know enouch to co-ordinate
policies in one street, we should beqig not * by proposing brand-new
systems for a whole society but by trying more effectively to link up
the things we already know best".
Only a few months ago, in July, I received here in
Canberra, a deputation from the Australian Council of Local Government
Associations. I understand too, that this was the first time in more
than twenty years that a Prime Minister had received a deputation from
the national representatives of the Local Government Associations.
I told the deputation of my own and my Government's
continuing concern for Local Government, and my own belief in the
maintenance of truly local forms of Government. As life in our great
cities in particular becomes more complex and more populous, I am
convinced that our Local, Municipal and Shire administrations will need
to play an even greater role in improving the quality of life of our
citizens., not only over the range of traditional responsibilities, but
in recreational, sporting and cultural activities to an increasing'-
degree. Big cities should mean a greater, not a lesser role for
Local Government, and I support this greater role. I have strongly 1/ 3 
supported the attendance of Local Government reoresentatives at the
forthcoming Constitutional Convention, and although it is more a matter
of decision for the States themselves, I have expresssed a definite view
that Local Government representatives at the Convention will not only
be able to speak, but they should be able to vote as well.
I mentioned the States then because we should not forget
that Local Government Authorities are created and function under State
laws, as you well pointed out, Mr Chairman. And the Commonwealth does
not wish to disturb at present the constitutional structure whereby the
responsibility for determining the revenue-raising powers and supplementing
the resources of Local Government lies with the State Parliaments.
In accordance with that attitude, the Commonwealth does
not normally provide direct grants to Lccal Governments. What it does
do is to provide large amounts of untied assistance to the State Governments
which they are free to disburrse as they themselves decide; so that
it is true to say that indirectl bul-: in a very real way the Commonwealth
provides considerable assistance to Local Government Authorities. May I
now spell out some of our recent actions to illustrate this point
The general revenue grants to the States have been
increased considerably in recent years and this year we agreed to something
of the ot ' 92 million, that is for the Burget year
1972/ 73. Now t'is was an increase of something like $ 15r million, or
over last year. The arrangements under which these grants will be paid
over a five year period ending 1974/ 75 were initially determined at the
Premiers' Conference of June 1970. However, they were very substantially
revised as a result of the Premiers' Conference in June 1971 and 1972
at which I had the good fortune to preside.
There have, as a result, been very significant increases.
For example it is estimated that the States wil. receive in 1972-73 over
$ 420 million more in Commonwealth general revenue grants than they
would have received had the 1970 arrrnvements continued unchanged. At
the June 1971 Conference, besides agreeing tothese additional revenue
grants, the States accepted our offer, the Commonwealth's offer, to
transfer payroll tax to them and they have been levying that tax since
September of last year.
At the same Conference, and I think this is of enormous
importance to you and your colleagues, ! r Chairman, we also agreed as
a special measure cf assistance to Local Government Authorities that we,
the Commonwealth, would meet the full cost of exempting the non-business
activities of Local Government from pay-roll tax. The cost of that was
$ 8 million in a full year and $ 6 million in 1971/ 72.
In rural areas , e also provide the general range of
Commonwealth assistance to rural industry. We have instituted an
unemployment relief scheme, and we have included the provision of
relief work grants as eligible under State drought relief measures. / 4 
In addition, at the Loan Council meeting in June this year,
the limit on Local Government borrowings without the approval of the
Council was aised from $ 300,000 to S40n, 00n.
I believe, and I want to emphasise this point, that all
these actions demonstrate our clear concern for the problems of Local
Government and our support f'lr the Federalist system of Government too.
Tgis is not to pretend that the present system is perfect by any means.
But with all its shortcomings, it does through a division and a balance
of power provide for decentralised administration, and an essential
barrier ot the abuse of authority by an all powerful central Government
which would replace elected bodies with commissions responsible only to
one Parliament. Let there be no mistake about it. It is an all-powerful
central Govenrment in Canberra that our opponents are dedicated to
impose. Many of you will remember the speech in Canberra eleven months
ago when the Leader of the Opposition spelt out his plan, and I now
quote from it " We should have a House of Representatives for international
matters and nationwide national matters, an assembly for the
affairs of each of our dozen largest cities and regional assemblies
for the few score areas of rural production and resource development
outside these cities". There in clear and unmistakable and unambiguous terms
the Leader of the Opposition advocates not only the abolition of the
Senate and eisting State Governments, but also the destruction' of
900 existing Municipal and Shire Councils and their replacement with a
series of arogant and disinterested bureaucracies, bodies that would
be answerable to Canberra, remote from the local problems of the
citizne himself.
citizen trying w d not be hard tn imacfine, the ligh
tdoan a response from a remote eacrtabout
an offensive drain or an unsatisfactory garbage service. And if
anyone imagines that a Labor Government would be prevented from
implementing its centralist dream by constitutional limitations,
I'm sure that in these words you'll find that the Leader of the
Opposition has the answer to that too.
Speaking to the Fabian Society in Victoria last July,
he said tat if Section 92 could be held up to be the bulwark of private
enterprise, then Section 96 is the Charter qf rublic enterprise. And
he went on to say that it would be intolerable if Labor was to use the
alibi of the Constitution to excuse failure to achieve its social
objectives; doubly intolerable because, he say3, that it is just not
true that it need do so.
Now this is clear notice from our opponents that a
Labor Government would use Section 96 which allows the Commonwealth
to grant assistance to the States on such terms and conditions as the
Commonwealth things fit; as a vehicle for '-entralism by financial
squeeze or as Professor Donnison put it more suczinctly, and now
again I quote from him, to " tear the guts o. of r'tate Governments". 
The message is therefore clear. A condition of
obtaining financial assistance is toeing the centralist line, or if
you like " Do what we say with Local Government or you don't get
the money". So nobody can preterdthat the threat has not been spelled
out. It is there. It is real, and to ignore it would I believe, be completely
foolhardy. In our view, the present structure of Municipalities
and Shires provides the indispensable network for grass roots contact
between the citizens and. what can be an arbitrary leviathan of central
government. Other countries are struggling to return Government to
the people, to put decisions back down into the hands of those close to
and responsible to the citizen at t~ v~ qrass roots.
Do Australians want to go the way of the dictatorship of
centralism, control by commission, the recioe of remote control I
do not believe it for a second.
Before I conclude, Mr Chairman, let me mention one other
aspect of our pponentis delusions and at te same time let me issue a
warning. They offer you the lure of Local Government representation
on the Loan Council and that has a superficial attractiveness. But what
again is the price tag Reduction of Local Government to a " few score
bodies" for the whole of Australia.
So I say we must beware of the lure of a " widened role"
for Local Government in a unitary centralised system, which in reality
is nothing n~ re than an invitation to destroy any vestige of so-called
" Local" Government, and reolace Federalism with a centralised system
dominated by the barons of boards and commissions reporting only tc
Federal Parliament. Mr Chairman, thank you for giving me the opportunity
of addressubg today so many distinguished Australian citizens, and
thank you also for giving me the opportunity to speak here at a
Conference where representatives of New Zealand are present, and
representatives of most of the Local Government Authorities are ablP
to come to Canberra, aid in time I hope, after the Constitutional ConventlLi
is held theywillbe able to participate more fullyin the work of government,
particularly helping those at the grass-roots of this great country of
ours and with whom they are in the most immediate contact. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
Companies ( Foreign Take-overs) Bill 1972
Second Reading
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 24 October 1972]
Mr MMAHON ( Lowe-P. rime Minister)
( 8.55)-This Bill makes provision for
the control of foreign takeovers of companies.
The House will recall that in the
statement I made on 26th September last
concerning overseas investment in Australia
I announced the Government's intention
to legislate for the control of those
foreign takeovers it considers would be
against the national interest. In outlining
the measures that would operate under the
legislation I indicated that decisions on
whether particular takeovers would be
against the national interest would be
taken by the Government. I added that in
making its decisions the Government
would be assisted by an independent
authority established under the legislation.
This authority would analyse and report to
the Government on takeover proposals
which the Government judged warranted
further investigation as to whether they
would be against the national interest. I
indicated that the proposed measures for
the control of foreign take-overs would
apply from 27th September 1972 and that
they would embrace takeover proposals
then current.
Pending the establishment of the proposed
independent authority I said that
there would be an interim arrangement
under which departmental machinery
would be used for consideration of particular
takeovers on the basis of the
announced criteria. This departmental
machinery has been established and is functioning. A special group of officers has
been appointed specificially for the purpose
of examining the national interest aspects
of particular takeover proposals. This
group is located in my Department but it
comprises officers from several other
departments and is under the direction of
a very senior officer who has been
seconded from the Department of Trade
and Industry. The reports of the group are
considered by . very senior representatives
of several departments before being
referred to the Government for decision.
The administrative arrangements for the
examination of particular foreign takeovers
are an important step in the implementation
of the Government's policy which I
announced on 26th September. That policy
recognises that we are not as dependent on
others as formerly and that Australians
have rights at stake in foreign takeovers in
the ownership and control of Australian
industry. But we also recognise that the
interests of the Australian investors should
not be prejudiced, except when the overriding
interest of the nation requires it.
The administrative machinery alone is not
sufficient. If it is to be fully effective that
machinery must have the backing of the
law. A decision that a particular foreign
takeover should not proceed must be one
that, if necessary, is enforceable in a court.
On the other hand, the parties to foreign
takeover proposals are entitled to know
with certainty where they stand. The law
should make their position clear too. 
The Bill will give immediate legal backing
to the proposals I announced on 26th
September insofar as those proposals relate
to foreign takeovers of companies. The Bill
will ensure the effectiveness of the Government's
control of the takeovers. It will also
provide clear and precise procedures for
the business world. Parties involved in or
contemplating takeover proposals will
know just what steps they should take to
remove uncertainties. The Bill does not at
this stage establish the proposed independent
authority. That will be provided for
in a further Bill, which will be introduced
next year and will necessarily take some
time. In the meantime it is desirable that
the effectiveness of the control being exercised
under the departmental machinery
should be ensured. The present Bill will do
this. The powers under the Bill to prevent
foreign takeovers that are against the
national interest will be exercisable by the
Government, acting through the Minister
administering the Act. This is in accord
with the proposals announced on 26th September.
In exercising these powers, however,
the Government will in practice act
on advice from the departmental officials 1
have mentioned. The present Bill applies to
foreign takeovers of companies, and these
comprise most of the takeovers within the
proposals of 26th September 1972. Certain
other types of takeovers are not covered
by the Bill. These takeovers will continue
to be controlled administratively under the
departmental machinery. They will be
provided for in the Bill to be introduced
next year. I assure the House that the
Government will not hesitate to use its
powers to the full to ensure compliance
with the controls. The Bill will apply to
proposals for foreign takeovers of trading
or financial corporations formed within the
Commonwealth and also of bodies incorporated
in a Territory of the Commonwealth
other than Papua New Guinea.
Holding companies of such bodies are also
covered. The Bill is not confined to companies of
any particular size. But the Government
does not propose, except in special circumstances,
to apply the legislation to takeovers
of companies unless their assets
exceed $ Im. Two main powers are provided in the Bill. One will enable the
Minister to make an order prohibiting a
particular foreign takeover proposal, whatever
its form, from being implemented if
the Minister is satisfied that it would be
contrary to the national interest. The other
main power will enable the Minister to
limit the beneficial interests that a particular
foreign ifiterest or associated group of
interests may have in a specified company.
This power will be available to ensure that
the prohibition of one particular takeover
proposal is not avoided by resort to some
alternative proposal which would achieve
the same ultimate effect. It will also be
available if foreign control of an Australian
company has been achieved since
26th September 1972 without prior
notification of the proposal to the Government.
The question whether a takeover proposal
will result in control of a company passing
from Australian to foreign hands will
be a matter for separate consideration in
the circumstances of each case. The question
in each case will be whether there is a
passing of effective control. In general such
control will be treated as passing if, as a
result of the takeover, 15 per cent or more
of the voting power would be controlled
by a single foreign interest or associated
group of interests. A similar position will
apply if in the aggregate 40 per cent or
more of the voting power is controlled by
foreign interests. These percentages will
not be a conclusive indication of foreign
control. ; If the Minister is satisfied that having
regard to all the circumstances an acquisition
would not give a significant degree of
foreign control over the conduct of the
company in question, the powers of the
Bill will not apply. The question whether a
particular takeover would be against the
national interest will be a matter for decision
by the Government. That is where the
responsibility should rest. In discharging
this responsibility the Government will
apply the criteria that I outlined in my
statement on 26th September 1972. In t:-at
statement I mentioned that a takeover may
be treated as against the national interest if
the company concerned is considered by
the Government to be an economically
strategic industry leader, or to be so large 
that the takeover would significantly affect
the relative balance of Australian ownership
and control of the industry concerned.
-1 mentioned also the criteria that are to
be applied to other foreign takeovers. The
first criterion is whether, against the background
of existing circumstances in the
industry concerned, the takeover would
lead, either directly or indirectly, to net
economic benefits in relation to such matters
as production, prices, quality and
range of products and services and
efficiency and technological change which
would be sufficient to justify the increased
degree of foreign control of the particular
industry that would result from the takeover.
If the proposed takeover is judged to
be not against the national interest on this
basis, the following additional criteria will
also be taken into account: Whether, after
the takeover, the firm concerned could be
expected to follow practices consistent with
Australia's interest in matters such as
exports, imports, local processing of materials
produced, research and development,
and industrial relations, including employee
protection; and whether the takeover
would have adverse effects on the Government's
defence objectives, environmental
protection or regional development.
In making judgments as to whether particular
foreign take overs would be against
the national interest on any of the foregoing
grounds, due weight will be given to 3
other matters. One is the extent of Australian
participation in ownership and management
that would remain after the take
over; another is the interests of ' shareholders
of the company subject to the take
over; the third is the attitude of its board
of directors. The Government's consideration
of take over proposals will normally
be in 2 stages. The first stage will involve
preliminary consideration to see whether a
detailed investigation is warranted. This
preliminary consideration will have to be
completed within one month from the date
that the proposal is notified to the Minister.
The Bill does not formally require all
foreign take overs to be notified. But its
effect will be to cause all take overs within
the ambit of the Act to be notified. This
will be because the Government will have
the right to -make orders to reverse take overs that have proceeded without prior
notification. If a conclusion is reached that
further investigation of particular proposals
is desirable, the Minister will have power
to issue an interim order prohibiting implementation
of the proposal for such period
not exceeding 3 months as is necessary for
the further consideration to be given to it.
If no order is made -in respect of a take
over proposal within a period of one
month from notification, it will be free to
proceed. In addition, the Minister will be
able in appropriate cases to grant clearance
certificates in respect of take over proposals
notified to him. A breach of any of the
orders I have mentioned will be an offence
punishable by a heavy penalty. In addition
a Supreme Court will have power, on
application by the Minister, to make further
orders against a person who commits
such an offence. The Court will be able in
such circumstances to restrain the exercise
of voting rights, direct payments to be
withheld, direct the sale of shares, and
make desirable ancillary orders.
In exercising these powers, however, the
Court will be required to satisfy itself, as
far as it reasonably can do so, that any
order it proposes to make will not unfairly
prejudice any person. The Court's powers
are limited where the breach in question
was due to inadvertence and excusable.
Orders made by the Minister under the
proposed Act will have to be published in
the Gazette. Parliament will also be
informed of the making of the orders as
soon as it is practicable to do so. Some
will come into operation on the date of
their publication. Others will operate as
from a later date specified in the order. if
the provisions. I have outlined are to
operate effectively it goes without saying
that the Government will need to be able
to obtain any relevant information and
documents. In particular, information as to
the persons who have beneficial interests in
shares held by nominees will be needed.
The Bill recognises this need and accordingly
empowers the Minister -to requisition
relevant information and documents by
notices in writing.
This Bill is a major step in the implementation
of the Government's decisions
which I announced on 26th September.
The Bill will ensure the effectiveness ot
our decision to prevent foreign take overs 
of Australian companies where they are be introduced. With this in mind the
against the national interest. It will do this operation of the present Bill will cease on
in a way that has due regard to all rele-31st December 1973 or such earlier date
vant interests and, most importantly, keeps as may be proclaimed. In the meantime
uncertainty to a minimum, this Bill will ensure that the interim
In due course a further Bill which will arrangements function both smoothly and
provide amongst other things for the estab-effectively. I commend the Bill to the
lishment of the independent authority will House.
20807/ 72F. D. ATKINsoN, Government Printer, Canberra 



MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT, HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP.
THE GOVERNMENT'S RECORD OCTOBER 1972
Interviewer Paul Lynch
Q. Prime Minister, criticism was often voiced of you as
a Prime Minister in your first months in your oresent office,
as being a man who had a good technician's interest in the
process of government and of politics, but not a man who had
a very clear * icture of where Australia would be perhaps
five or ten years from then. Do you think that in recent
months, you have altered this impression?
PM: Yes, I think first of all that the criticism is a little
unfair because I had to fit into the office and I faced
difficulties of an unparalleled kind. I don't think any other
Prime liinister had to face thc samc number and range of
difficulties that I had to face. Then when I found that the
economic conditions were changing and that I was getting
increasing control over the Party, then of course I could adopt
the proper role for a Prime Minister, and that was to take a
national approach and a vision for the future that I think has
been evident, really evident over the course of at least the
last eight to ten months.
Q. Whnich would you describe as the foremost of the new
directions that you have pointed out in the last eight to
ten months?
PM: Naturally enough, I would like to look first of all at
problems like education, of what we did in the Budget with
the reduction of taxation, of the suoport for pensioners,
and half a dozen other policy changes of a radical kind that
we introduced there. T would like to look at the health changes
that we made, and our chanaes in international relations as
well.
Q. In terms of international relations, Prime Minister, what
new directions do you see there? / 2 
2-
PM: In recent days we have become a member of the United
Nations Security Council which has the problem of looking
after world peace. We have become c wember of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development, one of the most
importz-1. -onomic committees that there is. Recently a
delegati(. came from Japan, headed by Mr Ohira, accompanied
by four ocher very senior Ministers, to talk over our common
economic, trade and social relationships. All these indicate
that other countries are very interested in us, they know the
influence we have in the Pacific Theatre, and they are confident
that we in Australia will play our Dart in trying to ensure
peace in this area and make our contribution to development
at the same time.
Q. In domestic terms, Prime Minister, you have been talking
more or less about the matter of relationships between
governments relationships between Australians and the way
individual Australians lead their lives. What i'o you think
are the most significant changes for which you would care to
take responsibility?
PM: First of all I would have to mention the taxation changes
and the changes relating to social services, welfare, housing
and also hospitals and medical attention. These all concern
and affect the individual. But we have gone even wider than
that in the education and arts. We have done more in actual
performances than I can remember has ever been done before.
We have assisted, too, with conservation and environment, and
we have done a lot to help the aborigines. So that if you
look at these cultural matters, then I think you can accept
the fact, nce you look at the record, that these have been
remarkable developments and they are taking us into a new
kind of a world, and a new vision of the kind of world you
want for succeeding generations of Australians, because I believe
now, we must concentrate more and more on youth and give them
the opportunity to express themselves, to find delight in their
surroundings, and to be able to fully join in every aspect of
the life of the community.
Q. Final point, Prime Minister, and fairly briefly, I'p
afraid to out to you the question that it was claimed you
couldn't answer in the middle of last year : What do you see
as being the future of Austraha?
PM: I don't know of any country at all that has a brighter
prospect than we have, providing only we have sound and
sensible government and proper management of the business of
state. We are a wealthy country. We can become increasingly
wealthy. We can give our people greater opportunities than
they have ever had before. We can give them the education
they need, the health services and the housing they need,
and this, after all, is the foundation on which they, the
people themselves, can spread their wings and I think get into
a new age of a new development that will bring a great deal of
contentment and happiness to them.
Prime Minister, thank you very mv'ch. 



FOR PRESS: PM1s 91/ 1972_
AUSTRALIA HOUSE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the RL Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP.
Arrangements are now in hiandi to enable transfer of
responsibility for the administration of the Australian High
Commission, London, to the Department of Foreign Affairs as from
1 November 1.972.
The decision was made some months ago. I discussed it
with the British Prime Minister, MR Heath, during my visit to
London last ycar, and the transfer was referred to by rmy colleague,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, in the course of a statement on
Australian foreign policy prese~ nted to the Parliament on 9 May 1972.
This decision to transfer responsibility for Australia
House does not in any way changa the special relationship which
the Australian peoplo and their successive Governments have with
Britain anc6 British Governments a relationship symbolised and
exemplified by the link with the Crow~ n.
It takes place again~ st the background of Britain's entry
into Europe. Tho resulting interaction between Britain's policies
and those of her European partners will impose new demands for a
detailed understanding by Australia in areas which are in large
part the concern of the Minister and3 Department of Foreign Affairs.
I want to express publicly my gratitude to the Australian
High Commissioner and all those employed by Australia Houso in
London, for the excellent service they havc given to the Australian
Government and people while Australia House has been under my
administation and that of my predecessors over the past 60 years.
The same devotion and quality of service will of course continue
as Australia House passes unior the administration of the Foreign
Minister and his Department.
The Australian High Commissionor in London will continue
to be appointed by the Prime Minister, in consultation with the
Foreign Vinister, and tho organisational arrangements being made will
permit continuance of the channols of diract communication which
exist betwoen the Primo Mi. nisters of Great Britain arnd Australia
and tirough their respective High Commissioners.
CAN BE RRA
October 1972 



STATEIENT BY THE PRIDE MINISTER, THE RT HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP, IN THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES, CANBERRA.
POWERS OVER AND PROTECTION OFFERED TO WITNESSES BEFORE
PARLIAMENTARY COEMITTEES 26 OCTOBER, 1972
Mr Speaker? The paper I have just tabled has been prepared by the
two chief law officers of the Crown, the Attorney-General and the
Solicitor-General. It is entitled " Powers over and protection
offered to witnesses before Parliamentary Committees".
In May 1971, at a time of great public interest in the
subject, I requested the Attorney-General to prepare a paper of the
parliamentary committee system which would give particular attention
to the constitutional position and the provision of guidelines for
the protection of witnesses.
The comprehensive paper I have just tabled was prepared
by the Attorney in collaboration with the Solicitor-General.
Its purpose is to discuss the power of inquiry of committees appointed
by Houses of the Parliament, and the rights and duties of witnesses
appearing before those committees. The paper also considers whether
there are any additional steps which might be taken to safeguard the
interests of witnesses and of persons named in evidence before the
committees. The Government has not yet had an opportunity to consider
the position as disclosed by the paper or the suggestions made for
possible changes. However, in viewt of the great importance of the subject,
the Government has decided that the paper should now be tabled, so
that it can be studied by Members of the Parliament and the public.
As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I want to express to the Attorney-
General and the Solicitor-General my appreciation, which I am sure will
be shared by all who read the paper, of the comprehensiveness of the
paper and of the very considerable amount of time, effort, skill and
learning which has gone into its preparation. 



PM. No. .92/ 1972
FURLOUGH ( LONG SERVICE3 LEFAVE) FOR COMMONWUEALTH OFFICERS
AI4D EYNLOYEES AND FOR MEMBERS OF THE DEFENCE FORCES
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
. Mciah'EoH CH, M?
The Public Service Board has reviewed furlough-
( long service leave) prov4 sions fcr Commonwealth officers and
employees, having regard to various representations, including
those-from staff associations. The ' 31overnment ha-, a'noroved the Board' s
recommendations for a numiber of legislative amendments. These
include: * reduction of the .) asic qualifying period ' from
to 10 years
* provision for furlough to be -made a right
* paymentL-to t-he estate of a dece--ased officer or
amp. loyee 1* 7hero th-Ierc are no dependants
* extension of furlough to part-tm emloee
* recognition for-furlough purposes of prior
service with local cgoverning bodies.
The Governmenit has authorised the Public Servico
Board to advise relevant staff associations of the Proposed
amendments and have anv necessarv discussions on detailis, -prior
to the proarat,-ion of legi&amp; slation.
The Government has also ani proved that any new
provisions should have simultaneous app-ation to all members of
the Def -ence Forces. The new provisions il come into effect when the
relevant legislation the Public Service Act, the Commonwealth
Employees' Furlough Act and the Service Firnancial Regulations
can be amend~ ed.
CA-NBERRA,
26 Octobor 1972 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. W. McMAHON, M. P.
Prime Minister
ON
Defence Forces Retirement Benefits
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 26 October 1972]
Mr McMAHON ( Lowe-Prime Minister)
-by leave-I am now able to inform the
House of the outcome of the Government's
consideration of the report of the Joint
Select Committee on Defence Forces Retirement
Benefits legislation tabled in the House
on 18th May 1972 by the Chairman of the
Committee, the honourable member for La
Trobe ( Mr Jess). Honourable members will
recall that the Committee was formed in
September 1970. It quickly embarked on
a wide-ranging inquiry in the course of
which it recieved 459 written submissiois
from individuals, departments and organisations
and heard evidence from 65 witnesses,
in Victoria, New South Wales,
Queensland and the Australian Capital
Territory. The main recommendation of
the Committee was the introduction of a
completely new scheme to replace the
existing pre-1959 and post-1959 DFRB
schemes. The DFRB scheme has now been
in existence for 24 years. It commenced
in 1948 after an inquiry by an interdepartmental
committee under the chairmanship
of the Honourable J. J. Dedman, then
Minister for Defence.
The original scheme, which had much in
common with the Commonwealth superannuation
scheme, proved to be very inflexible
in operation and in 1957 a committee
chaired by Sir John Allison was
appointed to renew it. The result was the
establishment in 1959 of a new and quite different type of scheme to apply to future
members. This is the new scheme now
known as the post-1959 scheme. Existing
members were not transferred on to the
new basis. Instead special arrangements were
made that preserved for them their accrued
rights and established a basis for them to
contribute for additional benefits as -they
arose. These arrangements, which were
significantly modified in 1965 to permic
members to limit their contributions, are
now known as the pre-1959 scheme. T'ne
pre-1959 scheme is most complex and has
attracted a great deal of criticism.
About 12,000 of the present DFRB
membership of around 80,000 still contribute
on this basis and the present majority
of present pensioners were pre-1959
members, The pre-1959 element of the
DFRB Fund is, however, in a most houyant
position. The report of the Commonwealth
Actuary on his fourth quinquennial investigation,
which the Treasurer ( Mr Snedden)
received from the DFRB Board earlier this
week discloses that on the basis of the DFRB
scheme continuing in its present form, and
I emphasise that proviso, there was an
available surplus of $ 14.9m as at 30th June
1969 in respect of around 19,000 pre-1959
contributors and pensioners. The post-1959
element of the fund, on the other hand,
was approximately in balance, there being
a small deficiency of little importance in 
actuarial terms. The treasurer will table
the reports of the Actuary and the DFRB
Board on the fourth quinquennial investigation
later today.
The post-1959 scheme is simpler than the
very complex pre-1959 scheme, but the
Jess Committee concluded that it is still unnecessarily
complex. It has two distict
parts, one covering other rank members,
the other officer members. Each contributor
pays throughout his service a fixed percentage
rate of contribution which varies
with his age and rank at entry. The percentage
rates range from 4.75 per cent for entry
at 15 or less to a maximum of 6 per cent for
other rank members entering at age 30 or
more. Only service from age 20 onwards
counts for pension purposes but both officer
and other rank members who enter before
that age pay lower rates of contribution. The
difference between the maximum contribution
rates for other ranks and officers reflects
the different basis on which other rank
and officer pensions are assessed. The other
rank pension is determined by length of
service while the officer pension is determined
by age at retirement, the maximum
in both instances being a pension approximately
70 per cent of final pay, although
the maximum tapers down -to around 60 per
cent for the most senior officers as in the
superannuation scheme.
Both the pre-1959 and post-1959 schemes
are actuarially based and members' contributions
are retained in an invested fund.
The earning rate of this fund has increased
rapidly in recent years. The estimated
earning rate for the year ended 30th June
1972 is 6.58 per cent, which would be an
increase of 0.24 per cent over the rate for
1970-71. The Jess Committee recommended
that the present fund be transferred to the
Commonwealth, that members' contributions
in future be paid to consolidated revenue
and that the Commonwealth guarantee the
benefits provided and meet all costs not
covered by members' contributions. In the
new scheme recommended by the Committee,
the contribution rate would be a
flat 5.5 per cent of pay for all members
and the level of pensions would be determined
for both officers and other ranks by
length of service.
All service, including service before age
would count for pension purposes and pensions would range from 35 per cent of
final pay after 20 years' service to 76.5 per
cent of pay after 40 years. Officers, like
other rank members, would be entitled to
a pension on completion of 20 years' service,
but a pension reduction penalty of 5 per cent
would apply for each uncompleted year of
service if an officer were retired at his own
request before he reached his retiring age
for rank or an other rank member before
the end of his engagement. The Committee
also recommended that, after retirement, the
whole of a member's pension be adjusted
annually to maintain relativity with average
weekly earnings. The Committee said that
a possible method of achieving this would
be to maintain the relativity of benefits to
current pay for the rank held on retirement.
Other recommendations include desirable
extensions and improvements to provisions
that exist in the present scheme.
The Jess Committee was rightly concerned
to seek to avoid complexions in the
future operations of the DFRB scheme. Far
this reason the Committee concluded that
all present contributors should be compulsorily
transferred to the new scheme and
that they should not be offered a choice of
remaining in their present scheme. The
Government is attracted to the concept of
a simple, comprehensible scheme as outlined
by the Jess Committee, but, in a letter to
the Minister for Defence ( Mr Fairbamn),
the Committee expressed the strong opinion
that if any of the Committee's recommendations
were detrimental to any section of
existing contributors, special short term
arrangements should be made to ensure
that no detriment occurred. The Government
accepted this view and on 20th September
last the Minister for Defence
announced that no-one would be disadvantaged
by participating in the new scheme,
that everybody would have a right by
election to ensure that by participating he
would not be disadvantaged. This inevitably
raised the question whether it would be
possible to make this assurance effective
without introducing a -third DFRB scheme
to supplement the pre-1959 and post-1959
scheme. The Government has no desire to
do so.
There have been strong representations on
-behalf of post-1959 late entrant officers.
There have also been representations on 
behalf of those pre-1959 contributors who
have taken the opportunity available to them
of limiting their contributions and receiving,
without increasing the level of their contributions
further, the Commonwealth element
of future accruing pension entitlements. The
crucial point, therefore, is whether it is
practicable to transfer in an equitable way
the pre-1959 and post-1959 contributors to
such a new scheme, without detriment to
any one of them. We shall have an independent
expert examination of this problem.
One supplementary suggestion from the
Jess Committee related to late entry
officers. The number involved are
significant. At 30th June 1972 there were
3,516 officer members who entered at age
23 or later; 773 officers entered at age 33
or later. Because of the change in the basis
for officers' pension to length of service in
the Jess Committee scheme, many of these
late entrant officers would have a lower
pension entitlement. The Jess Committee in
a letter to the Minister for Defence recommended
that these officers, in addition to
receiving the surplus of their contributions
above 51 per cent of salary, should be
allowed to purchase back notional service
to bring the pension they would be contributing
for under the less scheme up to
the level for which they were contributing
under the post-1959 scheme. This proposal
is being actively investigated now.
The Government, like the Jess Committee,
is attracted to the concept of a simple,
comprehensible scheme provided it is possible
to transfer the existing pre-1959 and
post 1959 contributors to the new scheme
without detriment. This is strongly favoured
by the Services. -But if the Government's
assurance of transfer without detriment
should prove to be impracticable, the Government
has decided that it would instead
incorporate many of the recommendations
of the Jess Committee in an improved version
of the post-1959 scheme to which pre-
1959 contributors would be given the
opportunity of transfer on an equitable
basis. In any event, the following 7 specific
recommendations of the Committee have
been accepted by the Government:
Marriages of pensioners before age 60
will be recognised for widows' pension
purposes; A dependent spouse of a female member
or pensioner will be entitled to pension
on her death;
Subject to conditions yet to be determined,
de facto spouses and illegitimate
children will be recognised for
pension purposes;
Children's benefits payable to students
will be continued until age
There will be payable to the estate of a
contributor or pensioner, who dies
without leaving dependants entitled to
pension, an amount equal to one and
one half times his contributions less,
in the case of a pensioner, any pension
or other benefits received;
The tapering of the entitlements of more
senior officers will be eliminated;
A retiring member will not be penalised
by reason of his refusing to sign on to
a reserve force.
The Government has also adopted in a
modified form 6 other recommendations of
the less Committee:
An officer will be able to retire on pension
before reaching his designated
retiring age on completion of 20 years
service for DFR. B purposes;
The present category structure will be
eliminated. Contribution rates will be
expressed as a percentage of pay for
DFRB purposes and pensions as a
percentage of final pay;
For members who enter at age
retirement pensions will range from
35 per cent of final page at age 40 to
70 per cent at age 57 or later;
A retired member will have an unfettered
right within a specified period of
retirement, say, 12 months, to commute
up to the existing one-third of
his pension, other than an invalidity
pension. The amount of the
commuted sum will be determined on
an appropriate annuity basis;
Appropriate provision will be made for
the purchase of past non-contributory
service by present serving members
including those members who in 1948
elected to remain on deferred pay
rather than enter the DFRB scheme;
The concept of an appeals tribunal has
been accepted. 
As I have earlier explained, the Jess Committee
recommended that DFRB pensions
be adjusted annually after retirement to
maintain relativity with average weekly
earnings and mentioned a possible method
of doing this. We have concluded that the
issue of post-retirement pension adjustments
cannot be dealt with in the DFRB
context alone. In the past DFRB pensions
have been adjusted at the same time and
on the same basis as Commonwealth
superannuation pensions and similar
adjustment principles have been applied to
other Commonwealth superannuation-type
pensions. The House will recall that last
year the Treasurer in his Budget Speech
announced that the Government was investigating
alternative methods of adjusting
DFRB and superannuation pensions.
We have now decided to refer this
important issue to independent expert
investigation. This investigation will be
called upon to report on various methods
of adjusting pensions for which the Commonwealth
is responsible and the interrelationships
of the various schemes and how
they might be affected by the various
adjustment methods. Additionally, the
investigation will report on the economic
and financial effects of the various methods
considered. The personnel members of the
Navy, Army and Air boards have all
agreed that it is premature at this stage to
press for an annual updating of DFRP pensions
in the light of the other schemes
needing similar consideration. Children's
and orphans' pensions in both the DFRB
and superannuation schemes are expressed
as fixed amounts, although there is an
alternative basis for assessing orphans' pensions.
The manner of determining children's
and orphans' pensions in the DFRB
and superannuation schemes is at present
under consideration and any decisions
taken will be incorporated in whatever
scheme emerges,
We have also given careful consideration
to the Committee's recommendation that
the DFRB scheme be administered by the
Department of Defence and that the
Minister for Defence should be the responsible
Minister. The Government is satisfied
that the present arrangement of the one
organisation-the office of the superannuation
and DFRB boards-servicing both the
DFRB and superannuation schemes, is effective and results in significant economies
through the common use of highly
specialised staff and facilities. There is also
a clear need for co-ordination of policy in
relation to the main Commonwealth contributory
superannuation schemes, namely,
the DFRB scheme, the superannuation
scheme, the schemes of the Commonwealth
Banking Corporation and the
Reserve Bank and the parliamentary and
ministerial retiring allowances schemes. In
the Government's view, this is at present
facilitated by one Minister, the Treasurer,
having responsibilities in relation to all 6
schemes. Another important recommendation of
the Jess Committee was that the present
invested fund of members' contributions,
which stood at $ 154m at 30th June 1972,
be transferred to the Commonwealth and
contributions of members in future be paid
to Consolidated Revenue. I referred earlier
to the improvement in the earning rate of
the DFRB Fund. An invested fund is
likely in the long term to return earnings
at a level that enables members' contributions
to provide greater support for
benefits than would otherwise be the case.
Accordingly, the DFRB Fund will be
retained. The Government has, however,
decided that the investment powers relating
to this fund and the superannuation fund
should be widened so that up to 25 per
cent of each fund can be invested in
shares, debentures, real property, and in
loans to building societies. The Government
proposes also to establish an investment
trust to handle the investment of the
2 funds. The Government is working
towards the necessary amending legislation
being ready for introduction in the
Autumn sitting next year. As already
announced, the legislation will operate
from 1st October 1972. We believe that
the improvements that will be effected by
the legislation will simplify the present
arrangements and result in a very much
better DFRB scheme.
Before I commend this paper to the
House, may I refer in particular to the
dedicated and excellent work that has been
done by the honourable member for La
Trobe ({ Mr Jess), the ' honourable member
for Isaacs (-Mr Hamer), and the honourable
member for Herbert ( Mr ' Bonnett). . I
have read the Committee's report and I 
have listened to the arguments that those
honourable member's put to me. I have had
to accept that there is no monopoly of wisdom
in any official group or-perhaps I
could put it this way-in any Ministerial
group. These honourable members have
made a notable contribution. They have
persuaded me that some of the amendments
' which they have suggested are worth
while and in the interests of the active and the retired servicemen. I believe they make
a notable contribution to the DFRB
scheme. I congratulate those honourable
members ; because I think they have done
an immensely important job on , behalf of
the servicemen of this country. I now commend
this paper to the House. I present
the following paper:
Defence Forces , Retirement , Benefits-Ministerial
statement, 26th October 1972.
21401/ 72F. D. ATKINSON, Government Printer, Canberra 



ANNUAL CONFEPENCE, LIBERAL PARTY CENTRAL COMMITTEE
OF WOMEN'S SECTION
ST. KILDA. VIC.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William. McMahon, CH, MP.
October 1972
Just as the strength of the family rests with
women, so does the strength of the nation depend upon the quality
of its women. And that leads me to say that I believe the same
principles apply to national political parties like the Liberal
Party of Australia. I don't think we could have succeeded as
well over the last twenty-two years, nor could we have endured
for so long and have such bright prospects as we now have, if
it had not been for the Liberal women.
Here, I am not talking exclusively about women
mem! Ders of Parliament. I am talking about the women of the
Party who comprise the backbone of our electoral and of our
campaign organisations. So today, I want to pay tribute to you on behalf
of the Liberal Party as a whole. But, now I am going to ask you
to work even harder during the next five weeks, or six weeks, in
order to ensure that we have a bigger majority in the House than
we have at the present time. I know you will. And I know you
are going to ensure your return on December 2 with a resounding
victory, and I repeat again with an evcn greater majority than
we have in the House now.
Now this election campaign will, I believe, be
decisive for all of us. It will in fact be a crucial decision.
On December 2 Australians will be making their choice between
a way of life that puts the individual, the family and the
nation first, living in and working in and sharing in the
Government of an Australia which has modern defences, strong
alliances and good neighbours. That is the Liberal way; that
is the Liberal choice. / 2 
We will be choosing between this and a radically
different way of life, a radically different Australia,
compulsorily squeezed and moulded by artificial controls to
conform to Labor's foolish and repulsive socialist policies.
It is, I believe, becoming clearer, as the tide
of public opinion continues to turn in our favour, that
Australians will emphatically reject the wrong-headed visions
of our opponents. I want to emphasise this just as strongly
as I can. Labor's blueprints for remaking of Australian life
are alien to everything on which we have based the nationbuilding
of our post-war generation of progress, growth and
development. In every phase of national and personal life from
external security to ' Private morality, they want to attack the
way of life that the great majority of Australians have built
and which we want to preserve. For these reasons, Australians
are realising that this is an election not between similar
Parties and similar policies, with nothing more than a minor
shade of difference to tell them apart because the differences
between us are sharp and they are real.
So, it will be a major part of the Liberal Party
campaign in the next few weeks to drive home these unbridgeable
differences in public understanding. It is essential that all
of us in the Liberal Party make certain that no Australian goes
to the polls without a clear understanding of these differences.
That is one vital aspect of our campaign. But the most important
message that we should bring to the Australian people is this.
It is the message that in the past eighteen months this
Government has achieved more changes and reforms than any other
Government in history in a comparable period. This pattern of
change and reform matches, I believe, the new aspirations of the
Australians of the 1970' s.
But that is only a beginning. We have shown that
we have a combination of youth and experience in Government which
successfully tranerlates imaginative ideas into constructive and
into responsible action. In the next few weeks Members and
Ministers will be travelling the length and breadth of the nation
and we will convince Australia that the return of this Gpvernment
will be a mandate for continuous, constructive contemporary, and
above all, responsible change. 1
And so I want to put this to all Australians. Put
back a Government that will guarantee your freedom of choice while
it goes on changing and reforming and improving the quality of
life in a dynamic Australia. Whilst we are proud of what we've
done, we are not content. / 3 
Before I go on to examine some specific areas of
policies and issue in this election lot me go bach~ a little over
what we have done in a very short period of Government. I remind
you immediately of the success of Premiers' Conferences and of
the Loan Council. But I want to move now fairly quickly to what
occurred three months ago whcn wco brought down the most
humanitarian, wide-ranging and far-sighted Federal Budget in
memory. We slashed personal taxation. They were the largest
cuts in th~ e nation's history.
We also demonstrated that this is a Government of
roal social conccrn going wel~ l beyond any previous actions.
The Means Test has been c" scd " a we ore pledgod t" its complete
abolition within the next throe years. Pension rates in the last
eighteen months brought an increase of 29 percent in the stanard
rate of pension, never before equalled in so short a time from
$ 15.50 per wcek to $ 20 per week or more than three times the
changes in the cost of living at that time. All other pension
levels went up to give thrm the largest buying power ever.
The wives of all pensioners become entitled to receive benefits
ranging up to an increase Df $ If.? 5 pcr week, and because we
allowed superannuation ponsions and annuities to be treated as
property, many thousands of people will receive further pensions
for tho first time.
Our nursing home and home care reforms will be a
milestone in the care of the aged. For care in the home, there
is now a home care allowance of $ 14.00 a wcek in addition to
their social service benofits.
The personal income tax cut has bcen cut an average
of 10 percent following a 2h percent reduction we made in April.
For the man on the average wage with a wife and four
children, the amount of tax paid is down by a quarter and his
take-home pay is increased by $ 3.10 a week. Dependants'
. Allowances have been increased by $ 52 a year.
We have exempted 600,000 taxpayers from tax completely
by lifting the tax threshold from $ 417 a year to $ 1,041 a year.
pstate duty exemptions have been doubled and the Home Savings
Grant has gone up from $ 5C0 tc $ 750. 
In education, 1-ye are allowing u-p to $ 40~ 0 as a deduction
for self-education ex'-enses. Deductions for student children have
gone up from $ 300 to 450, and secondary and tertiary scholarships
have been increased dramatically from $ 53,000 to $ 123,000 a year.
Living allowances have been raised and limits on scholarship
holder's incomes abolished.
We have begun assistance in child care with an initial
million for centres for children in snecial needs and those
from low income families.
These, I assure you, are but nart, and only part, of our
Budget measures, and this I can assure you, is only part of the
story. Let us look at other major ' nolicy decisions. ! We have
within recent weeks, in fact -within the last ten days, implemented
controls on foreign takeovers, and if the advice tendered to me is
correct, and I believe it i3, it will -over 90 ner cent of the
cases. But equally important, I believe, that not only does the
law itself provide a major deterrent, but it is also indicative of
the fact that we will take whatever strona measures are needed in
order to ensure that no foreign takeover takes placeif it is contrary
to the national interest.
We have acted to Protect the environment. We have
established an ambitious new;, framework for urban growth. We have
already established an inquiry into poverty.
1bw these are just some of the things we've done, and they
are the kind of actions which we have shown we can initiate and
implement both capably and responsibly. We will do more, we will
do much more, but no Government can build this nation without
ensuring its basic security.
Not so many years ago we. ir elied for our defence and
security on the might of tie British-and American Navies, and to a
lesser extent uoon thoir airforcoes. World War II and subsequent
events, ' narticularly the dramatic changes that are occurring in
Asia, have changed that basic concept. For centuries the Asian
nations remained unchanged and unchangeable. Today this area of
the world is one of the most changing and dynamic and we are
participating in that change and those dynamic areas whcre the
change is taking place.
There can be doubt, howover that, China in its
international policieCs, continually promotes the idea of
insurgency in other countries, for example, in Thailand and
Malaysia, which are both very important to our security and to
our trade. 
People might argue, that is all right, but we cannot
see immediate prospects of danger of an attack upon our nation's
frontier and on Australia itself. For them who argue this way,
I want to give an unequivocal answer. Akny person who is prepared
to take a risk with the security and defence of this country is
acting in a way that is completely intolerable and will not be
accepted by the vast majority of Australian people because the
unexpected can happen.
Let me 4ve you a few illustrations. You will
remember the confrontation between Indonesia and Malaysia a few
years ago and the possibility that this could have spilt over into
East Nlew Guinea. You will remember the insurgency in East Malaysia
and in North Malaysia and in Thailand and of the activities of the
Communists in Thailand and the military oerations between India
and Pakistan and you know, too, of the growing presence of Russia
in the Indian ocean. In these circumstances, we just could not
take a risk and any person or party who Promoted the idea that
the risks should be accepted is not worthy of representing the
Australian people. Of course we would wish for policies of
bipartisanship but this is not the nature of politics and cannot
be for long periods anyhow.
So you see there are great and fundamental differences
between the Government and our opponents but let me summarise them
to you. In our regional defences we are building good relations
with Indonesia and the Five Power arrangements with Malaysia and
Singapore were reaffirmed as in good shape during my visits to
those three countries earlior this year.
Labor, the alternative, would pull Australia out of
the Five Power arrangements. We will remain as long as those
nations want us to do so. We continue to support, and give full
support for the ANZUS Treaty as a guarantee of our security, while
continuing to build our self-reliance and our ability to help
others within the region.
Labor would downgrade ANZUS from a primary defonce
treaty to a social welfare document and concept. It would, in
fact, make ANZUS completely lacking in concept, lacking in vitality
for purely defence pu rposes.
Similarily they would write off SEATO as useless, even
though it is a regional arrangement which links the powers in our
part of the world, both to Britain and the Ujnited States and they
would do this through the immediate abolition of National Service
and they would straight away destroy the traditional strength of
the army which military experts state is the basic minimum structure 
necessary for the army to be able to field in any significant
force. In fact they would reduce the size of the army from about
41,000 to 26,000 and they would reduce the strength of our army
from about nine to somewhere about five or six battalions.
This would inevitably mean that our army would
immediately drop out of the currency of diplomacy and of deterrence
in the region. Career opportunities in the army would be
irreparably damaged. our security would be undercut, and our
ab~ ility to give our Asian friends our word and be able to back it
up would be non-existent. If this is not the recipe for an
isolationist, friendly, and ultimately defenceless, Australia, I
cannot imagine what is.
They see no problems emerging in the Indian Ocean,
and they would deny ? imerica access to defence communications
installations in Australia. These are all very great differences
between us. I now turn to the important issue of immigration,
because, here again, my Government and the Labor Party are poles
apart. We believe that it is essential that the Government should
control population policies. Through our Liberal Party
immigration policy we exercise this control.
Labor runs away from this responsibility. It wants
the entire migration programme based upon sponsorship by relatives
of migrants already living here.
Now this assumes that the sum total of the individual
wishes of relatives of migrants will always equal the sum -total
of Australia's immigration needs. This is nonsense and many
people in the Labor Party know it and they let their views become
known. My Government combines two processes. A sponsorship
process to encourage family reunions and a process of actively
seeking migrants under Government sponsorshiD to fulfil those of
the nation's needs not met by sponsorship. Labor's policy of
non-control is doubly dangerous. It abandons the means of making
adjustments to meet the nation's varied social and economic needs.
Worse, it ensures that there will be an immediate and substantial
cut-back in immigration followed by a rapidly accelerating change
in the pattern of immigration.
In the past five years, only half of all settlers in
Australia were either Commonwealth or State nominees, only thirty
eight rprcent were privately nominated settlers. To abandon
Government nominated immigration as the A. L. P. would do would have the
effect of reducing settlers by at least one half, despite the
/ 7 
weight of expert opinion that migrants put far more into the
economy than they take out of it. We would also lose an essential
supply of skilled workers and these, I believe, areD very important
figures to present to you.
In the past five years, Labor's policy would have
denied Australia 73,700 of the 98,000 skilled workers who came
here as assistant migrants. These skilled workors are essential
for regional development, such as the develonment over in the
North-West of Western Australia and the development as well in
various parts of Queensland, including the alumina developments
and the development of our bauxite deposits.
The other major effects of Labor's snonsorship-only
policy will be an inevitable change in the pattern or the
composition of immigration programmes because of the sponsor ship
rates of various nationalities. These show that the non-European
migrants have by far the highest sponsorship patterns of the
highest sponsorship rates. Under Labor there would be a
pyramiding effect of immigration amongst those migrants with a
traditionally higher sponsorship rate. This would mean the
systematic elimination of immigration from Northern Europa, the
United Kingdom and the 71mericas. Mr. Whitlam has done this with
complete disregard for the national interest. He even admitted
on television, as you probably know and saw, that this policy
was to get him " cff -the hook" on the issue of discrimination.
In summary, therefore, Labor would abandon the
existing immigration policy which, while by no means exclusively
European, is strongly oriented-I in that direction. Labor's policy
would ensure that no selection was to be made on the ground of the
country of origin. It would, in short, ignore the lessons learned
in other countries and it wouldl significantly alter the ethnic
structure of -Australia in the long tcrm.
By contrast, we support the existing immigration
scheme, with intake scale~ d to ensure maximum employment. Skilled
workers, 30 per cent of which wlould be eliminated by Labor, have
benefitted everybody by adding to the nation's nroductivity, and
their substantial demand for goods and services has helped to
sustain employment. This policy, based upon assisted European migration,
has encouraged rapid assimilation and it has given us an integrated
nation with minimal ethnic problems and controlled yet rapid
population growth, with an increasing insurance:-on our defence
potential. / 8 
The last issue I want to mention to you today is
the question of freedom under the law and how it affects our
society. Democracy and the guarantee of individual human rights
to freedom and independence depend upon two concepts: They are
the rule of law and the maintenance of public order and regular
free Parliamentary elections.
The rule of law means this, that everybody has equal
freedom and equal rights under the law which are administered
fairly, impartially and honestly. This means freedom for
everybody, freedom without any sort of discrimination. Tp be
effective, the rule of law requires discipline in the use of
sanctions which in turn require legal enforcement. That is what
the maintenance of public ordcr means.
It is truly said that without law is without liberty.
When we s * oeak of freedom we mean your freedom under the law. It is
not a licence to do as you please without restraint or without
respect to the rights of others. Particularly some young people
think it fashionable or exciting to become involved with the
so-called conscientious breaking of the law through civil
disobedience. Such people are easily exr'loited and manipulated
by a small hard-core group of militant activists because of their
relatively innocent political idealism. This hard-core group
makes no pretence whatsoever of respect for the law or concern
for democracy although, as most of us know, they fully exploit
democratic freedoms to preach their own propaganda.
Our political opponents try to ridicule and degrade
freedom under the law with a smokescreen of self-righteousness
or attacks upon the police. The question must be asked: Why?
Here in Victoria, the Labor Party has answered by
its action in endorsing as a candidate for an unwinnable seat a
young man who is on a run from the law. That endorsement must cast
doubts on Labor's belief in our political system of democracy, or
at least that section of the Labor Party which took part in, or
applauded this candilate, because the endorsement of the young man
did nothing less than throw the concer't of the rule of law of
which I have been speaking into ridicule and contempt.. You would
think that a democratic constitutional party would immediately
disown this sort of action as political delinquency, something to
be condemned. What happenedl? Mr. Whitlam was asked about it, and
he retorded:---" Draft dodging is not a crime." As you know, or
you should know, Mr. Whitlam is, or is alleged to be, a Queen's
Counsel. / 19 
4 9.
And what did Mr. Hawke do? He took part in the
young man's campaircn. Mr. Whitlam, I can assure you, put his
mouth to it, but Mr. Hawke went one better and out his foot in it.
Now Mr. Whitlam and Mr. Hawke are engaged in a contest
about who is going to be the front-runner in the Labor campaign.
Whichever one it is, this provides a fair indication of their
attitude to freedom under the law and the public order.
We are, unfortunately, living in an increasingly violent
society. This year alone, there were twenty-four bombing
incidents in an Australia, previously relatively free from them.
I ask you as Liberal women and those others, those other guests who
come within Liberal women today to ask and to frequently to ask
others this question: Which Party would you trust to preserve law
and preserve the authority of the law from the contempt which
eventually incident by incident will attack the foundation of our
society a foundation, steadily built un by the Liberals over the
years, steadily developed in a way that has given not only the
maximum of security internationally, but which has helped us to
develoo a world of our own where traditional values do matter, where
welfare of our own people is of paramount importance and where we
have created an impression overseas that is one of envy for what we
as people have done.
You, the women of the Liberal Party, who have played
such a magnificent part in developing this as a realistic concept
and making life better and better for every succeeding generation of
Australians deserve, I believe, the wholehearted commendation of all
Liberals and certainly deserve the respect of every Australian.
For these reasons, I have much pleasure in being
invited to come here, and I now officially declare this Conference
open. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 93/ 1972
RURAL CPREDIT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMihon, CH, MP
For some time past, the Government has been
investigating the availability of longer term credit to the rural
sector and has already taken a number of policy initiatives in
this field. In 1960, it established the Commonwealth Development
Bank, a high proportion of whose lending is to farmers on
long term. To supplei'. ent trading bank lending on overdraft,
Term Loan Funds were established in 1962 and Farm Development
Loan Funds in 1966, in each case by transfers frnm . the trading
banks' Statutory Reserve Deposits with the Reserve Bank and from
the banks' other assets. The Funds have been added to from time to time
in subsequent years. In 1971, the Commonwealth offered the States
$ 100 million to finance the rural reconstruction scheme, under
which long term loans are ma. Xe to farmers to repay existing debt
and to finance property purchases to build up their holdings to
a viable size. $ 44 million has boeen provided up to June 1972
and a further $ 56 million is included in the 1972-73 Budget.
Also in the Budget is $ 4 million for marginal dairy farm
reconstruction. These steps have resulted in substantial new
long term funds being made available to rural industry.
However, the Government felt that there was a
need for a detailed review7 to be undertaken of the adequacy of the
credit facilities available to the rural sector. The Minister
for Primary Industry therefore directed the Bureau of Agricultural
Economics to undertake such a review.
The Bureau in its report " Rural Credit in
Australia" reached the conclusion that the facilities available
to farmers from existing lending institutions to borrow on long
terms were deficient. / 2 
It came to the view that the amount-of long
term lending being undertaken was inadequate, compared with that
desirable to allow shorter term debt to be restructured, to
facilitate property transfer and amalgamation, and to assist
rural industry to adjust to the longer term Pressures facing it.
The 1972/ 73 Budget provided an amount of
million, to be appropriated for purposes of facilitating the
increased availability to farmers of long term loans. The
Government has not yet carried to conclusion its consideration of
the many complex issues involved. Consequently, it was not
possible to bring down legislation in the recently concluded
Session of Parliament. Issues arising include, for example, the sources
of funds from which such lending could be financed and how it
would fit in with existing rural term lending.
The Government has decided that an enquiry should
be held to examine and renort on the feasibility and desirability
of creating a new, separate and viable institution which, taking
its place along with existing financial institutions, would engage
in financing the repayment of existing short term debt and in the
provision of longer term loans for rural industry.
In order to achieve an immediate increase in the
availability to farmers of long term loans, arrangements have
been made between the Government, the Reserve Bank and the
Trading Banks under which the Banks will increase the amount of
long term lending from the Farm Development Loan Funds, for a
wider range of Purposes than hitherto undertaken, and with the
Funds being supplemented for this purpose.
The new pur oses will include finance for
property purchases, assistance in holding together a farming
enterprise where the death of a farm 9proprietor creates financing
difficulties and finance for the repayment of existing short-term
debt. The present maximum term of 15 years for loans from
the Funds will also he remaovea; the general aim will be to match
the terms and conditions of long-term loans to the situation of
the individual borrower. While the present preferential interest rates on
lending for developmental purposes will continue to apply, interest
rates charged on this longer term lending will be commercial rates.
The rates charged in individual cases will, of
course, vary according to the circumstances of the particular. cases,
such as the purpose and term of the loan and the degree of risk.
The interest rate structure, and changes in it
from time to time in accordance with chancges in the general level
of bank interest rates, will be subject to the approval of the
Reserve Bank and the Treasurer. / 13 
3
The Governor of the Reserve Bank will be
making a separate statement about the arrangements; the Funds
are being supplemented by an amount of about $ 65 million.
The Government believes that this initiative
will improve the access by farmers to long-term credit and be
of major assistance to them in achieving a more appropriate
debt structure. Property transfers and amalgamations will be
facilitated, and financing problems arising from the death of
a farm proprietor will be eased.
CANBERRA, 1 November 1972 



EMBARGOED UNTIL 6P. M., SUNDAY 5 NOVEMBER
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 94/ 1972
PENSION AGREEMENT WITH ITALY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William McMahon, C. H. MP.
Agreement has been reached between the Australian and Italian
Governments to allow Australian pensioners to continue to receive
their pensions while in Italy.
The Prime Minister, Mr McMahon, announcing this today, said
the agreement applied equally to people born in Australia and those
born overseas, but it was expected to be especially welcomed by
older people who wished to return to or visit their country of birth
after living many years in Australia.
Mr McMahon said the agreement applied to age, invalid and
widows' pensions. In many cases Australian pensions would be paid
after a person had lived in Australia for twenty years. However,
where the person became an invalid or widow pensioner while living
in Australia, this twenty year period would not apply.
Corresponding Italian pensions can already be paid in Australia.
The Prime Minister said the agreement would add to the already
strong relations between Italy and Australia. The two countries
would look at the possibility of extending reciorocity into other
areas of social services in the future.
Mr McMahon also announced that reciprocal agreements on
P~ ension portability also had been reached with the Governments of
Greece, Turkey and Malta.
In each case Australian pensioners would be able to live in
these countries and continue to receive pensions, and pensioners from
these countries coLld continue to receive their homeland pension if
they came to Australia.
CANBERRA, November, 1972 



EMBARGOS: U6NPD. AMY., 5 NOVEMBER
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 95/ 1972
NURDA APPOINVr' ENTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon,
The appointment of Sir John Overall, as
Commissioner, and Mr Robert Broughton Lansdown, as Deputy
Commissioner of the National Urban and Regional Development
Authority, was welcomed today by the Prime Minister,
Mr McMahon. Mr McMahon said Sir John had been appointed Commissioner
until 14 July 1973, and* Mr Lansdown had been appointed Deputy
Commissioner for a period of 7 years.
Sir John was the founding Commissioner of Canberra's
planning and development authority, the National Capital
Development Commission and in this role had guided the city's
growth for nearly 15 years.
Mr McMahon said Sir John had previously announced his
intention to retire next July on his 65th birthday but had
offered his services as a consultant to the Commonwealth
should they be required.
Mr Lansdown had been an Associate Commissioner of the
N. C. D. C. since 1965 and had an intimate knowledge of land
development and urban economics.
Mr McMahon said the Government believed it was most
fortunate in having two men of the calibre of Sir John and
Mr. Lansdown to head the new Authority.
EMBARGO: 
2.
He said that Sir John had been appointed
Commissioner of the N. C. D. C. in 1958 to carry out the task
of getting a new Authority launched to plan and develop
Canberra and only those who knew Canberra prior to 1958, could
realise just how successful he had been.
CANBERRA, November 1972 



PRAUSTRAIAISTE
FOR PRESS: R. I. No. 96/ 1972
RELASEOF COMMONWAEALTH LAND ON SYDN4EY
HARBOUR FORESHORES
Statement by the Prime 1Hinister, the Rt. Hon. William
Mclalon, C. H. MP.
For some time n~ ast the Commonwealth has been
discussing with the State of New South Wales the release of
substantial areas of Commonwealth land on Sydney Harbour
foreshores, so far held mainly for defence purposes.
The nature of the Commonwealth use has tended to
keep the areas relatively undeveloped, at least in comparison
to neighbouring lands so intensively developed commercially.
The Commonwealth has been conscious of the growing
community awareness of the need for open parkland in a crowded
metropolis, particularly such scenic Land as much of the
Commonwealth foreshiore land is. A critical examination of
the use to wqhich the land is beinci out has been made to see
to what extent it can be released for community use and
benefit. I had previously announced that, as a result of
this review, the Commonwealth was willing to release to the
State a total of about 550 acres of land at ' North Head,
South Head, Dobroyd Point and Middle Head.
The land is to be used only for creating natural
parkland and the Commonwealth will retain the right to resume
possession in an emergency.
Following further consideration by the Government,
I am now able to say that the firm basi3 of the Commonwealth's
offer to the State, which the Premier has advised is
acceptable to him, is as follows: 
2.
NORTH HEAD: The Commonwealth will make available aporoximately
half of its holding of 639 acres, including a strip for a scenic
drive between the land retained and the ocean front. The
Commonwealth will retain the balance of the quarantine station
and the School of Artillery.
SOUTH HEAD: The Commonwealth can release immediately an area
of about eight acres on the headland, plus a narrow strip to
provide access from Cliff Street. The Commonwealth is also
prepared to make a further area available on leasehold bringing
the total to about 33 acres of the 78 acres held by the
Commonwealth. DOBROYD POINT: The Commonwealth will transfer its entire
holding of some 115 acres to the State.
MIDDLE HEAD: About 80 acres can be transferred now and a
further 35 acres may be released later, subject to continued
occupancy by the Commonwealth's School of Pacific
Administration. Most of these lands are available now for public
use. It will, however, take a little time to complete
transfers to enable the State to include these lands in the
proposed Sydney Harbour Foreshores Iational Park.
I am sure that my fellow residents in Sydney, and
the many visitors to the city, will welcome the availability
of these lands as natural parkland.
I am also able to say that the Commonwealth has
also agreed to return to the State another harbour facility.
I refer to the Man O'War steps at Bennelong Point to be used
for ferry services to the Onera House.
CANBERRA, November 1972 



. AU8TAIAm
PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 97/ 1972
D. F. R. B. AND SUPERANNUATION ENQUIRIES
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
1McMahon,
On 26 October 1972, I made a statement in the
House of Representatives on the outcome of the Government's
consideration of the Report of the Joint Select Committee
on Defence Fcrces Retiriment Benefits Legislation.
In the course of this statement I announced that
the Government had detcided to arrange for independent expert
investigation in respect of two matters arising from the
Report. The tasks are to enquire into and report on:
whether it is practicable to transfer, in an
equitable way and without detriment to any of
them, Pre-1959 and Post-1959 D. F. R. B.
contributors to a new, simple and readily
comprehensible, D. F. R. B. scheme; and
methods of adjusting after retirement pensions
payable under the D. F. P. B. and Commonwealth
Superannuation Acts.
The two asnects are quite distinct and the
Government has therefore decided that the enquiries should
be conducted senaratel. Terms of Reference for each enquiry
have now been determined and are attached.
The enquiries are complicated and technically
difficult and the Government has decided that each enquiry
should be conducted by one expert assisted as necessary by
assessors. / 2 
The D. F. R. B. transfer enquiry will be conducted
by Mr. J. G. Rutherford, the Queensland State Actuary and
Insurance Commissioner.
The pensions adjustment enquiry will be conducted
by Professor A. H. Pollard, who is the Director of Actuarial
Studies and the Head of the School of Economics and
Financial Studies at Macquarie University, Sydney.
CANBERRA, 6 November 1972 
ATTACHMENT " A"
ENQUIRY INTO TRANSFER OF PRE-1959 AND POST-1959 D. F. R. B.
CONTRIBUTORS TO A NEW D. F. R. B. SCHEME
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Bearing in mind the Government's objective of a
simple, readily comprehensible D. F. R. B. scheme, enquire into
and report on: a method or methods of transferring in an
equitable way and without detriment to any
of them, Pre-1959 and Post-1959 D. F. R. B.
contributors to a new D. F. R. B. scheme;
the provision to be made in the transfer
arrangements to ensure that existing
contributors would not be disadvantaged
in such a new scheme, bearing in mind
the Government's assurance on 20 September
1972 that they would have a right of
election; the broad framework of the legislation
necessary to incorporate the detailed
arrangements for implementing the conclusions
arising from and above; and
the financial implications of and for
the D. F. R. B. Fund; and
the Consolidated Revenue Fund. 
ATTACHMENT " B" ENQUIRY INTO ADJUSTMENT OF D. F. R. B. AND
COMM: ONWEALTH SUPERANNUATION PENSIONS
AFTER RETIREMENT
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Identify and evaluate the criteria in accordance
with which D. F. R. B. and Commonwealth
Superannuation Fund and similar type pensions
could appropriately be adjusted in changing
economic circumstances.
Enquire into and report on:
methods of adjusting pensions payable
under the Defence Forces Retirement
Benefit Act and Superannuation Act;
the nature and extent of ny problems and
inequities associated with the use of each
adjustment method;
the inter-relationships between the various
Commonwealth Superannuation pension schemes
and how these inter-relationships might be
affected by the application of the various
adjulstment methods to D. F. R. B. and
Superannuation pensions; and
the financial implications of each of the
possible methods for, in particular,
the D. F. R. B. Fund and Superannuation
Fund and
( ii) the Consolidated Revenue Fund. 



EMBARGO: NOT FOR--ASE ON 1/ ll/ 2
PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PY1. N; o. 99/ 1972
LOAN TO FIJI
Statement by the Prime " inister, the Rt. } Ion. William
Mc ! ahon,
The Prime inister, Nr cahon, announced today, that
in response to a request of the Fiji Government, the Australian
Government had decided to join with the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development and New 7ealanI in helping to
finance a road project in Fiji.
The project, which entails extensive reconstruction
work on the road between Nadi and Suva, will be the largest, most
expensive, single project in Fiji's history. It has been
thoroughly examined by the World Bank, and has been cleared
through that Bank's procedure-for selecting economically viable
projects. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
and New Zealand have agreed to co-operate in financing most of
the foreign exchange cost of the project. Australia has agreed
to lend $ US2.7 7. on terms similar to those offered by the other
two lenders. Australia's loan will be outside, and additional to, the
aid programme recently approved for bilateral aid to
developing countries in the South-West Pacific, including Fiji
over the next few years.
Mr 1c? 1ahon added that he was particularly pleased that
Australia was able to assist in financing this project in Fiji,
which will make a significant contribution to the economic
development of one of our closest neighbours in the Pacific.
CANBERRA, 8 November, 1972 



NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 5 P. M. ON 10/ 11/ 72
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 98/ 1972
VISIT BY PRINCE BERNHARD
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William McMahon, M. P.
Prince Bernhard, Consort of the Queen of The
Netherlands, has accepted the Government's invitation to
visit Australia next February.
Prince Bernhard's visit is expected to commence in
Canberra on Thursday, 1 February, and to be followed by
visits to the Barrier Reef, Melbourne and Sydney.
The programme of engagements for the visit will be
announced when details have been completed.
CANBERRA, Nlovember, 1972
EMBARGO: 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 100/ 1972
ADVISORY COMMITTEE TO NATIONAL URBAN AND
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Statement by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. William
Mc'ahon,. M. P.
The Prime Minister, Ur McMahon, today announced that several
eminent Australians had already indicated their willingness to
become members of the Advisory Committee to the National Urban
and Regional Development Authority.
The Act establishing the Authority requires the appointment
of a committee of persons, who, by their knowledge and experience,
can assist the Authority in the performance of its duties.
The Prime Minister said the objective was to establish a
group with a wide background in community affairs reflecting
business interests, local government experience, professional skills
and an awareness of community problems.
The Commissioner of the Authority, Sir John Overall, would be
Chairman of the committee of 12, the members of which would be
appointed for three years, and would be drawn from all States and
the A. C. T.
Those who have already indicated that they will join the
Committee are:-Mr B. J. Callinan, Melbourne,
Engineer and Planner. Senior partner with a firm
of consulting engineers.
Dr I. D. Carr, Perth, Chief Planner of the Town
Planning Board, Western Australia.
Mrs J. R. Flint, Dubbo, N. S. W. Alderman of Dubbo
City Council and " ember of the Council of the
Mitchell College of Advanced Education, Bathurst. / 2 
2.
Professor P. H. Karmel, Chairman,
Universities Commission.
Mr A. M. Ramsay, South Australia, General
Manager, South Australian Housing Trust.
Professor P. Scott, Tasmania, Professor of Geography,
University of Tasmania and Chairman, Australian
Institute of Urban Studies.
Mr A. J. Smith, Queensland, Commissioner,
A. B. C. and has mining directorates. He was Mayor,
Townsville 1962-67.
Professor R. J. Walsh, Professor of Human
Genetics, University of New South Wales. Professor
Walsh is also Chairman of the Commonwealth Advisory
Committee on the Environment and a member of the
Immigration Planning Committee.
Other people prominent in the field of urban and regional
development have also been approached to join the Advisory
Committee which is expected to meet about every six weeks.
CANBERRA, 12 November, 1972 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 101/ 1972
HOME PAYMENZ~ ASSISTANCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
Mcl~ ahon. C. H., M. P.
The Government has given the closest consideration
to the scheme for tax deductions on housing loans interest, which
the Labor Party has announced and rejected it as unworkable. It
is against the interests of young married people.
Administratively, it is complicated and, if tried,
would have to be abandoned.
The Labor Party's claims that the scheme is superior to
the Government's proposals are false.
The Government's scheme gives the better benefit to a
majority of home owners, particularly those with incomes not
above average earnings who represent more than 70 per cent of home
owners. We offer a straight.-out subsidy a cheque from the
Government for up to $ 250 the first year to help meet interest on
housing loans. It reduces by $ 250 a year in each succeeding year
and is not taxable.
Those eligible must be 35 years or under, building or
buying their own home and living in it.
The grant will also be paid in full to married couples
where only one is under 36 but both are liable for interest and
jointly own the house. It will be paid to the eligible partner.
It is better because it gives a greater benefit to more
young married people in the first three years, which is when they
need it most. U~ nder the Labor scheme, the family man with children
is nenalised. Th~ e larger the family, the greater the penalty. I
give you a few examples. ./ 2 
Under the Labor scheme, a man earning $ 4,000 a year would
be paying $ 800 interest on an average loan.
If unmarried or without dependants, his tax reduction
would be $ 205. If he had a wife and three children, all he would get
would be $ 155. If on $ 5,000, he would pay $ 1,000 in interest and get a
tax reduction of $ 279 if he was without dependants.
If he had a wife only, he would get $ 263. If he had a
wife and two children, he would get $ 237 and if he had a wife and
three children, $ 1225 a figure below the Government's first year
grant. This makes it crystal clear that the married man with
a family is the one penalised.
One other point of important difference is the fact that
under the Governmc-nt* s scheme, young married people will know
precisely what their benefit would be.
Under the Labor scheme, it would go in their tax return
as a deduction and they would not know clearly and quickly what
benefit they were getting.
The Labor scheme will give a big concession to a single
taxpayer who may or may not intend to marry.
fir Whitlam said quite clearly in his Policy Speech that
" all taxpayers whose actual income i~ s $, 4,000 or below will be
eH" Et-' tlcd to deduct 100 per cent of their interest rate payments" s.
This makes the single taxpayer eligible along with young
married people. It gives him a golden opportunity to speculate in home
building and buying at the expense of the Government.
It should be remembered also that on August 9 this year,
the ALP's spokesman on housing ( Mr Uren) said he did not accept that
interest on housing loans should be tax deductible as this
assisted the wealthy rather than the poor.
How right he is. That is precisely what the Labor
stq-iemc would do.
Labor claims that its total benefit on a 25 year loan
would be $ 4,000. But the fact is that a majority of home owners are paying
off their loans in 10 to 12 years because of rising in~ comes.
The claim that Labor's cash benefit over a 10 year period
would be twice that of the Government's scheme is also false. / 3 
Labor is quoting figures which are not related to housing
loan activity as it exists nor does the Labor scheme concentrate
its maximum benefit in the early stages of repayments when the need
is greatest. Furthermore, the Government scheme is not dependant on
the movement in incomes of home purchasers or of changes in tax
rates. It has substance throughout whereas the Labor scheme is
full of shadows.
CANBERRA, 19 November, 1972 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 102/ 1972
PUBLIC ACCESS TO GARDEN ISLAND
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William I-c7ahon, CH, MP.
and the Premier of Western Australia,
the Hon. J. T. Tonkin, i2. L. A.
Agreement in principle has been reached between the
Commonwealth and the Western Australian Governments on an outline
of arrangements for public access to Garden Island after the Naval
Facility is completed in 1975.
It will be recalled the Prime M4inister announced in May
that it was intended about iCOO acres and 10 miles of beaches on
the Island would continue to be available to the public.
Agreement has also bcen reached in principle on the
State Government's proposal to transfer the Explosives Depot from
Woodman Point to a location adjacent to the Naval Armament Depot
on Garden Island. This would free the area currently occupied by
the State Depot at Woodman Point for inclusion in the State's plan
for development of tourist facilities in that area.
The location of the State Explosive Depot on the Island
will marginally reduce the area available for public access.
However, apart from the restricted areas associated with the
Armament and Explosives Depots, and the areas envisaged for the
Naval facilities, it is intended that the remainder of the Island
be made available for use by the public.
The respective areas are delineated on the attached
map. Transport to the Island will continue to be mainly by
the present means of small craft on a daily basis only. Access
to the beaches is the major public attraction. In the overall
interests of preservation of the ecology and flora and fauna,
access to the inland areas will be limnitod to designated
walking trails. 
2.
The State plans to establish limited tourist
facilities to the south of the historical area at Cliff Head
and it is proposed that visits by approvc tourist buses to this
area be permitted. The possibility of the State erecting a
tourist jetty near Cliff Head is also to be explored.
A detailed plan of management will now be drawn up for
approval by the Commonwealth and State Govern-ments subject to
the resolution of certain financial and legal aspects.
In concluding the arrangements for public access,
special provisions will be necessary and will be incorporated
for the protection of the flora and fauna and the sensitive
ecology of the Island generally. Due recognition must be given
to the security of the Naval facilities and p~ ossible future Naval
expansion. The Prime *:;. inister and the Premier both expressed
gratification tE. hat there is now every expectation that thc
arrangements worked out will, as well as meeting the defence
needs of the Navy, also meet the interests of the people of
Western Australia who wish to continuo to enjoy the various
attractions of this area.
CANBERRA, 19 November, 1972 
mile
I"
I
I
I
I
~ Sns INDIANOCEAN SOU N D
-a 24 i'sie.
I State Explosivec Depot
zrent Jetty Armament Depot
SCIIEDULE OF ZONES
z ISIOU MUSE ff flyl. 43 .11A! 01
0 ) AIAAMChT D[ PCT
C 11ITORIC RISER-o
a CON-EXNOSIYES AREA
I IMINIKSi IDI RE IICKTIG AUO
DAMIAGE CONTIROL
f SlAG( 14EXTUENT WORX3
9 FOSS18LI ILTURE CI FUEL DEPOT
a 4ARRACXS
I MIGK LEVEL WATER STORAGE
J WHARF MID V/ ORXSXOP FACILMfE!
K tOSSI l. FUTURE AIRFIELD
I POSSIDLE AITERMATI ILTUIE
79ASUITTII STATIONI
0 PQSSISLL FUTURE IlPR E
L GF, NT)
Restricted Out of
bounds to the Pub1H
Restricted T'ublic
entry or traverse
at own risk
Available ior
Public Access
( Approx. Beach
distances indicates)
Historical Area Ct) M 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 103/ 1972
COST OF ELECTION PROPOSALS
Statement by the Prime Mlinister, the Rt. Hon.
William McMahon, C. H., M. P.
I was hoping to announce the cost figures of the
Government's new proposals in the Liberal Party Policy Speech
together with costs of the Labor Party proposals on a comparable
basis. This is not possible. In many cases, there is no detail
and no clear basis for costing Labor's proposals. The details of our
proposals on a full year basis are set out below:-
COSTING OF NEW PROPOSALS FULL YEAR BASIS
PROPOSALS MILLION
HOUSING Interest Rate Subsidy
War Service Homes 7
EDUCATION Pre-School
Primary School Libraries
Underprivileged Children
Isolated Children 9
Other ( scholarships, etc.) 11
HEALTH Dental Service 10-20
Drugs, Alcoholism, Mental Illness 9
Low-income Families Health Insurance 7-11
Other ( physiotherapy, para-medical,
handicapped children, etc.) 1-3
WELFARE Pensions link with C. P. I. 7r
TRANSPORT Urban Transport
Main Line Railways 32
Other ( Road Safety, Beef Roads) ./ 2 
INDUSTRY Depreciation Allo. wance on Buil ings 8
OTHER Allowance to cover other smaller items
loans for ex-servicemen,
environment) 1
TOTAL 333-349
The above figures do not include expenditure on urban and
regional development. As stated in the Policy Speech, $ 5 million
has been made available to the National Urban and Regional
Development Authority this financial year and Commonwealth
expenditure is expected to rise to the rate of about $ 80 million
a year in the first five years.
These estimates have been checked by the Commonwealth
Departments. They indicate that the total cost of the proposals
would be under $ 350 million on a full year basis.
The Labor Party has made some 90 promises on policy
involving new costs. At this stage it has not been possible to
make cost estimates for the majority because they are altogether
too vague or general in expression. But in some cases, costs can
and have been estimated. Nine out of the 90 promises have been
costed. They have been checked by the relevant Commonwealth
Departments. The total is some $ 1300 million on a full year basis.
Details are:-VILLION
EDUCATION ( full year basis)
Tertiary Education 280
( ii) Abolition of Fees ( from 1974)
( iii) Pro-School Centres and completion of
secondary education 50 at least
HEALTH Insurance 110
PENSIONS Increases
HOUSING Mortgage Interest
PUBLIC SERVICE week
4 weeks' annual leave and other
matters. 90 
TRANSPORT Takeover-of all State railways
annual costs 190
( ii) Upgrading the systems 230
$ 1330 million
A total of over $ 1300 million for thee. costs makes it
plain that the costs of a lot of others coula be very substantial.
There are many others. One example is regional devlomont.
Another is the shipping proosals which are large indeed.
If the Leader of the Opposition likes to give more detail
on his promises, I will have the total cost estimated for him.
Mr Whitlam made a statement on Thursday last in which he
said, " All the proposals I have put and 1r McMahon has put are
within the rope of Commonwealth financial responsibility."
He is right about mine and completely wrong about his own.
Mr Whitlam has said that the money to pay for his proposals
would come f'obm a $ 5,000 million increase in Commonwealth revenue
in the next three years.
There are at least two comments which can be made about
this statement. First, Commonwealth revenue increases without any tax
changes would have beun of the order of $ 1,000 million between
11 and 12 per cent in 1971/ 72 and this year.
On that, the revenue increase over three years could not
approach $ 5,000 million unless inflation ran riot and the tax
burden was substantially increased.
Second, Mr Whitlam has overlooked one fact one
elementary fact the automatic growth of expenditure.
Commonwealth expenditure has also risen by about $ 1,000
million, or 11-12 per cent, in 1971/ 72 and this year. So that the
rises in revenue and exoenditure have been roughly the same.
A high proportion of the increase in expenditure goes to meet
increased wage and other costs.
A list of uncosted Labor proposals is attached.
CANBERRA, November, 1972 
ATTACHMENT
LIST OF UNCOSTED LABOR PROPOSALS
EDUCATION: Remove ceiling on Conimonwealth Grants for education
from 1974.
Tax deductibility of child care fees to $ 250P. A.
( with conditions)
Extend commonwealth assistance ( building, equinment,
teachers, students) to Teachers' Colleges.
Child-care facilities in Dre-schools.
HEALTH " Sponsoring" of health centres: Public Nursing Homes;
Free School dental service; Dental therapists'
training Colleges.
WELFARE Australian assistance plan ' cost sharing" a range
of local welfare services.
National Superannuation Scheme.
National Compensation Scheme.
Abolition of means test within three years.
Payment of pensions overseas to Australians and
returned migrants.
CITIES Six Commonwealth-State land development commissions
operating costs.
Acquisition of non-income-earning land for parks,
coastlines, historical sites.
Deliberate rcduction of interest rates.
Funds for State housing commissions for waiting
periods to be brought down to uniform 12 months.
War service homes: Loan ratio raised to 100%
establishment of revolving fund removal of 1951
and 1961 restrictions.
Semi-government and local government authority access
to Loan Council.
Water and sewerage works programme 1973-78. / 2 
REGIONAL DEVELOPPIENT rro grar. imc-concciitratcd cn Albury,-Wodonga and
Towvnfzvi. l..:
* reduction -t'o loc-il-call te-7lephone rates of calls
between growth c : rtres and ca-itals.
PRIMARY INDUSTRY rca : v zv Lraiii of long-term, low-interest
inar: c tirough the banking -stem.
* co: 1scrv-otici and construction authority
irograiirle of wzuter conscrvation financed from
P. A. iLncomrz frorn Snowy Mountains Scheme.
fit,,, st-dityy on storage of wheat suri. Dluses.
wz~ o cqnourered to acqiuire/ market whole
' o; 7 :. ic st'b-liztion" of primary industries in
* acce'. c: at. cn of re-afforestation
PD-jor 2sur'C : ucesiirvevL assistance in
nro. Cinyj vesscls, pr-: cessing facilities.
abolition of r,, ine ex-_ cise tax
NORTHERN DEVELOPMF. N2,-
~ Coo?: cLtC~ n Pilbatra vroj ect
join4-I~ sic vc ture of ai. n. Ld private owners.
ship co:-uc; o inancincr on lines of Japanese
Co~ i~ twh c'i: r ' for X--ustralian Resources
Dev~ or1~.~: L~ u~' -Financ!.-c; of '-, hip construction.
FOREIGN IN% 7ESTVI-' T
Expanls f.' n of !~ L
guaran: C e Lnu&amp;(* companies against diminished
re-turr. s
coOt IC l3c ;: i-ving lf-sufficiercy in rolling stock,
pipJ ~ Fhi light aircraft, fighter aircraft.
INDUSTRIAL RELAT3I( Q u~ tdl in v cai~ oaltraining and retraining
QUALITY OF LIFE 0e st a of ~. muiycentres in Schools by
Ca.-j tal C:. r. ts i-nitily ( all) High Schools.
tr3 -nillr" 0-yCDu h le-aderzs
a' s-zhuii-cr~ a... a: or ". chool f; porting facilities. 
( cont'd) tourist promotion indefinite grants, loans, tax
concessions and other inducements.
International Airport at Townsville
establishment of National Parks service and proposals
re Australian Alps and Central Australian wilderness area.
" encouragement" for cheap airline holidays within
Australia entry of tourist commission into business activities.
LAW AND ORDER appointment of ombudsman
mandatory publication of Covernment information
improved training, pay, conditions etc. of Commonwealth
Police Force.
ABORIGINES payment of all legal costs for aborigines
o establishment of Central Australian Aboriginal Reserve
Aboriginal Land Fund: $ 5M P. A. for 10 years
DEFENCE automatic annual adjustment of defence pay allowances
adoption of all D. F. R. B. Committee proposals
appointment of military ombudsman
$ 1,000 re-engagement bonus
benefits for servicemen: war service homes, Repatriation
health benefits, rehabilitation training, scholarships for
children, " generous" allowances for retirement and
resettlement
PRICES Subsidies, tariff changes, etc. to restrain price
increases
NEW COSTS FOR ESTABLISHMENT AND RUNNING OF:
economic planning machinery
permanent expert committee on taxation
price justification tribunal
( expanded activities of) defence standards laboratory,
commonwealth Analyst, C. S. I. R. O.
Australian Schools Commission
Australian nre-Schools Commission
Australian Hospitals Commission / 4 
o Ministry of Urban Affairs
SCommonwealth/ State Land DeveloPment Commissions
Inter-State Commission
National Disaster Organisation
Commonwealth Superior Court
SMinistry of Northern Development
Single health insurance body
Secretariat for ( Foreign Takeovers
Commonwealth Serum Laboratory
Commonwealth Arts Council: ( seven) autonomous cultural
bodies Securities and Exchange Commission
o Ministry for Aboriginal Affairs
Aboriginal " conciliation procedures"
Conservation and Construction Commission
Fuel and Energy Commission 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 104/ 1972
NATURAL GAS PIPELINE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William McMahon, M. P.
The Prime Minister announced today that he had been
informed that substantial orders are being placed in Australia by
East-Australian Pipeline Corporation Limited on account of
Australian Gas Light Company for steel pipe to be used in the
construction the main trunk and lateral lines for the Gipgealpa/
Sydney natural gas pipeline.
Negotiations had been proceeding for some time between
East-Australian Pipeline Corporation Limited and local manufacturers
on the question of whether these manufacturers could meet the
required specifications for the steel pipe required for the main
route. At the request of all parties the Department of Customs
and Excise was involved in these negotiations.
Following these negotiations and recent detailed
investigations, East-Australian Pipeline Corporation is now satisfied
that the Australian steel producers and pipe manufacturers are
capable of meeting the technical specifications required for the
pipe which is to be purchased from them.
The Prime r'' ii. ster went. on to say that
approximately 80 miles of the 34" nmin trunk line will be
manufactured in Australia by Steel ains Limited from X63 steel
plate to be produced in Australia. This is the total amount tendered
for by the Company. Tubemakers of Australia Limited also has the
basic capacity to produce steel pipe of 34" outer diameter and had
been offered a contract for approximately 160 miles of the main
trunk line the tent of the Company's capacity. I
However, East-Australian Pipeline Corporation has also
offered a cc^ tn: t to tubemakers for the su!] y. ly of ooroximately
170 miles of steel pi-e of 20/ 22" outer diameter required for the
gas distribution system and main lateral connections to other major
centres in New South Wales. / 2 
The Company has advised that is is not possible for it to
produce both lines in the time required and it has elected to
manufacture the 20/ 22" line. The high strength steel plate for
that contract will be supp~ lied from Australian ? roduction.
The Prime Minister stated that he had also been advised
that orders for the balance of the lateral and distribution lines
will be placed in Aiustralia.
All contracts -those let in Australia and in Japan
provide the same guarantees as to warranty and performance to
specification. The Prime Minister has been advised that because of the
size of this contract and the delivery requirements it is not
possible for one pipe manufacturer to supply the bulk of the
contract which must be imported. The Australian Gas Light Company
therefore proposes to impoort the bulk of the pipeline from three
Japanese manufacturers.
The Department of Customs and Excise has been examining an
application for by-law admission of the steel pipe which had to
be imported from Japan. By-law admission of imported goods
subject to protective duties is only given if suitably equivalent
goods are not reasonably available in Australia.
Since the Australian Gas Light Company is obtaining in
Australia all the pipe that can be made in this country within the
required delivery period the Minister for Customs and Excise has
approved duty free admission of the necessary imports.
The Prime Minister commented that the matter had been
resolved very successfully.
The decision by the Australian Gas Light Company meant
that Australian manufacturers and workers would be engaged in the
production of as much of the pipe line as can be produced in
Australia. In addition of course, Australians would be responsible
for laying of the lines, at the same time the bulk of the pipe
would be imported from Japan without the need to increase costs by
attracting the normal duties.
This imvortant Australian project would now go ahead
with advantage to all parties concerned, manufacturers,
unions and consumers.
CANBERRA, 22 November, 1972 



FOR PRESS: NO. 105/ 1972
THE CHANNEL 7 ( BRISBANE) INTERVIEW
Statement by the Prime ' i. nist: r, the Rt. Hon.
William " cM'ahop, CH, MP
A great deal of publicity has been given to comments
made by me in a television interview recorded in Brisbane on Friday
for telecasting next W. ednesday.
These have been misconstrued as criticism by me of my
Ministers. The following is the extract from the transcript of the
interview which deals with the incident
" QUESTION
PRI'" tE
MINISTER: QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER: Looking back, Prime Minister, over the last twenty
months, what have you, yourself, learnt from being
Prime Pinister?
I have learnt a lot. I have learnt first of all the
fact I now must make more decisions than I had
intention of making when I first became the Prime
Minister. I wanted to be the head of a team. I
wanted to delegate the authority to the relevant
Ministers resoonsible for the Departments.
TThat went iwrong with that principle?
I couldn't get the work done quickly enough and I
found frequently that the political aoproaches to it
were not as good as I thought they should be. So
from September of last year, I gradually started to
change, and I have been changing a little more quickly
as the days have gone by and I believe with success."
As I said last night, any suggestion that I am
criticising my Ministry is abso ut nonsense.
I was not reflecting in any way on any member of my
Ministry. 
There are times when one must, in co-operation with the
relevant Minister, make decisions which cannot be kept waiting.
I have an extremely competent team in whom I have
complete confidence, as I said in my Policy Speech.
It is obvious that as we develoned new programmes, I have
had to take increasing responsibility.
Since I took office twenty months ago, a whole range of
liberal Dolicies have been transformed.
Many new measures have been introduced, including some
of the most significant policy initiatives of thn postwar period.
I make no apologies for having gct these things done, and
done resonrnibly and rapidly.
More will be done when my Government is returned to power
on December 2.
Mr Whitlam has no qualificatinns to speak about Cabinet
administration. His caucus, under outside pressure, has forced him to
accept an unworkable Cabinet system with up to 77 members. Nothing
could be more impracticable.
Under our Cabinet system, the Prime Minister is the leader
of his team. Under Labor, a much larger and unwieldy team would control
the Prime Minister. That team would, in turn, be subject to the outside
control of Labor's non- elected machine.
SYDNEY, November, 1972 



-3 AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS PM. No. 106/ 172
MORAL ISSUES IN THE ELECTION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
Williar. _ IcMFahon, C. H. M. P.
During the election campaign questions have been asked
about the attitude of the principal parties on some of the moral
issues of the day. There are fundamental differences between the
Government and the Labor Party on a number of them.
What stand should a Government take on such issues?
Let me state my belief a belief which is implicit in our policies.
In a free society it is customary to regard the private
morals of an individual as a matter for his own conscience.
However, when such moral actions impinge upon others and are likely
to have adverse social effects, particularly if they are likely to
corrupt the young, then it is the duty of Governments in democratic
countries to intervene to protect the rights of others. With this
principle, I fully agree.
Abortion is a case in point. It is clear, of course,
that under certain conditions there is justification for therapeutic
abortion. The law should and does provide for this.
But my Government does not believe in abortion on demand.
I confirm the statements I have made before that we will not amend
the law relating to abortion.
My Government would apply the same principles to drugs,
whether " soft" or hard drugs. While we recognise that drug addicts
need and should get first-class medical attention, we would not, as
some Labor Party members urge, remove the penalties for drug-taking,
including marihuana. Medical science cannot exonerate marihuana from serious
physiological and psychological effects, including possible genetic
damage. In such circumstances, to give de facto legality to it by
removing penalties would be reckless irresponsibility.
Similarly, a Government has a responsibility to the
community on censorship, particularly in the protection of the
young. A Government should not be heavy handed or paternalistic.
It should try to reflect the ethical standards and voluntary
restraints of the community. This, we try to do. / 2 
.4 -2
We reject the argument by some Labor members that
all censorship should be removed, except on cinema advertising.
In our view, the Australian people expect us to act on hard-core
pornography and we will continue to do so.
Mr. Whitlam. has stated his views on abortion and his
intentions towards influencing his Party's policy on this matter.
On 24 June 1971 he said: " I believe that if a woman
does not want to bear a child, she should not have to. I believe
in abortion upon request."
Commnenting on the 1971 Federal Conference of the ALP,
the official organ of the Queensland Branch of the ALP, " Trend",
reports in its issue of July 1971: " Gough Whitlan made it quite
clear that he favoured abortion on request, would campaign for it
and support any bill aimed at aclhieving this object."
We reject such an attitude. Clearly this is an issue
at this election because it involves Commonwealth criminal laws
which will be under review in the ni.; w Parliament. What the
Commonwealth does in the A. C. T. could set an Australian standard.
My Government does not intend to alter the existing
abortion laws which provide for therapeutic emergencies but also
protect against the unnecessary destruction of life.
CANBE RRA
26 November 1972 



NO. 107/ 1.972
MESSACF TO PT'IPE r. INISTER--FLECT OF NEW ZEALAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, the 7t. Hon.
William McMahon, C. H., M. P.
The Prime Minister today sent the following message to
the Prime " inister-Elect of Ne-' Zealand, Mr Norman Kirk:-
" Please accept my congratulations and those of my
Government on your victory in yesterday's elections. I wish
you every success.
I am confident that Australia can count upon your help
and co-operation in maintaining and strengthening the intimate
links between our two countries."
CANBERRA, 26 November, 1972
FOR PRESS: 



FOR PRESS: MR. WHITLAM's ECONOMIC FANTASIES
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
r. icMahon, l^. P.
The latest excursion by the Leader of the Labor
Party into economic fantasy and downright inaccuracy illustrate
his complete ignorance of financial principles and facts.
His claim that ne would double national production
in ten years is as ill-considered as his recent declaration
that he would re-value the Australian dollar now, completely
ignoring the damage that would do to our great rural,
manufacturing and mining industries.
It is obvious that Rr. hitlamr. is seeking office by
making promises which he cannot keep, especially against the
background of his Party's declared economic policies and
intentions. The frustrations of being so long in opposition
have led the Labor Party to present irresponsible, grab-all
proposals that would certainly damage the economy beyond
repair. Mr. Whitlam says that a Labor Government would aim
for growth of six to seven percent per year. This is an
astonishingly ambitious target for him, with his policies.
In fact his own election promises would clearly prevent him
achieving his policies. What is worse, they would actually
depress growth. Take their 35 hour week and extended annual leave
proposals. These must reduce output per man that is
productivity, on which growth depends so heavily.
Then there is immigration. In the past this has done
much for national growth. It has enabled employers to find
labour for many development projects and to recruit particular
skills which would otherwise be unavailable. Labor would
reduce immigration and what is more, it would cease Government
recruiting. This vould mean there would be no selection on the
basis of skill. Here again the national economy would suffer.
./ 2 
-2
A growth of six or seven percent has not been
achieved in the past in Australia over more than a very short
period and Mr. Whitlan has not indicated what steps Labor
would take to step up growth other than introduce indicative
planning. But comprehensive indicative planning would require
a significant diversion of manpower from other urgent tasks.
Indicative planning involves target setting and targets which
turn out to be unrealistic -and many must be are worse than
useless. When efforts and resources are devoted to trying to
make thle facts of economic life fit the plans the result is
likely to be reduced rather than enhanced growth.
1M1r. Whitlam falsely says that Australia's growth
rate in the 1960' s was less than 3 percent. The facts are that
Australia's growth rate in the 1960' s was about 5h percent a
year. He also ignored the fact that inflation has eased.
The consumer price index has been rising at 7 percent, but so
far this year it has declined to around 5 percent.
Both these rates of increase in prices are below
what was experienced in the immediate postwar years and
unemployment has been well below the peak of 1961.
Mr. Whitlan also falsely represented the September
quarter figures on growth. Hc said thc: increase was only
.3 percent. While this was the increase estimated in G. N. P.
at constant prices, the figure was sharply affected by a
set-back in the farm sector caused by drought. This is
temporary. The significant figure was that non-farm G. N. P.
at constant prices grew in the September quarter at an annual
rate of 4 percent. It is the Government Partics' objective to obtain
thle maximum growth1* rate our economy can sustain and we have
proved that we can bc successful.
We know our policies and programmes can and will
achieve maximum growth. We also know that Labor could not do
this, on the evidence of Mr. Whitlam's own economic fallibility.
Mr. Whitlam was reported as saying that based on
calculations by the Mielbourne University's Institute of Applied
Economic and Social Research, the growth rate would need to
reach 6 percent to eliminate unemployment next year.
What he has failed to realise is that growth of this
order from now on is, in fact, implicit in the Government's
expectations that G. N. P. at constant prices will increase in
1972/ 73 as a whole by 5 percent. / 3 
-3
But such growth is predicated on the fact that
sound economic policies are followed. If -Mr. Vhitlam's
policies are followed, the very basis of our growth would,
as I have said, be completely destroyed.
The Australian economy is buoyant, unemployment is
at a low level, inflation has eased and the growth rate is
increasing. Personal taxation has been reduced significantly
and the tax scales have been restructured. That is the true
state of affairs today. Hore are the facts in brief.
Inflation The consumer price index hias dropped from an annual
rate of 7 percent to 5 percent.
Employmcnt There were 82,400 persons out of a work force of
million registercd for employment last month. This is
1.46 percent of the work force a figure accepted as close
to full employment and one of the best in t%-hc world. In other
words, around 98.5 percent of the work force is gainfully
employed. Prospects for school-leavers are excellent.
Consumer Demand Retail spending us up 12 percent compared with
8 percent last year.
Building Dwelling approvals are rising very strongly and
seasonally adjusted, are at a record level. The total value
of all building approved in September was the second highnest
figure ever recorded.
Growth A grOw~ th rate of better than 5 percent in real termsnot
3 pcercent as Wgnitlam claims has in fact been achieved
in recent years. We are approaching that level again after the recent
temporary setback to the cconomy.
CANBERRA, 27 November, 1972 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS: PRIME MINISTER CALLS FOR HARD LOOK AT FO3EIGN,
DEFENCE ALTERNATIVES
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William McMahon,
The Prime Minister, Mr NcMahon, said today that of all
the issues facing the Australian people at this election, the
defence and foreign policies of the major Parties were undoubtedly
the most critical.
" The other issues, important as they are, will count for
nothing if we are unable to quarantee our people freedom and
security for the future," he said.
" The one single factor in this election which should concern
the Australian people above all others, is the future security of
our country", Mr 1-cMahon said.
" We must not throw away our safeguards. It would be more
than foolhardy to do so it would be the most dangerous risk that
any political leader ever contemplated," he said.
" Put simply, Labor's policies call for the abandonment of
our military treaties and regional agreements, and the withdrawal
of our troops from South-East Asia to what would be a 7garrison
Australia'". " Labor has also declared that it would scrap the National
Service programme which would cut the effectiveness of our Army by
about half," he said.
" And, furthermore, the anti-Aunerican left wing would see to
it that by imposing unacceptable conditions on the United Stat: s,
they would force them to remove their communications installations
from Australia. " And, aaain, Mr Whitlam has said that he would establish
diplomatic relations immediately with the People's Republic of
China, throwing Taiwan to the wolves, and that he would set up an
Australian Embassy in Peking in the New Year. 
" That is Labor's attitud. but it could never be a
substitute for a foreign policy," e M-x McMahon said.
" The effects of these policies would be felt by our people
for many years to come. You cannot rebuild treaties and
friendships overnight.
" Labor's external policies would be disastrous for Australia
and quite certainly irreversible", Mr Mcmahon said.
" It is important to consider what changes of this character
would do to our standing with our South-East Asian friends and
allies, and the effect that such changes would have on the various
countries in our own region," he said.
" To cut our ties in this region and to jump in hastily,
in sycophantic fashion, to close relations with the People's
Re-nublic Of China, would bring about an equally quick reappraisal
oft us by our Asian neighbours.
" Certainly the stability and cohesion of the region would
be shaken. " If we were to show such scant regard for the security of
our own area, could we expect the United States and Britain and
New Zealand to accept the extra responsibility that was curs and
be prepared to shoulder our burden?" He said.
" of course we could not.
" if we were not prepared to~ play our part, all of our
treaties would go by the board. The big powers would not stay in
the region if we were to pull out, There can be no doubt about
that. " This would leave a powiz r vacuum in our north, and a power
of another kind would flow into that vacuum. The political
leaders of South-East Asia know -that they have said so publicly
and that is what they fear.
" It is for these reasons that I urge the Australian people
to take a long hard look at our foreign policies and those of the
Australian Labor Party," he said.
" Labor's policies are left-wing madness.
" Far from being progressive olicies, they are, a positive
danger to the future safety of our people.
" You cannot defend Australia with policies of isolationism
and pacifism," Mr McMahon said.
" The pro-communist wing of the Labor Party has done its job
well. It has written into Labor's platform a formula that would
make Australia completely powerless and isolated.
" The Australian people must recognise that policies of this
kind can only jeopardise our present nosition and imperil the
security of future generations of Australians", Mir McMahon said.
CANBERRA, 27 November, 1972 



FOR PRESS: ROAD SAFETY
Statement by the Prime i'inister, the Rt Hon.
William M~ cMahon,_ C. H., M. P.
The Commonwealth Government iA determined to save
lives on the Australian roads.
It is not enough to feel sympathy for those involved
in motor accidents. We must work vigorously with the States to
ensure that every possible means of reducing this toll are
fully exploited. Few poople have not been touched in one way or anothor
by a road tragedy. Road accidcnts rank fourth among the major
causes of death in Australia and arc the
major cause of death for young men under
the age of 25 ycars.
The road toll last yoar, when more than 3,500
were killed and more than 90,000 were injured
can only be described as a national tragedy.
In addition to this huma. n suffering, there is
the staggering ccornomic cost to the community
which could be morn than $ 5 million
annually.
In order to find out what morc the Commonwealth could
do, we appointed an expert group to undertake a detailed and
scientific review of the road accident situation in Australia.
We roceived the report of the expert group last month
and I have alrcady announced our decision to accept the group's
major recommendations for action on the part of the Commonwealth.
A high level specialist National Office of Road Safety
will be created within the Department of Shipping and Transport
to co-ordinate and support State and Territory efforts in road
safety. It will become a focal point of national efforts to
promote road safsty. 
2
We also propose to assist the States in removing
danger spots that menace the drivers on our roads. We will
provide immediately $ 5 million a year to the States to double
their present expenditure in this regard and will undertake
with the States a survey of locations with poor accident records
to see what more needs to be done to make our roads safer.
The task of reducing the road toll is not a simple one.
It will not be solved by subjective thinking or strong support
of personal attitudes. It will demand objective analysis of the
problems involved and a high degree of coroperation between the
many authorities concerned. We have shown that we are prepared
to do our part at the national level.
CANBERRA, 27 November 1972
L 



N.
ASTRALI
PRIME MINISTER
1972 FEDERAL ELECTION
RESPECT FOR THE LAW
Television Broadcast by the Prime Minister, the Rt.
Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP.
There is no issue which divides the Liberal and Labor
Parties more than the issue of respect for the law.
Our approach is quite clear. We believe that the laws
of Australia as made by Parliament and upheld by the Courts must
be respected and observed by everone. That is basic to the
survival of our democratic society.
I am sure the overwhelming majority of you support this
view. You know as we know, that to reject the authority of the
law is to advocate force as a substitute for lawful authority.
We will never accept this.
Labor leaders on the other hand hold opposite views. Many
of them, including Mr Whitlam, have encouraged breaches of the law.
In Victoria, they have endorsed a self-confessed law-breaker,
Barrie Johnston, as a candidate for the elections. Mr Whitlam
sought to justify his support of Johnston by claiming that
draft-dodging is not a crime: An amazing proposition for one who
seeks to be Prime Minister.
By holding this view, Mr Whitlam is advocating that every
citizen has a right to put his own value on the law; to obey
those laws which suit him and to disobey those which do not; this
is a condition of anarchy.
The Liberal Party's attitude is clear. We will always
defend the right of lawful protest and dissent. It is an essential
element in the democratic process, and it must never be modified.
But we believe there is only one way to change the law. That is
by the will of '. he majority expressed through Parliament.
Labor leaders are quick to react when violence and lawbreaking
touch them. For years the Liberal Party has warned of the
dangerous influence of communists in certain trade unions. We
have condemned their militant tactics and their abuse of union power.
But the response of the Labor Party has been a conspiracy of silence. / 2 
Labor has accused us of kicking the communist can. It
took a physical assault on the respected union leader, John Ducker,
the President of the New South Wales Branch of the Labor Party,
for Labor leaders to admit that union violence might be a problem.
Yet Mr Whitlam uttered not a word of protest when some
building workers hammered down work done by apprentices at a High
School in his own electorate.
So strong is the power of the left wing militants in the
Labor Party that it can silence the Leader of the Opposition,
even when the rights of his own constituents are abused. What
kind of double standard is this?
There is no double standard in our attitude to these issues.
We believe that the law should apply with equal force to everyone,
unlike certain members of the Labor Party.
We utterly reject the proposition that some people,
particularly union militants, should be placed above the law.
That is a dangerous concept and an incitement to anarchy.
We shall always believe in the right of lawful protest and
dissent. But my Government and my Party say that Parliamentary
authority and respect for the law are the basis of our society.
We stand fast by this concept and believe the great
majority of you stand with us.
27 NOVEMBER, 1972 



PRIME MINISTER
FOR PRESS THE VOTING SYSTEM
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, M. P.
Whitlam has stated that a Labor Government would amend
the electoral laws to abolish preferential voting and to introduce
the first-past-the-post system. He qualifies his statement by
adding that this would not be done until the re-election of his
government after a first term of office:.
The full implications of these announcements should be
understood by every Australian.
Mr. Whitlam is totally incapable of enforcing the
qualification that this radical change would not be introduced in
the first term. He cannot guarantee that he will remain the loader of his
party. His leadership has been seriously challenged in the past.
Given a taste of power, more significant challenges may be anticipated.
Anyhow, Mr. Whitlan is the servant and not the master of
his party's policies. He must obey the directions of the A. L. P.
Federal Conference or risk expulsion. Ho has shown, particularly
in policies on arbitration sanctions, that he is willing to reverse
his policies at the crack of the whip from outside.
If first-past-the-post voting is the policy of the A. L. P.
as now reluctantly revealed by Pkr. Whitlam, there will be inevitable
pressures to introduce it as soon as possible.
First-past-the-post is a bad system.
Its effect in this country would be to destroy the smaller
minority parties and Independent candidates. That is what it is
intended to do. That, in fact, is why it is used in some overseas
countries. The intention of the Labor Party is crystal-clear: Once
having gained power it would remove any possible threats to its
future. This is a real and very serious threat. Labor aims,
therefore, to neutralise and emasculate small parties such as the
Australia Party, the D. O. G. S. and the D. L. P. so as to ensure that
the preferences of any such groups ( or new political groups which
may emerge) can never be turned against it, however extreme or
offensive its policies may be. / 2 
-2
Mr. Whitlam's announcement is -the death sentence for such
groups. It would be the destruction of valuable checks and balances,
the end of minority voices vital to a healthy democracy.
It is a strange irony of fate that those minority parties
whose second preferences have been directed to Labor in the past
are to be rewarded by extinction against the possibility that they
may show some independence of spirit in the future.
Under first-past-the-post, it is readily possible for a
political party polling considerably lewss than one-half the vote
to gain power. And once in power, it would be extremely difficult to
remove. Mr. Whitlam's second aim is -to weaken the rural vote
throughout Australia. He knows that country people by substantial
majority support the Liberal and Country parties. He knows, too,
that three-cornered contests ( where both Liberal and Country Party
candidates are present) tend to be successful against Labor so he
is seeking to make such contests impossible. Under first-past-thepost,
a three-cornered contest would divide the coalition vote and
allow a minority Labor candidate to win.
Once again, the Labor Party is seeking to deny freedom of
choice. It is seeking to destroy the total value of every vote
cast in Australia for small groups or Independents.
The right of such groups to exist and assert their
influence is fundamental to the Australian political scene.
This electoral issue, carefully suppressed by Labor until
now, emerges as a major factor for izvaluation in this campaign.
CANBERRA, 29 November, 1972 



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB
CANBEIRA 29 NOVEMBER 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hhn. William McMahon
M. P.
Mr. President, Members of the National Press Club and Ladies and
Gentlemen of the National Press;
One of the perennial questions in a democracy like ours
is the one about the Press and politics.
Does the Press have the power to radically influence the
political process? Can the Press actually change a Government or alter an
election result? And as a politician, I am isked with some regularity what
a Government ought to do about it.
Well, I'll give you one commitment and one non-election
promise. I am committed to a free Press as an essential element
of a democracy and I would always want to preserve it.
And I make the non-promise. We will not establish a
Ministry for the media.
I noticed that a distinguished British Journalist said the
other day that newspapers who claimed they could win an election were
being fanciful. I'm not sure how closely this translates to the Australian
situation, but I will say this to you:
That all the praise and the blame,
agreements and disagreements,
and conflicts of opinion between politicians
and the Press eventually finish up at one point.
and we will reach that point on Saturday
when all the newspaper readers,
television viewers
and radio listeners
turn themselves into voters and make the final
decision for themselves.
That's the only way to settle the argument.
Ana i think for once we all have to agree that it's the
correct and proper method. / 2 
4 2-
Having said that, I come to my main purpose in accepting
your invitation today
And that is to review this election campaign and the
major issues that are before the Australian people today.
If I could sunarise them briefly in the form of a list
but not necessarily in order of importance, they are
First of all
representative Government.
Gcod Government rests on three basic principles:
It should be truly representative.
There must be respect for the rule of law:
And there must be an independent judiciary to protect
the individual against the State.
As an elected representative, you are there for the
people's purposes Not your own
And you should reflect the ambitions and the vitality
and the feelings of all Australians.
This goes hand in hand with my strong conviction
that no single person or group of people should become dominant
or too powerful in the community.
That is the road to dictatorship.
And here lies the fundamental and primary difference.
We stand fcr truly representative Government.
We are there to reflect the will and the wishes of the
people, and I believe we do.
The evidence of the years against Labor is overwhelming
and irrefutable. Labor Members of Parliament are pledged to obey
the instructions of the party machine.
This has been true for many years. It remains true,
despite Mr. Whitlam's cosmetic efforts.
In fact, it may well be that a Labor Government in the
nineteen-seventies would be more subject to outside non-elected
direction than in the nineteen-forties.
It is certainly true that the influence of the left wing
unions through Mr. Hawke and the A. C. T. U. executive is stronger.
So that remains a primary issue.
The second question is that of irresponsibility and
inflation which has been made an issue by Whitlam's costly and
incredible total of 140 policy promises.
Together with his delv. sions about w. hat can be done with
the growth rate. 
-3
Closely linked with this is the state of the economyaad
the management of the economy.
The latest indicators
Industrial production,
New motor vehicle registrations,
And building approvals,
All confirm the diagnosis of an economy which is bubbling
along and which by this time next year
or possibly a few months earlier
may well be in the condition of boom.
Clearly it is not appropriate in the coming months to
unleash demand in the tremendous and irresponsible manner that
Labor's huge list of promises implies.
Next, there is the very real question
of why the Labor Party wants to run away from the
issues of respect for the law.
And the preservation of accepted social values,
now that the election is so close.
They are. badly divided on this.
And that issue is very closely tied in with Labor's
impotence and silence on industrial relations and the future of
the arbitration system.
There is the question also of the party which puts
itself up as an alternative Government consistently skating away
from and trying to dodge the great issue of the defence and foreign
policies of this nation.
And the issue of centralism versus federalism, which
is an expression of one of the great and overriding philosophical
gulfs between us and the socialists.
As well there is the question of campaign opportunism
again made an issue by Labor's
on-the-run attempts to prOduce last-minute vote-catchers
and plug gaps which it seems oven the 140 election
promises did not cover.
Then there are the other great issues.
Is there to be freedom or onforc--d conformity and
monolithic control of education in Australia?
Is freedom of choice
and the whole private and religious hospital system
to be destroyed in the name of a single, depersonalised and more
expensive health machine? / 4 
04 4
Are our cities to be renewed and our new cities built
according to the rules of the political game or should it be done
by a properly constituted expert body advising both Federal and
State Governments? Those are some of the major issues.
But let me look at them in a little more detail.
The Labor Policy Speech ( and his attempt at economics
at Queanbeyan) showed that Mr. Whitlam had dropped all prctence of
responsibility and moderation in this attempt to buy his way into
office and bluff his way through the questio-n of cost and the
impact on the economy.
We have attempted to make sense
out of this ness of ambiguity and half-baked proposals
in order to get a fair and sensible estimato. of costs
to the taxpayer. As you know, their figure was $ 1,330 million against
$ 375 million for my Government's election proposals.
That is, four times the cost.
A~ s you know, too, Labor's figure covered only a few of
the firm proposals and have not been costed.
We had to leave out many of Labor's deceptive and vague
proposals simply because they-were too sloppy for any disciplined
and proper costing.
In total, they would most certainly run into many
hundreds of millions more.
All this was wrapped up in pious talk about open
Government. M4r. Whitlan might well have started by being open about
the exact nature of his proposals,
their timing,
the specific priorities in implementing his myriad
promises, and, most importantly, how they are to be paid for.
He has been too clever by half in dodging the taxation
question by saying there will be no change in taxation rates.
Every Australian knows that rising incomes and prices
automatically cause a greater and greater burden of actual tax in
dollars. The serious inflationary consequenices of the Labor
programme such as thle 35-hour week and reduction in immigration
would accelerate the speed at which the burden becomes
heavier and heavier, and the tax paid becomes punitive. 
N 5
We have recognised this with two large tax cuts since
the last election Nearly 10 percent in the 1S70-71 Budget
and an average of 10 percent in the Budget three months
ago. Mr. Whitlam hopes that no one will see through his
lawyer's talk about tax rates rather than actual dollars paid in
tax. As a means of financing his white elephants through a
two-way squeeze of inflation-boosted taxation.
This policy is not only dishonest to the taxpayer
and inhuman in its effects
on fixed income earners
and social service beneficiaries
it is also inadequate
to meet the huge costs involved.
Taxation rates themselves would have to go up,
or it would have to be done through new or increased
indirect taxes. Remember, Labor would impose two new taxes immediately.
The Health levy of 1.35% and the Social Services tax
of Or 3.85 cents in every dollar of your earnings.
We have reduced personal income taxation twice, as I
have already mentioned.
As I said at the beginning of this campaign and I repeat
now, Under Labor either taxes will have to be increased,
or many of Labor's promises wo* uld have to be quietly
dropped as forgotten election gimmicks.
: nd Labor talks about trusting the people.
While it deliberately perpetrates this slick and
unworthy deceit. In fact, 1ir. Whitlam doesn't trust his own Shadow
Treasurer who was candid enough to admit
that anyone over the $ 90 to $ 95 a week level would pay
more tax under Labor.
It is typically dishonest of him to try and get around
this by talking about tax rates.
Most people are rightly concerned with just how much is
going to be left in their pockets.
But the misery of
unremitting taxation burdens
chained to unchecked inflation
is only one side of this type of mandrake economics
we hear from the Leader of the Opposition.
You know what I mean. / 6 
-6
Think~ of the growth rate halve it and then-pretend
you can multiplyit-by magic.
The other side of this story is simply the very structure
of Government which the history and geography of this nation has given
us that is the three-tiered Federal system.
The whole thrust of the socialist takeover scheme is the
concentration of all political power here in Canberra
while State and Local Governments are to be strangled
and emasculated. There aro a lot of wolves in sheep's clothing around the
place on this subject.
Not least M4r. Whitlam himself.
But I put it to you that no one who has read the Labor
Platform, the Labor Policy Speech,
or Mr. Whitlam's many constitutional speeches could
have any doubt about his Party's true intention.
To put it in the words of my friend, Bob Askin:
" They want to murder the States"
The policy of the Liberal Party on this issue could not
be more opposed to that of Labor.
We are convinced that power should not be sucked into
the centre but pushed out and down to the grass roots, close to
the problems and close to the people.
his is a world trend, even in Mr. Whitlam's so-called
" comparable countries."
So much for the Policy Speeches.
What have we seen since from our oppocnents?
Incredibly it appears that Mr. Whitlam was not satisfied
with his 140 promises, once he saw our proposals.
Opportunism was piled on top of irresponsibility and we
heard first that Labor would match our plans for $ 330 million for
city transport. Since then, every time he arrives in a capital city he
adds another titbit from a stolen report
and at last count, was well past the $ 700 million mark
in extra transport promises.
On tcp of that, his Deputy suddenly discovered that
Labor might also be able to afford an enlistment bonus for the
army although this appears to be still in the half-baked
promise category. / 7 
-7
Two more bribes from the Labor Party.
After that we have heard virtually nothing from Labor's
sham campaign but a few belated bleats about their half-hearted plans
to quieten down organised Labor rowdies
who have been trying to drown out my own election
meetings around the country.
The truth is that once the Labor Party had trotted out
its T-shirt, TV commercials and its tremendous election bribes,
it ran for cover, leaving it to Mr. Sayers to throw the
mud. With -plenty of financial support, of course.
So what then have we seen in this campaign?
Mr. Whitlam is scared of defence and foreign policy.
He refuses to discuss law and order.
He has been muzzled on industrial relations policy.
He won't talk about immigration.
He wants to wash his hands of moral issues.
So much for trusting the people
So much for leadership.
Let me sp. eak to you now about this question of
leadership. I know many of you are experts in this area
you write about it so much.
So you may want to know how I see it.
As I said at the start, I believe Government should be
truly representative. That is the first of the three ingredients of good
Government. The second is that we should respect the rule of law.
And the third is that we should have an independent
judiciary that can be able to determine disputes between the
individual and the State.
So I believe that a man should have those qualities of
leadership which will make certain he can
sensibly and satisfactorily interpret the will and the
wishes of the people.
He should also be able to makec the machinery of
Government function in such a way that those wishes can be put into
practice. And the people themselves should be kept informed that
he is carrying out their will in the way they wan -t him to do.
He is also the man
who can create the conditions under w~ ich the individual
himself can realise his own ambitions ( providing. they don't interfere
with the rights of others), / 8 
8
can satisfy his needs and his wants, can help his
neighbours, and can help to develop the better society we all want.
It is also a fundamental task of leadership for the
Government. to interpret the changes occurring in society as life
becomes more complex
to be able to adjust
the Parliament
and the law
in order to mesh with the changing environment and
changing values. Now, I'd like to relate these thoughts to my own
party to show how in a practical way we have been able to
put these principles into practice.
I faced a difficult task when I took office twenty
months ago, as most of you have recognised
with no small emphasis in your reporting.
First of all, I had to make sure
that the State Premiers were treated as men
with their own serious responsibilities of Government in their
own areas. The results have been worthwhile.
The relations between the Commonwealth and the States
are much better and they have been able to play a much more
effective part in getting this good society that we all seek
to achieve. Then we had the problem
of unemployment getting too high
and demand for goods and services falling.
We had the problems of falling prices for rural
commodities and the exchange rate
and the alarming rise in wages and average earnings
and industrial lawlessness.
So we deliberately set cut to boost demand
to get production and employment rising
and to improve the climate of expectations
so that economic conditions would be improved.
Part of this was to ensure that people would have
the opportunity to earn more money
and keep a greater amount of it in their own pockets.
After all, this is the incentive to do better
remembering always that there are national and
social nieds which the Government must take into account
at the same time as it looks at the tax burden on
the individual. / 9 
9-
So as I have said, we twice reduced taxation
substantially to meet this objective.
Looking at this problem in the much wider national
sense You will remember that we acted with a series of
measures The Premiers' Conferences
with the mini-Budget
the Budget
and then on to our Policy Speech
In all of these, you will see that our objective
has been to represent the individual men and women in our
society. And we wanted to give priority to those in the
greatest need. I believe any honest witness will agree that we have
achieved our purpose.
But once having satisfied those basic or conventional
needs we believe there's much more the Government should,
and must That is, to promote the arts
to Provide opportunities for recreation
opportunities for travel
opportunities to ensure that if man is the paramount
objective of social life,
that he is able to realise inherite* d1 qualities
to burgeon and to grow
and to ensure that as he burgeons and grows
he will be able to help his own family
his neighbours
and to more helpfully participate in the social
life of the community.
In my view, this is the true objective of Government
I don't believe in dictatorship.
I do believe in leadership.
I hope that I have made some contribution to
achieving the true liberal ideal
of ensuring that the person himself
the individual man, woman or child
can have a much better life, a much happier one,
and that his prospects for the future in the wider sense can be
fully realised. We have come a long way along this road in twenty
months. Notwithstanding both the economic and political
conditions which were very much le: os than ideal.
The economy is now in good shape and obviously
getting better. The quality of social ju., tice has been greatly
improved. And I have a young, ablB and dedic-ated team of
Ministers with me. 
I think Australians recognise that what we have
done has been sound and practical and progressive as well.
I think they recognise
that we are moving into better times
and a greater future
a future in which good Government
means that it is the Government's job to do its
best to meet the will and wishes of the people as individuals.
I am therefore convinced that when it comes to the
decision on Saturday
they will accept us
and reject the alternative of a Goverrnment which
wants to impose its will and its machinery and its theories
on the people themselves.
Thank you. 


