
AUSTRAIJAN TRAkNSPORTATION CONFERENCE
CANBERRA, ACT
S1p etceh rim MiistrMr William McMahon
.24 MARCH_ 1971
M r Chairman, my Ministerial Colleague, Gentlemen:
This is a unique Conference. It is unique in the sense
that it seeks to identify the problems associated with Australia's
surface transport and to attempt to find solutions.
According to the information conveyed to me by one of
Australia's greatest industrialists and captains of transport, there are
thte reasons for this uniqueness.
First, it is difficult to think of any other occasion when
so many leaders of industry and representatives of transport operators
and users have got together to discuss the critical issues involved in
the transportation of goods.
Second the aims and objectives of the Conference are of
fundamental importance. Taking the two reasons together, it is
probable that many ideas will emerge having a direct bearing on the
future of transport development.
And third, you can be as frank as you like and you can
put forward as many suggestions and ideas as you like. They won't be
pigeon-holed. You have my colleague, Mr Nixon's assuranice on that.
The Government will consider the suggestions you have
to make. It is important for y7oiTo be critical and to be constructive.
Now, as to your objective that is of identifying what
are the surface transport problems in Australia today this is an
extremely complicated problem.
You have the task of finding out how goods can be moved
across the length and breadth of tlis vast continent quickly,
efficiently and economically. Everyone in Government and in industry
wants an answer to this problem.
Daily and with growing intensity, the technologist is giving
us new tools to use. The innovators and applied scientists are showing
us how they can be used. Not to be outdone by changes in the vocabulary,
there is a new language too roll-on-roll-off ships, container
transport and flexi-vans. 
1
I 
2-
Some sectibns of. the Australian transport sytem have made
marked progress; in others there is a tremendous amount to be done.
We hope this Conference will generate ideas about what can be done anid
how we can go about doing it.
You are look ' ing for all the answers t the problems visible
and hidden. We want you to find the answers for as many as practicable.
To crystallise the Government's thinking, we want a
transport system which will serve a nation as it should be served, so
that we can beat the barriers of distance, of mountain and of plain....
and can do so cheaply and efficiently.
I have spoken of technical progress. Much of this has been
the result of a res pcnse by private enterprise the basic system of our
way of life. But the Government is directly involved, too, perhaps more
than many of you realise.
If I may, Sir Ian, I would like to mention briefly one or two
things the Government has done and is doing because I think it is an
example of co-operation between industry and Government; between the
private and public sectors. And this co-operation, in a free enterprise
society, means two things growth and progress.
As to our own part, you know the Government's direct
involvement in sea transport took on a new dimension recently with the
entry of our own line into overseas shipping. This was a return to a
system pioneered and abandoned about half a century ago.
Coinciding with this involvement we are building our own
ships for a variety of purposes and are developing the skills that are
transforming Australia into an increasingly self-reliant country.
In ten years to June, 1970, the Commonwealth has provided
$ 84 million by way of subsidy for Australian shipbuilding. This, I know,
is a good investment and a wise and effective contribution of public funds.
Our other direct involvement in surface transport is through
the Commonwealth Railways which complement the State railway systems
and link East and West.
The Government has contributed significantly to rail
standardisation projects in the States because we recognise that a standard
system is both economical and a unifying force.
In the past ten years the Commonwealth has given $ 99 million
in grants and $ 76 million loans to the' States for this p urpose. /* 3 
-3
But the heaviest spending is on roads. This is where the need
is greatest. It was one of my great pleasures as the then Treasurer to
introduce the Commonwealth Aid Roads Bill. Under the Act, the
Government commits funds on a five-year basis for roads and for the
period 1969 to 1974, we are aporopriating 252 million, an increase of
67 per cent on the amount provided in the preceding five years.
This year, taking roads, railways, shipbuilding, navigation
aids and other transport programmes together as a transport
commitment, the Commonwealth will be spending about $ 31A million.
Mr Chairman, spending of this order is part of a long-term
programme. There is so much to be done and the demand continues to
grow insatiably and intensely. Close co-operation between the
Commonwealth and the States is fundamental to success.
Australia is now spanned by a standard gauge railway between
Sydney and Perth. Many improvements are still needed on the railway
networks. Our beef roads are opening up new pastoral lands. Here, too,
the job is unfinished.
The changes in ship design and in cargo handling have led to
modernisation of our ports. Here, too, there is still work to be done.
We live in an environment of large bulk carriers and specialised
general cargo ships. If we are to be successful this demands management
practices and technical excellence of the highest order. I am sure yc'lx
have the qualifications. Now Sir, may I speak about transport costs the critical
factor for everyone Inflation feeds on rising costs. Freight rates are
a significant factor in costs. You know the problem just as well as I
do. May I turn to one aspect of it.
The problem of the man on the land, who cannot pass on
increases in freights, is well known to us all. Today the farmer is badly
hit by rising freights. So too are others. In this sense it is a national
problem. If we contain rises in freights and better still reduce them
then the burden of rising costs would be lighter. Whilst the problem
is one of immense complexity, we know of your capacity and are looking
to you to find out the ways and means of finding a solution. / 4 
Not so long ago, in order to honour an election promise, the
Govermnent took the first steps to establish a Bureau of Transport
Economics. A Director has been appointed and for the time being,
in a restrained way, staff is being recruited.
The Bureau's main function will be to study and report on the
costs ) f transport operations in Australia and to suggest what can be
done to help reduce costs.
Gentlemen, for the next two days you will be putting under the
microscope the transportation philosophies and policies of both the private
sector and government.
I conclude in this vein we do want your help. In saying that,
I am not passing the problem from Government to you.
We will continue to do all we can through the Budget, through
the Department of Shipping and Transport through the new Bureau and
in co-operation with the States at all levels.
We will co-operate with industry wherever we can, according
to our powers and responsibilities.
Gentlemen, I do wish you success with your Conference... and
I now declare it open.
NEW 



PARLIAMENTARY LUNCHEON IN HONOUR CF
1H ISRO6YAL H IGHNES57 DD~ ff ED INBURGH
CANBERRA, ACT
SecbyL the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon 31 M\ arch 1971
Your Royal Highness, Your Excellencies, Parliamentary Colleagues, Chiefs
of Staff and Gentlemen,
Prince Philip is very well-known to us and we are delighted he has come
back again as our guest to share with us the fiftieth anniversary of the Royal Australian
Air Force. Your personal standard, Sir, is now flying in Canberra. Its four quarters
are a record of the events which brought you to your high and responsible place
alongside the Throne.
The lions and the cross in the first and second quarters remind us of
your ancestors from Denmark and Greece. The fourth quarter contains the arms
of the city of Edinburgh.
But, Sir, it is the third quarter of the standard, with its black and white
stripes, that has an added interest for many Australians. Many of the locals will
claim you as a supporter of the Yass rugby team. Black and white are its colours.
If you went to Collingwood, in Victoria, you would get a riotous welcome. Their
colours, too, are black and white.
But Sir, I'm sure you'd get the best welcome of all if you went to the
Western Suburbs in my own electorate near Sydney. They too play rugby in black
and white. I've heard that Newcastle United in Britain claims your support and that,
in fact, you call your personal standard " Newcastle United". Our teams in black
and white are called " the magpies" and I'll stretch the story a bit further, Sir,
to recall that your f irst command was a naval frigate, H. M. S. Magpie.
But names apart, Sir, my advisers tell me that the black and white stripes
in your standard are the mark of the Mountbattens your family name and one of
great distinction in the British story.
I hope your standard will fly in this country many times and will always
bring with it the same enjoyment as it does today.
Your own family links with the Throne are deep-rooted in history and you
have given matchless support to Her Majesty The Queen. Together you have given a
new purpose and an involvement to the Crown and the people in this neo-Elizabethan
age. / 2 
1 2.
The Crown's adaptability to contemporary life is evident to all of us. It
is based, I believe, simply on a compatability with the world of today and an
understanding of the human values and the qualities that make our society what it
is. You are known Sir, not only as a sailor, airman and sportsman, but as a
man with a social conscience and a deep and understanding sense of community interest.
You have been a spokesman for most good causes and a number of neglected ones.
You have never been to use your own words " a sitting tenant in any
job". Not once or twice, but every time you have been with us, you have had
something inspiring to say.
Your speeches have purpose and point and are candid. They spark off
ideas and promote debate with a cutting edge finely honed for each particular subject.
Your appeals for a public conscience on the protection of our wild life
and the conservation of our environment have done much to win support for what we
want to achieve. It is part of history, Sir, that you managed to have the site of a
housing estate in Western Australia changed so that a " noisy scrub bird" to give it
its full name should not be disturbed, because the species was nearly extinct in
Australia. I am sure you know, Sir, that we have developed plans for a National
Advisory~ ouncil onConservation and also have decided to establish a Commonwealth
Office of the Environment.
You are an eloquent advocate of conservation and this helps to generate
a public awareness of the problem which is one, not for governments alone, but for
everyone. I think, too, Sir, your special interest in young people matches the mood
of the times. We want to expand their horizons and their freedoms. By that I mean
the freedoms that go with health and physical fitness education and opportunity.
These new frontiers must be explored and fertilised if our young people are to live
happy and rewarding lives.
The interest of Australian youth in the Duke of Edinburgh Awards Scheme
shows they will readily respond to new outlets for their enthusiasms, talents and
energies. We value the Scheme as we value the Commonwealth Study Conference
because it is one of those social movements of the fast-moving seventies that you
have sponsored with drive, imagination and more than a bit of blunt speaking.
We don't want Australia to stand still, and, I am sure Sir, neither do you.
You have warned that the propaganda of the " stop-everything brigade" is continuous
and in the long-run fatal. You have done what you can to make the " start something
society" remain active and dedicated. With these goals we all agree. oo. / 3 
3.
And you, Sir, are a family man. Those who have seen you with your
family as so many of us did last year will know how enjoyable and exciting it can
be. It is a reminder that the family remains the foundation of the good society.
When you spoke on television last Sunday you said of the Royal Family
" We have to live as people and we have to have a home".
I agree completely. There is no other foundation on which we can
build if we want to sustain a free and tolerant society.
Sir, it is refreshing to have you with us for all these reasons and to do
honour to the Royal Australian Air Force on its fiftieth birthday. Ilam specially glad
to be associated as Prime Minister with this anniversary, becadse in 1952 1 had the
honour to present, on behalf of Her Majesty, The Queen's colours to the R. F.
at Laverton. Ladies and Gentlemen, this is a special day for the R. A. A. F. The
R. A. A. F. has fought with heroism d. nd distinfction over Europe and Africa, across
the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and ih the war theatres of Asia.
This fighting Service is vital to our security because I believe air power
to be one of the keys both to survival and to peace.
We are proud that you are here as a Marshal of the R. A. A. F. and
as a rmmber of the Royal F amily.
And that you honour this fighting Service by your presence, as we, in this
Parliament, honour it, too.
We thank you, Sir, for being with us at this time. 



NATIONAL PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON
Hotel Canberra-Rex, Canberra APRIL 1971
~ peeh~ yhe PimeMinister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. Chairman, Thank you and all members of the Press Club for inviting me here today.
I hope I come back on many, many occasions, not as a vision or a memory, not
as a former, but I hope in the way I have come today, in the capacity to enjoy mlyself
as I am in your immediate company.
And may I too refer to a bit of history because this will be the last occasion
we will see Tony Eggleton here for some time. When I first became the Foreign
M41inister then the External Minister for reasons that I will never really understand.'
( Laughter) But I did suggest to the then Permanent Head perhaps the area where we
were suffering most was in public relations, and I thought it mould be wise if I could
get a sufficiently high enough grading for a good public relations officer, the bloke
I would choose would be Tony Eggleton. We then decided well, perhaps, we couldn't
get him quite enough for that, so the best thing we could do was to induce him to come
in as a PR officer and later on we would be able to put him into the diplomatic service
proper. Tony, I can assure you it was a tremendous personal loss to me when I was
advised that it would be highly unlikely that you would come not because you would
take to heart the salary, but because you had other commitments and you were a bloke
who lived up to your commitments first and foremost. So we will miss you, and we
do hope, Tony in the days to come you will remember that if I am around the scene,
anyhow, I will be one of the first to welcome you back and I will still be thinking of
you for some position in the Commonwealth Civil Service diplomatic or otherwise.
Well ladies and gentlemen, today I would like to speak to you about three
different subjects. The first one I want to speak to you about is the state of our
economy, then something about the People's Republic of China I will call it from now
on Coptinental China and then to refer to this problem we have about the so-called
political problems associated with the sale of wheat.
Well, now first of all about the state of the economy itself. No-one can
deny that we are growing at a very satisfactory rate. Our rate of development is good,
and before I get on, therefore, to what are our real problems, I would like, if I could,
to dis ' miss certain other elements of the economy that are not causing great concern
but perhaps are ones that we can regard as very satisfactory too.
Now the first one happens to be our balance of payments, and within our
London balances. And I want you to remember these figures in the context of what
I want to say to you later on about wheat, because we haven't got a crisis in our trade
relationships, and we haven't got a crisis in our balance of payments or in our
international balances either. In fact, up to the present in this year, we will have a
surplus in our balances of something like $ 188 million, and our international balances
are running well over 700 million. For a country like us even though we are a
big trader, these are satisfactory figures. 
Secondly, insofar as the money supply is concerned, as I mentioned in a
speech in the House not so very long ago, we thought that round about the beginning
of tbe. June quarter we would have to liberalise the money supply, and the Reserve
Bank did that yesterday, and made a statement about it yes terday. It wasn't as much
as perhaps we might have expected it to be some two months ago, but it was in fact
reduced probably or mainly because of the fact that we had reduced the deficit of the
States when we gave them $ 43-$ 48 million at the beginning of last week.
And the other point that I want to mention to you is that consumption and
retail sales, or consumption expenditure and retail sale3 are running at a normal
level and are not therefore a contributory factor to our current economic difficulties.
Now, having said that may I then turn round and analyse what are the
difficulties and the specific kind of remedies that we are making in order to meet them.
Well first and foremost then, may I look at the private sector I want to
divide this up into three sectors if I can private, public and then average incomes
or average wages and earnings, and then to deal with the remedies themselves.
But first of 41l, if I can look at the private sector, we had two areas where
the demand -was too great and where the demand on resources was exceeding the
actual supply, where the main area was in investment in plant and equipment and
we immediately took action to take away the investment allowance. The second area
was in commercial building and construction, and here the rate of commencements
was exceedingly high and couldn't have continued unless we had a price increase of
something of the order of 12-L to 15 per cent per annum, judged upon Commonwealth
public works expenditure figures.
We got the various elements of the industry together and they assured us
that they knew that they were over-building and that there would be a very substantial
drop in approvals and in commencements and I believe that process is continuing.
Now, therefore, in the private sector we do look as though we can get
control of the demand factor.
I now turn, therefore, to the public sector, and here, of course, we do
have one of the two major problems besetting this country. In terms of our public
expenditure, there will be an increase in the State sector this year of something like
16 per cent and they have particularly big difficulties because they are labourintensive
in their employment figures and with wages in the education and in police
and in other civil service sectors, they have of course have got a boost in costs that
couldn't have been forecast at the time when their Budgets were being prepared.
And, secondly, we have one other very big problem there that I believe
that it is in terms of expenditure on goods and services outside wages that the amount
or the increase that is taking place is great and consequently we had in co-operation
with the States to reduce ours and they had to reduce theirs. They reduced their
expenditures by something of the order of $ 60 million in this current year. We
attempted a goal of about $ 75 million and I believe that to be a reasonable and a
satisfactory figure for the moment. / 3 
So in the public sector we therefore took action.
Coming to the third element, and that is average earnings, these of course
were the besetting evil that we had to face because I am confident in this view that
had it not been for the 6 per cent increase in the national wage case, driven forward
by the impact of a 40 per cent wage drift that is the. amounts that were paid in
average earnings over and above Arbitration awards I am absolutely certain that
we would have been able to keep the economy under fairly tight control and we wouldn't
have the inflationary problem that now threatens us today.
But when the national wage increase of 6 per cent, adding $ 900 million
to the pay cheque the take-~ home pay cheque occurred, then of course a totally
different element has to be introduced. And there was really nothing that we could
do about this because once your increasein wages runs ahead of your increase in
productivity, you get an inbuilt infdlationary pressure and there is very little or
nothing that any Government can do about this particular element.
So this does introduce an element of inflation that will, I believe..., an
underlying element of inflation that in terms of discounted gross national production
will, I think, be certainly higher than 5 per cent and is the real difficulty that the
Government has to face now and in the days to come.
Now the effect of this increase in average incomes and wages might not
occur immediately because savings can to some extent reduce the impact and, of
course, it can occur over a period of time and not be concentrated in any one
particular Budget year. So what then are we doing?
We have of course announced the various measures that I have spoken
of a few moments ago, but we are also looking at a wide range of measures so that
we don't have to press down too heavily in any one sector. Within the course of the
next few weeks we will be introducing a special Bill on resale price maintenance,
outlawing it, but having certain conditions under which an application can. be made to
the tribunal. We are looking in detail at the problem of restrictive practices again
to see if there can be a tightening-up in the procedures and in the kind of activity
that we might regard as contrary to the national interest or contrary to the competitive
interests within the Australian economy.
We will also be looking at the same time to see if we can strengthen the
Arbitration Commission and in these and in other ways we hope that we will be able
to get an internally consistent and a general programme that will, subject to what
I have said about the national wage case and average earnings, will, I think, put
us in a favourable position so that when the next Budget comes along we will be
able to reduce the rate of government expendi ture both in the States and in the
Commonwealth and thus give one other dampener to demand.
Now what I want to point out to you is this. That the problems are there
and in particular I have to emphasise, as other people have emphasised, too, the
real problem today is one of inflation and we must look at every avenue of expenditure
to ensure not only of expenditure but particularly in the area of arbitration awards / 4 
and over-award payments made by industry, to ensure that to the maximum of our
extent we can reduce the inflationary impact. So that then is the first statement I
want pd to make to you.
And the second one relates to our relationships with Continental China
Peking China. And here I believe there has been a great deal of misunderstanding.. This
problem itself must be looked at in two separate components. And I believe that when
I have listened to what has been said by the Opposition and particularly by people Who
have recently been talking too freely and in an ill-informed way down in Adelaide,. I
have been surprised at the lack of understanding of what is actually -happening.
Well, now let me look at the two components associated with China that is
Continental China and associated with it the problem of a Taiwan China the Republic
of China itself. First, as I said, we have the probilem of admission to the United Nations.
Now Taiwan China is in fact a member of the United Nations. It is a fact of life, and the
government there has de facto control and constitutional control over 14-1 million people.
It has lived up to all its international obligations, and lived up to its obligations under
the United Nations Charter.
On the contrary, Continental China Peking China is not a member of the
United Nations. It is not recognised by us. And while there are many who feel they vould
like it to be a responsible member of the United Nations and of the international
community, they do so and we do so on these grounds: that if they are to become a
member of the United Nations and to be recognised, then there must be some kind of
assurances that they will live up to their international obligations, particularly those
to the United Nations. In other words that they won't try and achieve their political
objectives by force of arms. Two, that they won't be guilty of insurgency or guerrilla
operations in neighbouring countries. And thirdly, that we hope they will leave their
neighbours in peace. Or to put it a little more eloquently they will let the people of
the countries concerned determine their own futures.
Now these are the goals that we have had in our international life, and
they are the goals that we want to sustain in the future. Now what then is the present
and the immediate problem that we have to fact?
At the last year at the United Nati. where I had the pleasure to be present,
I did come to the conclusion that of the two resjlutions that were before the United,
Nations one relating to what is called the Important Question and that means that a
particular question can be determined important and once it becomes important
it requires a two-thirds majority to permit the subsequent resolution itself to be
put into effect I wondered to myself whether it would be possible to sustain the Important
Question for very many more years, and then when it canrto the substantive question
of what is called The Albanian Resolution, then I was fairly certain that that resolution
would be carried and the effect of that would be that Continental China would become a
member of the United Nations and a permanent memiber of the Security Council. But
what you people and all Australians have to remember is that it would have automatically
led to the expulsion of Taiwan. 
Taiwan has been-a odinmerber,-and has lived up to its international
obligations and is responsible ior the welfare of 14! L million people. Now her
attitude has therefore been clear as a Government.
-Let us look, first of all, at what is the immediate and pressing
problem that is of admission. And consequently, as a government, we came to
the conclusion that our attitude would be of doing all in our power to sustain the
position of Taiwan as a member of the United Nations. We have had discussions
with many of our great friends. VWe have had them visit us and talk to us. We have
talked to them. We have let them know our thinking and I believe that the contribution
made and the papers prepared by our own Department of Foreign Affairs are at
least the equal of anything that I have seen or anything that I have heard. And while
I am not now the Minister, I pay enormously high tribute to the quality of the work
that has been done by the civil servants in that Department.
We will do all we can to sustain the positi on providing the R. 0. C. wiant
their position to be sustained in the United Nations itself.
Well now, then, let me come to the question of recognition, and here
I believe we run up against an extremely difficult problem because recognition
is now gaining some force. But what has happened, and I can illustrate this to you
by reference to the position of Canada.
In the case of Canada it recognised, but it recognised on the basis that
it noted the claim of Continental China, that it had an inalienable right to the whole
of China including Taiwan, and it was made clear by the Canadian Government that
recognition in this way meant that there should be withdrawal of recognition by
Canada of the representation of the Taiwan Government. In other words, recognition
of one meant withdrawal of recognition of the other, and this is the constitutional
and legal position as presented to me.
Now, wouldn't it be a strange thing for us if we put the cart before the
horse and we went straight ahead with recognition and said, " Well, it will mean
that we have to withdraw recognition from you", or what would happen is that if
we recognised Continental China, it would mean that Taiwan China itself would say,
" Look if you are going to do that, let us get in first and we will be first in the queue
because we don't want you to take the initial action".
Now I believe. the proper and the responsible course there, the only wise
course that you can take and this does require a great degree of subtlety, a great
degree of subtlety of handling and a knowledge of what most other countries in the
United Nations and in other parts of the world are thinking. But I believe that the
first step and the immediate step must be to try and ensure that by September of
this year we and our friends have mobilised sufficient strength to be able to keep
the Taiwan Government in the United Nations and to be able to ensure that it plays
its proper part in international affairs.
Now as to the facts themselves, I am fairly certain tha t if you were to
be able to get a Gallup Poll of all the members of the United Nations, what it would
mean would be this : That on admission, there would be a majority who favour the
admission of Communist China Continental China to the United Nations, and 
I think it would be by a bigger majority than the. Albanian majority was carried last
year. Equally, too, am I certain of this that a very big majority of the members of the
United Nations would like to find some means by which Taiwan China the Republic
of China could also retain its membership. That is our paramount goal and it is
the one that we will adhere to, and it is the policy we will be pursuing between now and
the next meeting of the United Nations in September of this year.
And now may I come to the other subject that I want to speak to you about
and that is the one relating to wheat. I wonder if there could be more misunderstanding
of the single problem of wheat than there has been at the Conference of the ALP in
Adelaide. Let me first of all try and persuade you on the facts and on the logic of
the situation alone. And the facts are these, and they are very easyto understand.
First of all this year in the first four months of this year we have sold
over three million tons of wheat in the international markets. That is 1. 1 million or
per cent more or whatever it ha-ppens to be in percentage terms more than we
sold last year. The biggest saiea v's-eavee ver had up until this year in the
corresponding four months have been 2. 6 million tons. So we are selling, and we are
selling better than ever before. But we haven't got to worry too much about the
Chinese market, at least in this crop year.
Secondly, in international trade, the quantities in international trade have
increased from 54 to 57 million tons and we are participating in that growth.
Thirdly, and this was pointed out by the Chairman of the Wheat Board
yesterday or last night and p'biish-, l t. day that China itself has had nine successive
good crop years and has now s'. iCient wh.-t to meet its immediate requirements and has
sufficient wheat also to build up quite substantial stocks.
Now there are two other facts of life that you should know. Normally
China imports wheat because it has a curpi-us of high quality rice that it can export
at a premium to other countries. Bec-: Iase there is a surplus of premium rice
throughout the world today and is litk" y . row, China therefore is in a position
where she has got a surplus of rice and w-:' re she doesn't need to depend so heavily upon
the importation of wheat even c:' r is the kind that she wants most, and in
terms of quality and price it is prU-b'bJLy their terms the best kind of wheat they
can get, subject to getting a reasonable quantity of high protein Canadian wheat.
Now those are the facts of life as they exist today and the other fact that I
should mention is that within the cocur.! s of the last few days the Australian Wheat
Board has returned from negotiating with Nung Fung Hong Corporation, cn behalf of
the Chinese Government in order to find out what the true position with regard to
Chinese Continental Chinese demand for wheat should be. They had established
and are continuing to establish the most clo se and friendly commercial relationships
with them, and the Corporation itself has s3id to them, " We want you to keep in
closest contact with us. We want the goodwill that exists between us to keep on because / 7 
4 4 7.
conditions may change."
And with the changing conditions, well, your guess is just as good as
mine -as to what could happen.
Now, I admit quite freely here that of course the Continental Chinese
would be making as much political mileage out of this as they could, but equally
certain am I of this particular fact that when they want wheat, and they want it
in quantities, they are hard traders and they will buy where they can get the best
commercial advantage. Some politics yes, but not a great deal. But I am sure
of this, that it is the hard facts of commercial life that will determine what their
actions will be. Put that in context against the fact that we are doL.-g pretty well
in the international wheat trade, the price is good, particularly good, and the
Wheat Board itself certainly cannot, if you read its statement of last night, be
regarded as coming back with any feeling that there is a crisis or that we face
real problems. Now as to the suggestion that there should be a political group, promoted
by people like Mr. Hawke and the Secretary of the Labour Party not the Parliamentary
representatives and this is something of tremendous significance to us that a
delegation should be going to China, to Peking China, to be able to put the political
position to them not as the representatives of the Australian wheatgrowers, not as
the constitutionally-established or legally-established Wheat Board that has the
responsibility for selling our wheat. If the delegation goes, I venture to suggest that
they can do both political harm and they can do harm to the interests of every single
grower throughout the Australian community. But they would do that only in
circumstances when China has a shortage of wheat through either bad crop years
or for other reasons. What I want to emphasise is that this is n political gesture
and I have never known political gestures to be successful in commercial life of this
kind. On the contrary, if you are playing politics for the shabbiest of motives, the
probability is that you will do harm and I believe this can do, as I repeat it again
this can do damage to the wheat interests of this country.
So there were the various matters that I vmanted to speak to you about today.
I want you to understand, too, and particularly those who are members of the Press
Gallery and of the National Press Club that my door has in the past been always open
to you. I believe as a practising politician that it is our responsibility as Members
of Parliament and as Members of a Cabinet and of a Government to be able to provide
you, unless there are security reasons to the contrary and that applies particularly
to Foreign Affairs that we should give you access to the maximum of information.
I want you to understand, too, that whenever you are givei, information that you feel
ought to be checked that either my door or the door of my Press Office will be open.
Consequently we will do our best to see that this communications gap is narrowed.
Thank you Mr. Chairman for giving me the chance of coming here and
speaking to you today. I ask you to put any question you want to me, and if it is in
my capacity, I give you my assurance I will do my best to answer it.
* This paragraph has been adjusted in line with the amendment made by the Prime
Minister in the subsequent question time. 



ASSOCIATED CHAMIBERS OF MANUFACTURES OF AUSTRALIA
PRESIDENTS' LUNCHEON
PARKROYAL MOTOR INN, CANBERRA 21 APRIL 1971
õ pieech by the-Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen
Now, I am not one of those who believe that we should take too unhappy a
view of our future. But I do want to emphasise, and I keep on emphasising it as
often as I can, that the major difficulty that we face today is inflation, and that we
have to keep the forces of inflation whether they are the cost-push type
or demand type we must keep both of them, not only under constant review, but
I think we also have to keep them under constant control.
Well, what then about the economy?
As I see it, we have some difficult areas. It is not the consumption area, it
is not our balance of payments. It isn't in terms of liquidity because in the last few
days, as we forecast in a recent " No Confidence" motion we forecast then that we
would Improve the liquidity position of the banks, not so that they could expand
activities but so that the activities of industry would not be reduced.
In other words, we have a feeling that while we have inflation, we don't want
to strangle the economy in the process of trying to find a cure, but we want to
gradually try and bring inflation under control. While at the same time to permit
expansion of the kind that we want round about 5-1% per annum to keep on going
and to permit us the increased production out of which better standards of living
can be sustained. So we are not worried about every section of the economy. We can identify
three or four problems. The first one is, of course, in capital investment in plant
and equipment and we have taken what we regard, at least for the time being,:. the
necessary precautions here.
The second one and it doesn't really affect you people to a great ext ent
is in commercial and industrial buildings. And here even in the last few days, I have
been advised by the constructing people that they will be able to come to grips with
their own problem because they are probabl,. over-built, particularly in office
capacity which is now too great the rents are falling and there is an automatic
reaction and consequently Government Intervention isn't justified. / 2 
But the real problems that we face, and these are two that I want to emphasise
to you are Government expenditure Commonwealth and States. What we are doing
is preparing the way now for the next Budget, and second what we have to look at' is
the wage increase or the increases in average incomes or average earnings. Because
we believe, and I am sure that this is true, that if it had not been for the 6 per. cent
increase in the national wage case, we wouldn't have had any serious problems to
face at all. In otherwords, we could have looked somewhat benignly at the
development of the economy and we wouldn't have been looking to the next Budget to
ask ourselves the question " How do we keep back demand inflation and how do we
ensure, not only in terms of our international trade in commodities and in processed
materials, but also so far as our primary industries, how do we stop them getting
involved any more heavily in the cost and price squeeze?"
So these are the real difficulties. I want to emphasise to you that we must,
and you must, keep inflationary pressures under control. And I hope that you don't
think that because of some chaniges that we have made in the last few weeks there
can be any lessening of the activities of the businessman to see that his costs keep
within acceptable limits and that where you have the capacity and I know that in
all cases you haven't got the capacity but where you have the capacity, you do keep
your costs from rising.
Wages, particularly arbitration and over-award wages, are, I believe somethings
that are extremely difficult to handle, and we and you must be active before
the Arbitration Commission and in other sources to see that wages are kept within
reasonable limits.
Now, I suppose it can be argued that because there was a fall in the consumer
index from 1. 9 per cent in the last quarter, the quarter before last, of 1. 1 per cent,
there might be some easing. And you could be fortified in this opinion, too, if
you felt that there was some almost imperceptible easing in the labour situation in
the past few months. But I want to assure you that whilst there was this almost
imperceptible change, it is so small, and against the context of very heavy pressures,
that we don't think we can ease up in our control of inflationary forces at all.
I think some people might perhaps say, " Well you eased up. You gave the
pensioners, in the case of the married couple a $ 1 increase; in the case of the
single person, 50 cents.
I have to answer that by saying I could never see for one moment that the
pensioner, the people on the maximum rate pension, ought to pay the penalty because
wages are rising somewhere else. Consequently, I would have regarded as the
strongest of strong moral obligations that these people should receive help.
Equally, too, with the States, I am a little baffled by the opinion that is being
expressed that it could be inflationary. We don't think it can be and the highest
technical authorities that advise me don't think it has got any substantial influence
at all, because what we have done is to reduce our surplus in our internal accounts
and to reduce the deficit that exists due to the funding operations of the States in
their accounts. 
And if it might be that the banks do-get an increase in liquidity, we offset
that because as I said a few moments ago, when we were discussing the " No
Confidence" motion on the Budget, we anticipated that there would be an increase
in liquidity in the June quarter and we have only increased the liquidity by half the
amount we intended prior to the time when we gave the States the extra $ 48 million,
$ 43 of which was to reduce their own funded deficits.
So similarly you find that the technical experts who are advising me are
giving me the kind of advice that I believe is not only in one. case morally right;
in the other I believe creates a position so tha' the States themselves will be able
to face their 71/ 72 Budget on a much more sensible basis than before.
What we are doing is to help those that need help not to slow down the economy
because economic growth is of critical importance to us and then to see that
whatever remedial measures that we take outside the wages system are spread over
as wide an area as is possible.
I know that I have given you this information and I have done so very very
quickly, but in a speech like this you honestly don't get the opportunity to set out
in detail what you are thinking or what the path ahead might lead to.
The second point that I want to mention to you, and I think it proper that I
should do this, is to say something to you about tariffs. I want to emphasise to you
as one who has been on the relevant Tariff Committee of the Cabinet for more years
than anyone else, and as one who has read, I believe, very nearly every tariff
report that has been presented to us over the course of the last fifteen years, that
I am not one who speaks to you I can't speak to you as a technical expert but I
do speak to you as one who is fairly well informed about the tariff mechanism of his
country. Not like Alan Westerman, who was one of the great members they had on
the Tariff Board, but at least I can speak with a considerable degree of Ministerial
authority. What I want to emphasise to you is this. First, we ourselves as a Government
no matter what might have been said in critical quarters in the last year or so, will
maintain control of the' tariff mechanism itself. -And we will maintain control of the
final decisions that-v-e muade because whilst the Tariff Board itself can make
recom mend ations', it is we alone who can make the actual decisions themselves.
Andi I say that we -will give it special attention.
I have established a tariff committee . of the Government. Now it is a pretty
high-powered one, with people who will be able to read the reports, and who go into
the Cabinet Committee with the advice of their own Departmental officials. And
what I can assure you about is not only will we take into consideration the social
consequences of action, but we know that if we are to grow and particularly ensure
that productivity has to improve, then it is up to us to ensure that manufacturing / 4 
~ 4.
industries not only remain competitivebu -he ideals of being economic and efficient
will be one of the bases on which we will make up our.. minds-on-what should be done.
The point I want to make to you is this :-of course tn the interests of this
c ountry we have to regard the manufacturing industry as a tremendously important
section of the community and the one where we have got to get productivity increases
if we are to be able to sustain increasing wages and increasing standards of living.
Our Chairman a few moments ago, did ask me a question relating to meetings
with manufacturing industry and other groups of industry as well. The opportunities
will be there for you to present your views to us. We will change the procl-2Iure
considerably on this occasion.
After discussion with the various authorities the manufacturers, the
primary producers, the construction experts, the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council, the Export Development Council and others I am fairly certain that you
will find that on the n ext occasion before the Budget discussions commence, we will
arrange, on a much more individual basis say with the manufacturers alone or
with their associated industries we will arrange for discussions vi th them.
Secondly, we will give you much more time. It won't be a question of coming
there and reading out a document with us scratching our heads and wondering what it
is all about and seeing a bewildered look on Harold Herford's face.
We will give you plenty of opportunity to present your views. Ard what is
much more important, I hope that we will be able to cross-examine you and find out
what the manufacturing industries are thinking, and what they think can be don~ e in
the best interests of their own industries and through supporting their own industries,
the best interests of the Australian community.
So you have the chance. I think we will only meet once a year from now on, but
at least the time available will, I hope, be at least as good as you would have-on the.
two meetings that you would have throughout the year.
This I think will bring us together. You know our problems. We will know
yours, but above all, I believe we will be working in the interests of the Australian
community and we will be working in the interests of trying to push up productivity.
And could I point out this to you about.... because I had mentioned the
industrial position and I have now brought in this question of tariffs and of your
own industries. Within the course of the last few days I have been looking at the
wage rises that have occurred in Japan and of the productivity increases that have
occurred. What has surprised me because I have so frequently put the argument
that whenever increases in wages grow faster than increases in productivity,
then of necessity you get an inbuilt inflationary pressure.
And I have said over and over again that I think according to that single
factor alone, we have got an inbuilt inflationary pressure of something of the
order of 5 per cent. I don't mention the exact figure because I believe it possibly is
a little stronger than that. But of all the indexes that we take, particularly what
is called the Paasche index, it is obvious that on discounted gross national production
figures, that there is an inbuilt rate of inflation of at least 5 per cent. 0. 
But nonetheless the argument that I want to put to you is this can be conquered
if we get productivity high.
The Japanese wage increases are about 10 per cent per annum much bigger
than ours but because they have a productivity increase in excess of 11 probably
in some years a little higher than that, they are able to absorb them and that is
why in international company, they are able to better than compete with other
countries in the world.
We are not in that position because in the case of our primary industriet,
our rural industries they can't have productivity increases of that kind, but ever.
if they did, the international level of commodities prices spread over a wide area
isn't sufficiently great to permit them to take the increase in costs.
Now the only other point that I would like to make to you is this. I haven't
had the opportunity to come and talk to you as much as I did in other years, and to
get the benefit of the advice that you were able to give.
I can assure you that in the days when I did have the opportunity to talk to
the manufacturers, I was probably as well versed and as well informed on
manufacturing problems, and consequently of the problems of the w~ iole economy
as any other person in Cabinet.
I want to assure you, and particularly you Mrl. Chairman and those of my
friends that I have just spoken to, that my door is usually open.
I welcome opportunities to talk to you. I don't welcome them to talk to you
as I mentioned a few moments ago on a personal basis. But I do welcome them
because I know that if we can co-operate, you and I I representing the Government
and my colleagues and you representing great industries that are increa singly
making this country powerful and great. Permitting us, too, to compete in
international trade and to do so successfully, permitting us to grow at a rate of
gross national production in real terms of 5-f per cent. Believe you me, if we can
co-operate together with the mining and the other industries we can make
our contribution to greater productivity, then I won't be so worried about inflation.
The day hasn't come yet, but if we can co-operate, we can make a lasting
contribution to the increasing greatness of this greatest of all countries. 



PARLLAMEhTT'ARY LUNCHEON R4 HONGUR OF THE
KING AND QUEEN OF N, EPAL
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 23 APRIL 1971
õ peechby the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Your Maje.; ties, Members of the Diplomatic Corps, Ladies and Gentlemen
Sir, this is the first time a reigning monarch from Nepal has come to Australia,
arid the first time that a reigning monarch from Nepal has been in the Parliament House
of the Commonwealth. We welcome you and we welcome your wife.
Sir, you should know that there has been a long association in one way or
another between the Nepalese people and ourselves. Many of us here today, if not all of
us, remember the fact that at Gallipoli, Gurkha troops shared the responsibility with our
own Fourth Brigade under General Monash. We can never forget their braveness. We
can never forget the assistance they gave us under the most troubled and difficult
conditions. And I well remember on many occasions, listening to a former Governor-
General of ours, Viscount Slim, when he continually referred to the tract that he liked
talking to the Gurkhas. He liked talking to your own people, and above all, he liked their
steadfastness under action, under active service conditions, and how much he liked them
fighting because he knew they would never fail.
But there are other reasons, too, Sir, why we have got reasons for happin ess.
Our own Colombo Plan was, in the days when I was Foreign Minister and that was
only a few weeks ago was, I believe, a little out of proportion to the vote that we gave
to other countries. I hope it hasn't changed, but if I find it has, or there is a likelihood
of change, I can assure you I will be the first one reminding my c&amp; gethe Treasurer.
Now, Sir, we have a Colombo Plan, as you know, and we have already had
something of the order of 90 of your young students come here. We welcome them, and
we hope that more will come in the days to come. I can't say that we will bu-ild up the
programme because it is a difficulty for you just as much as it is for us. But we do like
them. We regard them as people who are adaptable, people who are fitting into the
educational system of this country and I hope they go back much better trained and able
to play their part in the future of your country.
And, too, Sir, we have these problems of tourism. Yours is a magnificent
country, of grandeur and of plains of the ranges and the mountains and the plains.
Providentially, nature built the ranges on the North and the plains on the South. And I
think, Sir, it has been a protection to you and it will, I believe, in time be a protection
to others. But I am sure what we can do is to build up our tourism. At least I know that
in the case of my own two children, not only do they know of Everest and of the exploits
of Hillary and of Sherpa Tensing, but they also, Sir, would like to come and find the
Abominable Snowman, if they could, even if they have to beseech your help, as probably
the best guide there is in Nepal, in order to try and find him. a. / 2 
Then Sir, may I turn to you as a person and as a reigning constitutional monarch.
I have looked with awe, Sir, at all the portfolios that you have held. Roughly, I have
held about fourteen, one way or the other, but I believe, Sir, as I looked at the record,
you have held ever so many more than I have. And you have been there less time than
I have. I wonder how you fit into them the Treasurer, as well as the Chief
Administrator, as well as the Head of your National Development Corporation, and I
believe one or two other portfolios which for the moment the names evade me.
But, Sir, if I can look at what you have done the World Health Organisation,
in education for the young people and the people of the universities and the colleges, in
looking after the women and children. I think, Sir, that you have given the kind of
leadership that any country in the world, including our own, would be proud of.
And besides that, I was asked today by one of my officials, if I would care to
recite " The Man From Snowy River". Naturally it caught me a little by surprise because
it is so long since I have heard it. And when they asked me to do it, I couldn't
remember the opening bars. But I was told, Sir, that if I did ring you, Sir, as a. poet
in your own right, you who know the ranges and the mountains so well, would have
responded. And I perhaps, Sir, might have been a little flabbergasted and certainly
would have been put in the shade with the eloquence of your speech.
But, Sir, may I now turn to your Constitutional activities as the reigning
monarch, Head of State and Head of Government together. Sir, if I can refer to three
areas in which you have taken a part.
First of all, I want to refer to your activities in what we call the Panchayat
System of government, which commences right at the grass roots, and goes through
local government and other organisation working up to the central government under
yourself, both as Prime Minister and Head of State. Sir, we hope that this scheme
is successful, drawing the people into the government at the lower levels, giving them
the opportunity to participate, and in time strengthening the very fabric of government
in your own country.
But there are two other reforms that I believe will meet with the warmest
of warm approval by Members of Parliament and of the Australian people. The first
one is your adoption of the rule of law the application of law to everyone, no matter
who they might be and without any kind of discrimination, fairly and judiciously and
making sure that every single person in the community has the protection of an
independent judiciary. Secondly, the programme of " Back to the Village", designed
to ensure that the leadership shall come from you down to the paeons and the people and
back from the paeons and the people to the government itself, in combination working
in the interests of your own country.
Sir, naturally enough, we want each of these programmes to be successful
and we feel reasonably confident that under your direction and leadership that they will
be. In the international field that I have recently vacated, as I said a few moments
ago, I knew that on the last occasion I was at the United Nations the 25th anniversary
celebrations you were there too. Equally, too, can I say that the year before, whilst
I wasn't there, I knew that you were there, and that you played your part as the
leader of your own delegation and you certainly took a prominent part in the Economic
and Social Council. / 3 
Internationally, too, with the non-aligned countries, you have taken a very
prominent part. First of all in Belgrade and later on in Lusaka. And we, Sir, again
if I can repeat these words, welcome the part that you played to try and mould this'
th~ ird force together. To be a force that can make a contribution, and in time a bigger
contribution, to try and ensure that there is a better balance of forces in the world"'
4nd consequently a greater prospect for peace, a greater prospect of success for the
things that we hold dear in your and in our time.
And, finally, Sir, may I say something to you about the grace and charm of
your wife. She, too, complements in very nearly every way your own activities. 7 with
the young women, with the children, with health and educational organisations, in
the. arts and in culture, and too, in conservation measures. We welcome you, Your
Maiesty, along with your husband, and we do hope that in the days to come, in reven
days that you are with us, they will be days of unequalled joy for both His Majesty
and for yourself. Now His Majesty himself. I first of all should say this to you as a maiter of
fact. Normally a reigning monarch under circumstances like this doesn't make a
speech. But the mood has caught him not while he was sitting here in Parliament
House, for which he would have been forgiven, but on the way here. Without urging
but voluntarily of his own free will, he has decided he would like to say a few words
to you in Nepalese, but translated by his Foreign Minister. I wanted you to know this
before I called upon the Leader of the Opposition to support the Toast.
But, Sir, I want to assure you before I sit down that we, the representatives
of the Australian people welcome you. We know that the Australian people Mvuld
welcome you too if they were given the chance. Thank you for coming. We will
always welcome you back again. 



ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS POLICY
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
The Rt Hon. William McMahon
TO THE CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE
MINISTERS RESPONSIBLE FOR ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
AT CAIRNS
23 April1971
I am sorry not to be able today to meet the Ministers responsible for
Aboriginal affairs throughout Australia. It is, however, appropriate that I
should take this opportunity early in the life of my Government to declare
the profound concern I and my Government have for the advancement of
Aboriginal Australians and our determination to move steadily and firmly
towards the solution of the many problems which confront us in achieving
it. At the same time I would like to give a brief outline of some of the principles
underlying our policies and our administration of them.
I believe that the problems of racial differences and the evils of poverty,
ignorance, prejudice and discrimination which so often go with them are
among the most urgent and most difficult in the world today. At a time.
when the moral indignation of the world is directed at these evils it is important
for our own sense of humanity and for our relations with the rest of the
world that our determination to deal effectively with them in our own
society should not be in doubt. While we intend to proceed with discretion
and care, we will not allow prejudice or temporary financial difficulties to
stand in the way of more effective action to deal with these intensely human
problems. Let me say a little about fundamental objectives. I do not like attempts to
embody complex policies in single words like assimilation or integration,
capable as they are of varied interpretations and acquiring often irrational
associations. We believe that Aboriginal Australians should be assisted as
individuals and, if they wish, as groups to hold effective and respected places
within one Australian society with equal access to the rights and opportunities
it provides and accepting responsibilities towards it. At the same time 
they should be encouraged and assisted to preserve and develop their culture
their languages, traditions and arts so that these can become living elements
in the diverse culture of the Australian society. My Government's policy will
be directed to these ends.
I welcome this meeting especially as a symbol of our genuinely federal
approach to this problem. Aboriginal affairs is not a single functional responsibility
like most other portfolios. It is a general care for the whole welfare of
a minority people with a variety of special problems. Housing, education,
health, employment, economic opportunity, civil liberties the foundations
of community advancement are in their general aspects the responsibility
of a number of Ministers and their Departments, sometimes in a State and
sometimes in the Commonwealth. Aboriginal advancement must be built
upon the same foundations. Hence I believe that, to the extent practicable,
we should move towards devolving upon individual Ministers and their Departments
the administration of those aspects of policies for Aboriginal advancement
for which they are responsible for the rest of the community.
It will, as I see it, be the function of Ministers responsible for Aboriginal
affairs, with the active interest of the Prime Minister, and in the States, I
hope, the Premier, to develop policy, to co-ordinate different components of
it, and to check up on its balance and effectiveness. Since responsibility for
many of these components of policy lies in the State sphere we look to you
to participate fully and to give to policies and administration a genuinely
local quality and flavour. You may rely upon the genuine co-operation of
my Government in your efforts.
In my own Government I intend that the Minister responsible for Aboriginal
affairs will have my strong personal interest and support. It will be his
task to work out, in collaboration with his colleagues in functional departments
and with the Minister for the Interior, policies to meet the special
needs and problems of Aborigines.
For this purpose I shall establish a special Ministerial Committee presided
over by the Minister. He will, with the aid of this Committee, be concerned
to present these various policies as a coherent whole and to ensure their
effective balance and co-ordination.
In this work the Minister and the Ministerial Committee will be advised by
the Council and Office of Aboriginal Affairs whose functions and powers I
am taking steps to clarify and re-state. The close liaison which has developed
between the Council and Office and their opposite numbers in the States
will, I hope, be strengthened even further. 
I have asked the Council, in consultation with appropriate Commonwealth
and State Departments and authorities, to review urgently existing Commonwealth
programmes for the advancement of Aboriginal citizens and to advise
me through the Minister on a programme of action which can be put into
effect progressively. This programme will build on the special welfare activities
designed to improve the health, housing, education and vocational
training of Aborigines now being carried out with Commonwealth financial
support primarily through the States.
The programme will be concerned to increase the economic strength and
independence of Aborigines by widening their employment opportunities and
by assisting them into potentially successful enterprises both as individuals
and as communities. Attention will be devoted to the search for opportunities
for Aborigines in areas with which they have traditional links. For instance
we hope, with the collaboration between the Commonwealth and the States,
to find opportunities for them in conservation-type enterprises and activities
which may include forestry, flood mitigation, rehabilitation of the natural
environment and the development of national parks with special Aboriginal
interests. But in parallel with these efforts we will try, by training, accommodation
and placement, to assist those willing to move to areas and centres of
greater opportunity.
Consideration will be given to an appropriate policy for Aborigines and
the land, ensuring to continuing Aboriginal groups effective access to land for
recreational and ceremonial purposes as well as for the development of enterprises.
I am happy to inform Ministers that discussions with the States, following
the agreement reached at this conference a year ago to examine remaining
legislation which appears to discriminate against Aborigines, have proceeded
amicably and promise well for a successful outcome. Thereafter it will be our
task, with, I believe, the support of the great mass of the Australian people,
to move towards the complete enjoyment of normal civil liberties by Aborigines
generally.
We believe that this will not wholly be achieved until Aboriginal citizens
are given the-fullest opportunity to demonstrate the richness of their own
cultural life and its potential as a component in our general diverse culture.
Consequently we intend to assist Aborigines to protect and develop their
own languages, arts, traditions and general culture and to help educate the
community generally to understand, respect and enjoy the contribution
Aborigines can make to the richness and diversity of our national life. 
Finally we believe that Aborigines must be helped to take an increasing
part in the management of their own affairs. We welcome the moves that have
been taken to develop State, regional and local councils and other representative
and consultative bodies in Aboriginal communities and hope that this
programme can be stimulated. There is scope for programmes of consultation
with Aboriginal groups to be further developed and in particular for types of
organizations to be studied which may build up decision making and action
by Aborigines themselves. Interesting experiments are in process with organizations
in community development and group economic enterprises. We will
encourage and help their further progress.
My Government recognises that much has already been achieved in health,
education, housing, vocational training, placement in employment and in
economic development. However it sees continued and substantial progress
in Aboriginal affairs as the test of our community's determination to end
racial discrimination in our midst and to deal with Aboriginal Australians
with respect, justice, humanity and compassion. If existing programmes can
be built upon effectively on the lines I have described I believe we can achieve
a break-through to a new level of performance. I welcome your collaboration
in proving that we can measure up to this test in the eyes of the world and to
the satisfaction of our own conscience.
I wish you well in your deliberations. 



PRIME MINISTER
OFFICIAL OPENING OF " CONSTRUCTION HOUSE
CANBERRA 27 APRIL 1971
Speech by the Prime Minister,. The Rt lHon. William Mc~ ahon, M. P.
I would also like to thank Mr. Williams and Mr. Box on your
behalf, and on behalf of myj wife and myself as well, for inviting
us today. It is most appropriate that the building and construction
industry should decide to build this magnificent national headquarters
building in Canberra. It's hard to imagine a more apt way
for the industry to display its presence in the national capital.
This city which is as much a tribute to the construction industry
asit is ' oour own planners, architects and engineers. There are
three industry organisation partners here in Construction House.
Firstly, the Master Builders' Federation of Australia which is well
known and respected in Canberra. It has been submitting the views of
the industry to the Federal Government on a wide number of matters
of industry concern for a long time. And last year, my Government
was pleased to co-operate with your industry in sending an official
survey mission to South East Asia to help Australian contractors try
to win competitive contracts in that developing region.
During the last three or four years, Australian consultanfts
have been successful throughout the South East Asian region. It
would be natural for Australian building and construction companies
to be looking for a similar trend in the export of their skills.
This region is virtually on Australia's doorstep, and it is one
where Australian building could make an important contribution in
applying the world standard of competence it has reached.
I will be visiting Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore myself
soon, and my Government attaches very great importance t-o our
relations with these closc neighbours to our north whether in
defence, in aid and development pr. ogrammes in cultural relations,
or in the growth of trade. We would like nothing be~ tter than to see
private enterprise doing more in backing up and developing the
Government's efforts to stranqthen our ties with these nations.
0 I A 17 
The Australian Institute of Building is a newcomer to
Canberra. But its vital role in establishing and maintaining
standards is well known in the building industry. The third
member of the triumvrirate occupying this building, the Master
Builders' Association of the A. C. T. deals with the day-to-day
industry problems in Australia's fastest growing city. And it
does that well, as the evidence of our eyes shows.
In a short ten years, building in Australia has grown from
a modest to a very large industry. It is now an industry which
helps significantly in setting this nation's growth pattern. And
much of the credit for Australia's development in the past twenty
years must go to it. its influence in Australia's growth,
development and standard of living are, of course, visible everywhere.
Let me elaborate Investment in physical capital is one
of the mainsprings of economic progress: It has rnThyed a key role
in Australia's strong rate of economic and population growth.
The building and construction industry is responsible fbr
something over half of total fixed investment and about 14 per cent
of gross national expenditure in Australia: But its importance
does not end there. Through its demands for materials the industry
affects output and investment throughout many sect6rs of manufactu-'
ring industry. It is also a very large emnloyer of 430,000 people,
or 9 per cent of the national workforce, according to the last
census. But if you take account of related industries, building
and construction could be said to be responsible for employing
about 15 per cent of the workforce; you have rapid growth as well.
In those ten years, total spending on building and
construction has gone up by about 140 per cent. That compares with
an increase of 12o% in gross national spending generally, because
your industry is such a mass user of scarce resources, i-t has an
important responsibility to make a maximum contribution to growth
by making the best and most efficient possible use of those
resources thus both your industry and our own economic policymakers
have a strong interest in the soundly-based growth of
building and construction activity.
Continuity in building and construction operation raises
productivity, encourages technological innovation and facilitates
longer-term planning. Stability in your industry makes it easier
for us to maintain stable growth and full employment in the
economy as a whole. That's why we are very pleased to see the
development of, and increasing professionalism in organisations
like the Master Builders' Federation..
The Federation and its affiliated bodies have also found
themselves increasingly involved in industrial relations, and
Master Builders' Associations have recently featured prominently
in major industrial disputes in the industry. I can recall some
recent disputes in New South Wales which have proved very costly
both to employers and individual employees, One particular
building union resorted to the use of physical violence and
caused damage to property in pursuing its demands. ./ 3 
But I am confident that under the guidance and co-ordination
of your Federal organisation now established in Canberra, industrial
relations in the building industry will bring increased employeremployee
harmony. I would not want to leave such a distinguished
audience as you are without some comments on how we in the Federal
Government see our role in relation to your industry, particularly
in relation to housing.
It has become almost a cliche of the political scene that in
Australia we enjoy the highest level of home ownership in the world
and one of the highest rates of housing construction. But no matter
how well accepted and commonplace those statements may seem to some
observers, they show a solid record of achievement against which
current problems and criticism must beweighed. There will always be
problems to be overcome. But we are not resting on our record in
this vital area of housing which is so closely identified with the
everyday life and aspirations of Australians. On the contrary,
we are carrying on and improving the record of successive Liberal/
Country Party Governments, in the increasing involvement of the
Commonwealth in housing.
Housing is one of the few portfolios that I have not held
during my ministerial career and that's mainly because it was
established in comparatively recent years. I seem to have had my
chance in just about all the others. The total is thirteen portfolios,
they tell me. Our position as a Government with respect to
housing is that we believe every Australian family should be well
housed and housed in a fashion of its own choice. We recognise
that Government assistance is necessary to achieve this aim. But
we believe such assistance should be implemented in a co-operative
rather than in a domineering and bureaucratic way.
We take the approach that we can co-operative successfully
with private enterprise, and this new building and this national
capital are testimony to the success of that approach. We also
believe we should co-operate with the state Governments in helping
them to fulfill the housing needs of the people as speedily as
practicable. More recently, we have taken a number of decisions in the
housing area. For example, last December we made new arrangements
for Commonwealth financial assistance to the states for housing.
As a direct result ther ' have been substantial reductions in the
interest rates charged by all state authorities. They represent
the greatest reduction in housing interest rates in a quarter of
a century. The interest charged on dwellings sold by the state
housing authorities and financed by co-operative societies have
been reduced substantially, and the benefits of these reductions are
being passed on to home buyers. We have also relieved the States of
the need to provide housing for members of the armed forces. This
has released additional funds for civilian and welfare housing.
We are also paying the States $ 1.25 million a year for the
next five years towards rental reductions for the really needy. / 4 
Since the last Budget, the maximum advance under the war
service homes scheme has been increased by $ 1,000, and interest
charged by our housing loans insurance corporation has been reduced.
At the Premiers' Conference in February, we provided additional funds
for state works, and a number of states have stimulated their home
building programmes as a result.
These are all decisions taken to assist housing, but another
problem the industry faces is the rising costs of land. This
problem can only be solved by co-operation b tween all levels of
Government and private enterprise.
As for the future. You can be. assured that we will. o. continue
to improve and update Government asistance in the housing area, as
we have dcne in the past: We are proud of our record. But we
acknowledge that there are still many policy aspects of housing
which we should be looking at. Having said that I want to thank
you again for inviting us here today, and I have much pleasure in
declaring construction house officially 6pen. 



AUST RALIA -JAPAN BUSINESS GO-OPERATION COMM= TEE
ACADEM/-Y OF SC IENCE, CA NERRA, A. C. T. 6 MAY 1971
Spechbthe Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Now may I make some comments to you formally. And the first I would
like to make, and I will put it in three different classifications, is the importance in
aim trpaodritnagn csee nthsaet oJfa pJaanp acna nto pulas, y tahse ai mpoploitritcaanlc ein folfu eJanpcaen foinr at hwe orrilgdh ctso notfe xtht ea npde oapllseos tohfe'
South East Asia. It is probably well known, but it bears repetition, that within the course of
the next ten years, Japan will be, undoubtedly, the second greatest production nation
in the world. And in order to be able to sustain its continued growth, it must have
access to raw materials, semi-processed materials and, I believe, a large range of
manufactured items as well.
Thus it necessarily follows that Japan, in order to be able to sustain its
production and its trade, must be able to obtain raw materials from various parts of
the world. There can be no doubt that Japanese businessmen will be looking increasingly
at Australia as the source of raw materials and processed materials.
The second point is that as Japan's economic growth continues, and as it
increases its trade in Asia, including South-East Asia and further South, it must be able
increasingly * to play an important part in the development of the countries with which
it trades. And so too should it be able to play a part in parallel with other countries
in qnsuring that the less developed countries of South-East Asia have the opportunity
for development. And the last assumptions on which I want to base my subsequent remarks
are,: That as Japan develops its industrial strength and its trading strength as well,
it will increasingly be able to play an important political role in the development of
Asia, and particularly those parts of Asia closest to our shores.
Consequently, we want to be able to join with the Japanese in order to ensure
that Japanese political activity is directed towards ensuring the political freedom and
the physical freedom of the countries of South East Asia. And that increasingly together
we can make our contribution to helping the poorer people of this part of the world.
Now while we as a Government can create an effective and real atmosphere
or milieu in which development can take place, nonetheless, it is you as businessmen
who can go out, seek the contacts with the political, and industrial and commercial
people, and be able to achieve the kind of ideal I have just mentioned. That is increasing
trade and with that increasing trade, increasing understanding and with that increasing
understanding a higher responsibility for helping others in order to help themselves.
Fortunately for us, trade between the two countries is complementary.
They will be, as I have said be! ore, large importers of rawx materials and processed
materials, and we will in our turn be able to import from them large quantities of
highly sophisticated industrial eqa. ipnent. / 2 
Li-14.1.. 
If we look at the trade between our two countries,, we can, on a preliminary
estimate, get a false impression. Becaus. we have undoubtedly a big surplus in our
balance of payments our balance of trade with Japan. In the latest figures that have
been made available to me, we have, in recent years, increased our trade by about
per cent to Japan, and they have increased their trade from us by about 60 per cent.
So there is very nearly reciprocity at this present moment.
The point I'd like to make, however, is that the Japanese authorities from
the Prime Minister down, recognise that it is in their best interests and our best
interests to have multilateral trade. And they realise that in a multilateral trade
and finance world it is not essential that there should be a balance with every country.
Japan accepts the fact that its balance of payments with us will be adverse,
and probably this adverse balance will increase as the years go by. That does not
mean that both of us don't want increased trade. Of course we do. As I said a few
moments ago you can be absolutely certain that that trade will increase and increase
at a rapid rate. As to the future, I think the first submission that I put up to the Cabinet
or I should state in a preliminary way that I asked the Department of Foreign Affairs to
prepare was the way in which we should look at the problems, the inter-relationships
between Japan and Australia. As a consequence of that submission we have appointed
a high-ranking group of civil servants at-F irst Secretary level or at Deputy Secretary
level in order to be able to co-ordinate the relationships between the two countries.
Equally, too, if I can interpolate this, although it is not exactly relevant
but It has a bearing on what I am saying, we also in recent weeks prepared three
papers for the Government on our relationships with China, particularly improved
trading relationships with them.
I have been able to announce in the House that we will considerably liberalise
our trade with the People's Republic and that the Minister for Trade will shortly be
releasing two lists one of goods that can be exported to the People's Republic, and
one, the Strategic List in which there will be prohibitions imposed on trade.
The substance of this is that businessmen will shortly know exactly the
type of goods they can and the type of goods they cannot export.
May I now refer shortly to three different subjects first capital
movements, secondly, our problems relative to tariffs, and third, if I can mention
It, guidelines for borrowing in this country by overseas interests.
First, then, as to capital movements. I must again interject to say that
in recent months the Japanese Government has indicated quite clearly that it will
liberalise the quota restrictioces that are now imposed. And secondly I go on to say
that as Japan has a very favourable balance of payments surplus, and one that is likely
to grow, and is now in world terms in the financial market in a very strong position,
we wifl welcome the fact that Japanese markets of this kind will be opened up to
Australia. And we can hope for capital movements to increase between the two
countries. In the last three years there has in fact been a movement of direct
investment in Australia by Ja-anese interests of something like $ 43 million. 
3.
The second point I want to mention is borrowing capacity by Japanese interests
or Japanese firms that have been established here. This depends on the amount of
Australian equity as well as on the duration or the time during which the Japanese
interests have carried on buiness here.
We have two political objectives. We do want Australian equity participation
when Japanese firms establish here and I know this is well known to the Japanese
authorities, and 1 believe to Japanese business and commercial interests. And secondly
we do like Australian talent, whether it happens to be on an administrative or a technicalI
basis, to be able to participate with the Japanese in the development of Australian projects.
I applaud the statement made by Mr. Miyazawa when he was here a few weeks
ago that the Japanese look forward to co-operation between Japanese and Australian
interests for the development of industry here. I hope we can extend that and extend our
joint influence to the development of Australian/ Japanese interests in other parts of Asia.
The third element is with our tariff policy, and whilst I would never like to
feel I had become involved in controversy with the Minister in control of MITI, I thinkj
I should say here that we have in fact only one kind of restriction on goods from Japan
entering this country.
Virtually we have an open-door policy to import and we do not, except on a
very limited scale, impose quotas or non-tariff policies. But whatever we do, we do it
after a thorcugh-going review by the officers of the Australian Tariff Board and after
recommendations and reports by them to the Government. We do not act unilaterally.
But all of this that I have just mentioned relating to the Tariff Board and
capital movements will be submerged by the fact, and I repeat this again because it is
so critically important there can be no doubt at all that trade from Australia to Japan
and in the reverse direction will increase substantially in the years to come.
We in Australia do want the most friendly international relations with the
Japanese Government and people and the Australian Government and people. And from
all I can gather and I have recently been to Japan as a guest of the Japanese Government
for a period of something like ten to fourteen days, I think I can express the feeling that
there is an increasing desire to be friendly. And not only friendly, but that we should get
to know one another, that tourism should increase and that we should be able more and
more to establish direct contact between the two peoples.
And I finish on this note that while we as a government can do much in
order to provide the infrastructure, the circumstances in which trade can increase,
I do want to emphasise that the businessmen themselves can, and I believe will do the
job. I know of the tremendous industry and the application of sound business principles
particularly in finance and industry of the Japanese. Equally, too, do I know of the
abilities of Australian businessmen as well. I am sure, and I express this view on behalf
of the Government, that you will. make our task easier. But if you ever feel that we
can do something to improve the relationships and to improve the trade between the
two countries, I assure you that everyone in the Government will be only too happy
to participate with you. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINI3TER TO THE CITIZENS
CLUB DINNER, SYDNEY, MAY 13, 1971
Tonight I hope you will permit me to speak about where
we are going and what Initiatives we are taking in novel areas of
international affairs that up until a few years ago we had riot been
concerned with. By that I mean our diplomatic international
relationships with Japan and the emerging world powers immediately
to the North. That is with the two Communist countries Soviet
Russia and the People's Republic of China that is Mainland China?
I do this because in each case I want to speak to you
about the dates on which the initiatives were first taken beginning
in April 1970. Before I get into the body of my speech I want too
purely for the purposes of identifying the dates to mention the
dates on which subsequent initiatives were taken.
In May 1970, we were looking at papers, position
papers and documents that were subsequently presented to the
Ministry, relating to a new approach to Japan. In March of this
year, we considered papers relating to China, that is, the
People's Republic of China Mainland China. Every single phrase
that has been used lately, and that I will use tonight, have beer.
taken out of those basic documents.
And finally, we had in April of this year a paper
relating to our relationships with the U. S. S. R.
I mention these dates purely to point out to you that the
Department of Foreign Affairs has been doing this work and that
we haven't, as it~ were, been forced by ping pong diplomacy to take
the kind of action recently taken.
I had the great pleasure in every one of these cases to
initiate the yolicies that I will mention to you.
If anything is to be gained or, behalf of the Commonwealth
Government, I car. assure you that each and every one of the
proposals has received the full endorsement of Cabinet, and of the
Ministry. Whilst I am going to speak about, Japan, the U. S. S. R.
and the People's Republic, I don't want you to think that I am
forgetting our great permanent and powerful friends in the United
States, and in the Uniited Kingdom. 
-2-
The United Kingdom is still using its benign influence
for good in South-East Asi!, and has joined with us in the post
Anglo-Malaysian defence agreements. And the United States,
of course, has been the most powerful influence for good and
for the salvation of the free world since World Wat 11. And it will
still be expected to play this role.
Tonight, I want to speak to you about both our bilateral
and multilateral relationships with the countries I have mentioned.
By bilateral I mean our direct relationships,
diplomatic and other relationships between two countries without the
intervention of thi-rd And by " n ,... ti-lateral" relationships,
I mean those relarionshi=~ between oursel'es and a dozen and one
other countries as, for exa le, in the Un'ited Nations and the
Asian Development Bank anr. similar types of institutions. Over and
over again, you will hear me use the wo.: ds bilateral and
" multilateral" and I make his very brie explanation so that you
won't be kept in the dark about exactly what I mean.
Now I want you, too, to understand that we are a great
trading nation. We are, per head of po:,-' ation, as great as any other
country. But we also have to remember that besides the interest we
have in trade, we have other international relationships as well. We
want to achieve poe-tical s-. ltbility in the area in which we live, to help
others in the ecoc-mic de. rel. opmen: t of thi. r countries and the overriding
objective we have in international affairs that ie to play our
part to the maximum of oUl. capacity to ensure that the people of
the future the young chil'e-n of today and those who will come after
us will have a better opprranity to live under more peaceful conditions
than you and I have beer, able to live ir..
So this, then, is the basis on which I want to speak to you
tonight. May I then turnto Japai. the paper that was presented
in May of last year.
Japan is one of our great trading partners. h fact, in
terms of total trade, it is ahe greatest tr-. ading partner we have. Our
exports to Japan top the liht. She is by far and away the greatest
importer of what we produce. In terms of imports, she runs third
only to the United States, and in terms of total trade she is second
only to the United States.
It was for this reason, more than for any other, that I
started the discussions ir; the Department of External Affairs, ea'rly im May
.1973. I the: n established with the approval of -the then Prime Minister,
r. G3orton, the strongest inter--de'artmental Committee that we could
establish in order-to con sictently look at our policies and to ask ourselves
Can we improve themn' Can we improve them for the. benefit of our own people? 
This worked very well, . and you people will kn~ ow that
we have i-ow established rnot only trade, but in other kinds of
relationships, the most close relationships with Japan.
What then of the future?
Let me mention that in teni years' time, Japaii will be
unmistakeably the second most powerful productive country in the
world. And because our two economics are complementary and there
is an enormous degree of complemerntarity between the kinds of
goods they want and we are able to sell to them, arid the kinds of
goods they have and are able to sell to us, that our future trade
relationships with Japan offer enormous opportunities for us.
It is axiomatic that the greater your trade, and the greater the
amount of foreign exchange you can earn, then the greater the
prospects you have got for productivity increases arid also for better
standards of living of our own people.
So we have this complementarity, and as I have said,
as Japan grows, then it is axiomatic that we will grow too.
I also want to mention other factors associated with
this period as Minister for Foreign Affairs. Japan started to change
its low posture to an exercise of a kind of global influence that a
country of its power should start to exercise. At the Djakarta
conferences, Japan for the first time took an initiative in order to
help to try and achieve peace in Cambodia along the lines of the
Geneva Conventions an-d Protocol of 1954.
I believe that Japan is moving definitely, precisely, calmly,
but still with a low posture, to play its part in trying to achievepolitical
stability in South East Asia.
But it is not of Japan that I wanted to speak to you tonight.
It is rather of the U. S. S. R. and of the People's Republic of China and
of China I want to speak at considerable length.
When I speak of these two countries, I want to remind you
of certain assumptions and of certain principles that flow from them.
The first one is that we must recognise that both of these
countries have different political and social systems to ours. Both
of them base their foreign relations on different basic ideologies.
Theirs is a philosophy of centralised government, of a political
system that depends on the Party as the dominant element in
potlcal life the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. They concentrate
on the Party itself. It is the political organisation which determines
not only their internal but their external relationships as well. 
A
We, on the other hand, believe in representative
government, We believe that it is the people who are sovereign,
it is they who support a Party, and through the Party determine
who will represent the people in the National Parliament itself.
I want you to understand that whenever we are thinking
of trade between a communist country and ourselves, we must
remember the differences particularly that we have a free press and
freedom of expression, while theirs is controlled and their people
know little or nothing about what the real objectives of the
government might be.
This is tremendously important under present
circumstances, because if I can use Rob Askin's phrase of ping
pong diplomacy, let us remember that we are not going to gain a
great deal out of ping pong diplomacy.
We have to look much further and ask ourselves when we are
engaged in dealings with them What are we likely to gain out of it
in the long term, in the medium term and in the short term as well?
And on every occasion when we are making a decision,
we must, as all businessmen must, prepare a profit and loss account.
Ar. d we must always, when we are adding up the sums, ask
ourselves the single question. When we look at the total final figures
are we sure that they will be in the black and to the advantage of this
country. Having said that, I mertion two other principles associated
with it. I want you to realise that when we are dealing in either
bilateral of multilateral relations with other countries that we must
not think that because they have different political systems to ours
that that fact alone should prevent us from entering into negotiations
with them. That is far from the truth. The mere fact that they happen
to be socialist or communist is not in itself sufficient reason
to prevent us from entering into negotiations with them.
And the second principle that I want you to realise is that
even though you recognise international law, that
recognition does not mean that you approve of the policies of the
government recognised. It merely means that you look at the facts
of life objectively, pragmatically, coolly and calmly and thin ask yourself
the simple question if we take a certain course of action, what
advantage has it for the Australian people and the Australian nation? 
This brings me to the text country I want to speak about
at this dinner tonight Soviet Russia.
I don't have to draw distinctions in this case between
multilateral and bilateral negotiations because they are in fact a
member of the United Nations and they have diplomatic relations
with us. They have their Ambassador and Embassy here. We have
our Ambassador and Embassy in Moscow. So I don't want to
speak to youabout that. What I wa-t to speak to you about is this:
The Soviet, has in recent months, been saying they would
like better relationships with us. They have been asking us if we would
give some earnest of our willingness and of our ability to improve our
relationships. To indicate to them in reply * hat we would like. They
would like to be. able to ensLure that they had bdtjter trade opportunities
with us too. In recent weeks we have been able as a government to show
the Government of the U. S. S. R. that we were prepared to make certain
concessions to them as an earnest of our intention. We have decided
and we have communicated this to the Soviet Government the
concessions we are willing to make. We will be delivering an aide
memoire setting out the details. The terms and conditions under which
the concessions will be made will be communicated to them in the next
few days. We have agreed at their request, that we will permit the Soviet
to establish a trade office in New South Wales I mention this
specifically Mr. Askin, not because i am a Sydneian, but because it
happens to be the place chosen by them. Primarily this office will be
for the purpose of commerce and trade, of trying to increase commerce
and trade between the two countries. I hope, looking at the balance sheet
it will be of advantage to us.
Secondly, because Russia has recently joined the Continental
Shipping Conference they asked that they would like the Biltic Shipping
Company to establish an office in Sydney. We think this will give us
access toport to the South of China, but also. Anian Russia and the
opportur. ity tc be able to sell our goods and services there.
Thirdly, they have asked us, if we could agree to visits by
Ministers. That has already occurred.
Their Minister for Agriculture, a member of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party, has visited Australia Sir John
McEwen has visited Russia.
They have also proposed, and we have agreed, that there
shouldi* ae missions, or delegations of Parliamentary Members tc move from
one country to the other. 
-6-
This, I believe, shows our good will and the fact that we
want under the conditions that I have mentioned to show an earinest of
our intentions despite the fact that we know they are building up their
forces in the Middle East, beyond what is necessary for perce-keeping
purposes there. They are suspect in some regards, and we are entitled
to be sceptical. Nonetheless they took the initiative and we have
responded. From . now on, at least the ball will be in their court, At
least we can say this that so far as Australia is concerned: They have
indicated clearly to us that their recent decision to purchase millions of
pounds of Australian beef was based on their desire for good relations
with us. That is our position with regard to the U. S. S. R. I now turn
to the part of my speech that I want to emphasise tonight.
I want to emphasise to you that every phrase I use was coined
some time ago and certainly a long time before the ping pong diplomacy
was invented and practised under the skilled guidance of Mr. Chou En-lai.
The China Paper was prepared in February of this year. Let me talk
about the People's Republic of China and let us look at our relations in
both a multilateral and a bilateral way.
In multilateral terms. We believe they are anxious to -become a
member of the United Nations. The suggestion has made from time to
time that China wants to adopt a global approach. They are entitled to do
so as a great power. Consequently, those who have watched the U: nited
Nations have been asking themselves the simple question What do we
think are the prospects of the People's Republic becoming a member of
the United Nations in the course of the next year or two?
I want to say to you clearly a;-d emphatically that there is
little doubt at all, in fact it is almost certain that this year or next year,
Mainland China will become pcrticularly if it makes certain concessions
a member of the United Nations and will hold the permanent seat in
the Security Council that is now held by Taiwan China.
In the face of this inevitability, we will do nothing to obstruct
it. We do so against this background.
The Government in Peking is the defacto government and is
responsible for 700 million people. It controls the land mass of
Mainland China. So too does the Government of Taiwan China excercise
power and control over 141 millior people And over the territory,
that is comprised within the jurisdiction and central writ of the
Government of Taiwan. It is our view, therefore, that as the government
of Taiwan has lived up to the principles of the United Nations we should
assist it to remain a member. We are trying with all the influence we can
to sustain the position of Taiwan, and give it the opportunity to remain
in the United Nations should it, in its own wisdom wish to remain there. 
. So that then is roughly our position on a multilateral basis, so far as the
People's Republic of China and the Government of Taiwan are concerned.
I now want to turn to our bilateral relations with Mainland China.
And I want to state our reservations.
I want to express those reservations coolly, and not stridently. When you
are making a diplomatic approach of the kind I will mention the less strident your
approach, the better your prospects of success will probably be.
I don't want you to think that there have been any great changes so far as
Mainland China is concerned. They are masters of tactics. They control the news
media there and they can more or less do what they want to do without great trouble
from the domestic population.
We in all our dealings must remember the domestic population exercises
a powerful influence on what we do. No democratic government ought to get too far out
of line with the trends of thought of the people of their country.
I remind you of an incident that occurred in 1969, not very long before the
last Federal elections. One phrase in a very well-presented and prepared speech
by one of the most cautious diplomats we have in Australia's foreign service a phrase
relating to the presence of the USSR Navy in the Indian Ocean caused a degree of
controversy that every one of us would have preferred to have avoided. In other
words, eight or nine words, caused difficulties and a tremendous amount of public
disapproval. This is why we have moved with a great degree of care. We have not wished
to move in a way that we felt would insult public opinion.
I want you to understand, too, that the People's Republic of China, that is
Mainland China, still proclaims in most of its public statements, and particularly in
its latest May Day addresses, that it believes in revolution and believes in achieving
its purposes by force. It is still bitterly critical of the United States and it uses the
words " All its mad running dogs" that is those who co-operate with the USA in its
desire to sustain the liberal democracies.
In those circumstances, what policies have we adopted? We have decided
that our long-term objective will be, I now use the phrase that was coined in the
documents that I mentioned and was used before by my colleague, Mr. Bury, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs or if it wasn't by him, by the Acting Minister on his
behalf. The words used set out our predetermined goal. That we want normal
bilateral relations with the People's Republic of China.
We want those relationships, but we have decided to proceed cautiously.
Because as I have said, we must always be adding up the sums to see that the major
advantages are with this country.
We decided to take the first step towards a diplomatic detente and took
the initiative to open up discussions with them. I used the phrase one day this
week I think on Tuesday that we want a dialogue between the two countries. 0 0 / 8 
Initially we hope that we will be able to move in certain areas I will mention
latdr. Before I mention these areas, I want to dispel certain doubts that have arisen
about our attitude to Mainland China. I think there is so much misunderstanding
about what our present relationships are that I ought to stop the rumours and let you
know the facts so that you will be able to judge what the prospects for the future are.
Our present attitude to Mainland China is pretty clear. There is no
restriction whatsoever on the movement of Australian people to Mainland China,
providing only that they can : get a visa from the Chinese and providing that security
considerations are not involved. In other words, we don't stop our people going
there and we ' don't stop their people coming here. We will give them visas on the
conditions, or subject to the conditions that I have just mentioned.
Secondly, but for several restrictive lists on trade, we do permit trade with
Mainland China. Now at the Canton Fair, we have many, many Australians trying
to fill their order books. And indeed they have met with success in many cases.
Thirdly, our cultural activities. Not so long ago there was an approval for
the Peking Opera Company to come here. Because the only theatre that was available
for them had closed down, they were not able to come.
I want now to illustrate the way misunderstandings are occurring. I want
to mention the facts relating to wheat sales to Mainland China. They are these.
Continental China has had nine good production seasons for wheat. They
don't need to import any other than special varieties to mix with the wheat that they
produce themselves. They have had very good rice production which they normally
sell at a premium in order to buy the blending types of wheat that they need. Rice
is now in abundance. Consequently we did not expect that we would be making large
sales of wheat to them this year. As they have built up the stocks they have, they
need only the blending varieties.
Our position is therefore clear. Until a few weeks ago, our contracts for
the sale of wheat in other countries were far greater than they have * ever been.
We now think that we will have a carryover, which won't be a large one the present
carryover from last year's crop is about 365 million bushels much less than
200 million bushels. I believe it will be substantially lower than that.
In the cour se of the last two or three days, we have negotiated a sale to
the United Arab Republic of something like one million tons.
It is argued that Peking China is playing politics with the purchase of
Australian wheat. Not only do the facts deny it, but it wouldn't be a sensible sort
of politics. Our sales are pretty good and our stocks will be pretty low and of the
kind that we will need in the intermediate period between seasons.
Now we are moving towards a dialogue. Shortly we will be taking the
preliminary steps. We have already taken other action. see / 9 
% The present restrictive lists are now being analysed and liberalised. The
only. restrictions that we will impose on trade and this will be of interest to every
one of you businessmen are those invdving defence interests or where there are
strategic Implications of a kind which our Department of Defence, Foreign Affairs
Department and my own Ministry feel require restrictions.
I want to remind you that China is a great and powerful country and is
starting to indicate that she is interested in becoming a great world power. We feel
that simply because it is Communist there is insufficient reason to prevent us
improving our relations with her. Secondly, we have to recognise that China wants
to exercise a world role and to be able to play a part in the future trend of world
affairs. There is growing evidence that since the Cultural Revolution and the change
in the power structure of the Peking hierarchy, particularly under the Premiership"
of Chou En-Lal that they are searching for the opportunities to do so. It would be
extremely foolish for any of us to think that this trend could be resisted because Mainland
China is strong and determined. This is one of the reasons why we feel that a dialogue
may be important to us.
We want to probe their feelings. What they are thinking about the
Western democracies. In our turn to be able to take some action to influence the
decisions that they might make.
We are now moving along a different track. I have mentioned trade to you.
I now want to mention various other kinds of activities. The issue of visas, the
protection of Australian personnel who are in Mainland China, cultural and other
types of activities, particularly the arts.
Shortly after I announced on Tuesday that we were attempting a dialogue
the irrepressible Dr. Coombs was on the phone and asked me would I give him
authority to negotiate with the Chinese to bring out ballet companies, opera companies
and any other type of artistic team that he felt might be entertaining to the
Australian people.
We will be moving in these and other directions to try and see whether
there is a basis on which we can have a rapport.
And I want to say this clearly. We will be moving cautiously. Every single
step will be weighed up before we take it. Every single step will be included in
the balance sheet that I mentioned.
We don't want to be pushed into taking action because somebody else has
done so. I warn you that recognition or admission will not make a great deal of
difference to Mainland China. Many countries have realised that even though they
have recognised Mailn. China it hasn't meant that they . havj incioascd their trade.
At least in the casc of two ccuntrics there has been a reduction, Th -re 1-wo riot been
an increase in trade. The Chinese Govornmient hais lot th
aren't goad enough and-that political influcncco are not sufficient tc win them the kind
of contracts that they could not win in competitive company. 1 
This is the attitude we'll take. We want to move. But we will only move
if movement will be for the benefit of the Australian people and we do not prejudice
our negotiating strength.
That brings metherefore to the conclusion. In all our international
relationships, we in the Foreign Off ice and in the Government and the Prime
Minister's Department particularly, will be seeking to protect and enhance your
interests as Australians. Not only our vital defence and security interests, but
also our trade and our cultural relations.
One of our objectives will be to provide aid and to participate in the
economic development of the less developed countries of South East Asia.
Everywhere I have gone over the period of the last two years as Foreign
and External Minister, I have been delighted but' surprised to find that there was
so much goodwill for us. In some international conferences, when a stalemate has
occurred, some countries have come to us to find a solutioiu
We are, I believe, a phenomenal country. Our aid programmes the money
that comes out of the pockets ofc the Australian taixpayer are substantial. We are
making a large contribution.
I come back to where I started. Our objective must first of all be to
protect and enhance our vital interests. And I use the phrase again we want political
stability in the Pacific Basin. We also want economic development because we
know it is a two-way traffic. As other countries develop so too will we. Above all
we want peace and we want to make our contribution-to the hopes and aspirations
of these people. If in time we achieve peace in Indo-China, Laos, Cambodia and
South Viet-MNm the kiddies there will be able to look forward to a future just as
bright as ours. 



AUSTRALIA-TAPA N RELATIONS
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUJTE OF IN~ TERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 12_ JUNE 1971
&amp; ech by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you for asking me to come here today to speak to you
about the relationships between the Japanese and ourselves. As you know, I was not
the Foreign Minister for very many years, but the very first submission that I put
to Cabinet of any consequence was in April of last year when I presented a paper
relating to our future relationships with Japan. At the same time, I received the
approval of the Cabinet to institute what I regard as the highest level Inter-Departmental
Committee, headed by the Permanent Heads of the most important Departments of
State, to keep under continuous review the relationships between Japan and Australia
and, once they felt they had come to concrete recommendations, to be able to present
papers to us. I also want to mention the fact that subsequently the Government
also considered I think in February our relationships with the People's Republic
of China. Subsequently we were able to consider papers relating to a new relationship
with the Soviet and particularly what we could do with the Soviet Far East.
Mr. President, I hope my Department has had the good sense
to send to you a copy of my speech to a meeting of citizens in Sydney a few weeks ago.
Because I am sure it broke niew ground and I am as sure as I can be of this, that it had
to be done because we live in this changing area changing so quickly that we can't
be left behind. And I can more or less paraphrase what you have said. We must be
playing our part to see if we can make our contribution to peace and to the development
of the whole of this area. So I put it to you then that we have been doing a tremendous
amount of thinking. And with the recent reorganisation of the Department of Foreign
Affairs and its elevation in stature, and I believe in importance, and I hope that will
continue then I think you will find that continually we will be trying to make our
contribution wherever we can towards the goals that I mentioned to you a few moments
ago. The most important of them at least as far ahead as you and I
can see, will I think, be the two countries you have mentioned, Japan materially, of
course, and I hope politically as well but Indonesia too for many, many reasons
because it is a very vast country and one to which we will pay increasing importance
in the years to come. I mentioned to you the breakthrough we made in the middle of
last year when we decided on a three-year programme of aid something we had never
done before to Indonesia. And we extended our appropriations in a way that we had not
done in the. case of any other country. a 9 / 2 
So I think you can take it, therefore, Mr. President, that we
reflect in the Government t he views that you put a few moments ago of the enormous
importance of Japan, the enormous importance of Indonesia and the importance of
Papua/ New Guinea to us as well.
So, consequently, I now come to this responsibility that has
been given to me today. That is to officially open this Conference, which as I have
said, fundamentally relates to the bilateral relationships between Australia and
Japan in the 1970' s. I think you know, and I can repeat this, that it is of fundamental
importance, not onl y to us, but also to the Pacific theatre and particularly to South-
East Asia, but not exclusively because it is not exclusively a regional subject.
We live in a world of interdependence which involves Europe, America and the African
continent, as well as the great nations of the Asian mainland.
Events in the region have a bearing on changes in the power
structure politics and economics in most other places. But today I want to concern
myself mainly with Japan and Australia, and again I emphasise to you that in the speech
I made at the Citizens' Dinner a few weeks ago, I emphasised that in the immediate
future and as far ahead as we could see, Japan was the country that in material, and
I believe in political terms, can offer the greatest advantages of co-operation between
US. And I believe, too, that when the history of this decade is written,
the changes now occurring in Australian-Japanese relations, and what I hope will
happen in the next 10 years or so, will prove to be one of the most significant developments
of its kind. The War is far behind us, its tragedies and sufferings of the
past, and the impeiatives of the future, are, in fact, here. So we have to look ahead.
We must plan ahead, and we must aspire to a new world of peace and prosperity in Asia
and the Pacific. And I believe that Australia and Japan together in several ways, have
much to do so that they can make a contribution to that goal.
Today we are at the threshold of a new era in our relationships
with Japan. This isn't something that is going to be spelt out with a crop of new
decisions or dramatic changes in the relationships that exist already. But it is
something that will be reflected by an even closer relationship than the one we already
have, and one which will have superimposed on the developing economic connection,
some political overtones stronger than we have heard up until now.
Sometime ago, my Government felt it was time to do a
stocktaking, because the progress of our relationships, along a well-ordered path, had
beentaken up to a point vmh ere this could usefully be done. I n-e ntioned to you a few
moments ago, the formation of the Inter -Departmental Committee and the Report that
is now before the Government for detailed consideration.
There has also been a recent decision to form a consultative
committee on trade, and related matters at Ministerial level between Australia and
Japan. The Deputy Prime Minister, my colleague Mr. Anthony, was able to confirm
this during his recent visit to Tokyo. / 3 
Now I have for long taken the view that the co-ordination of
diplomatic relationships between any two countries ought to be the responsibility of
the-Department of Foreign Affairs. And I can assure you that in trying to work out
sensible and better relationships between the two countries, that with us now, our
Foreign Affairs Department will be taking the leading administrative role, advised where
necessary by the other Departments, in economics and finance by the Treasury, and
trade* by the Department of Trade, education and science by that Ministry, and
correspondingly, too, with the other Departments, such as National Development, or
in national development schemes, by Mr. Swartz, the Minister for National
Development himself. Now these developments alone at Government level will do a lot
to enlarge the framework within which we can plan ahead. I think, ladies and gentlemen,
when we look directly at the bilateral relationships between two countries such as
those between Australia and Japan we must be clear about our motives and our
objectives. It is also wise that we be completely frank about them.
And if I can say this to you about frankness, in the recent
discussions I had with the Japanese Prime Minister and the various many discussion * s I
had with Mr. Aichi, I have found them completely frank, willing to discuss the most
difficult of problems and anxious, I believe, to co-operate with us for the political and
economic betterment of the South-East Asian region.
Now the first motive on our part, naturally enough, as you well
said in your quotation from U Thant and if I can change it a little bit is national
self -interest. This goes for any country anywhere in the world, and I can assure you, it
goes for us just as much as it goes for anyone else.
Our relationship with Japan should continue to assist the broadlybased
development of the Australian economy and help us to maintain an independent
foreign policy. It should also seek to develop our relationships with other friends and
allies, regional neighbours and trading partners. I like to hope that every Australian
businessman, with an eye on exports, will regard himself as some kind of a latter-day
Marco Polo and go out in search of new markets. He will have the Government
supporting him when he does.
And the second objective is that our co-operation with Japan
should be directed more and more to meeting the needs and aspirations of the
developing countries in our region. We have a wonderland of new experience before
us where a " green revolution" is coming to the paddy fields and plantations of
Asian countries. The miracles of modern science and technology are beginning to
touch the lives of millions who, for the first time, can see the prospect of a better
life being added to the old, sustaining forces of their ancient cultures.
We want them, our neighbours to the North, to feel part of a
broader region, secure within it and being able to share in its progress.
And I believe, too, that we have a remarkable opportunity not
only to help, but to be able to draw them together, because in my experience as a
Foreign Minister, whilst I wasn't there for long, at least I visited South-East Asia and
Japan on several occasions. I think you can take it that they trust us. They know we
have no predatory intentions arid I think they recognise, too, that our aid is given
freely and generously. We don't put any bans or ties on it. We don't ask for repayment * ao/ 4 
and what we give we give because we feel we are making a contribution to their development
and at the same time, in a reciprocal way, adding to our own.
And the third objective is that we will be looking to the establishment
of a stable relationship with Japan and among the other three major powers in the
Asian-Pacific area the United States, the USSR and the People's Republic of China.
These considerations will, of course, have to be matched to the
continuing satisfaction of Japan's legitimate economic aspirations.
So, ladies and gentlemen, there you have our motives and our
objectives. They are, I believe, free of enmities, untouched by racism or compromised
by different ideologies. It is time for us in our thinking to move out from the shadow
of the great nuclear deterrents and the " curtains" and " walls" of the past into a more
positive world of progress. And I know in trying to achieve the kind of change we in
the government want to achieve that with you, Mr. President, and with everyone here
today, we will find the most willing companions and accomplices.
Now as to achieving our objectives in our relationships with Japan
we have a solid base to build on. The Trade Agreement or the Agreement on
Commerce, as it is called, of 1957, was a foundation stone of the first importance.
The beginnings were small, but the growith has been rapid.
Japan is now our largest trading partner and Australia is Japan's
second largest trading partner after the United States.
The political relationship has developed more slowly but it is
becoming significant both on a bilateral and on a regional basis. These links have
been supported by business, cultural and scientific exchanges and the encouragement
of tourism between the two countries.
The relationships are plain for everyone to see. I refer to
them because this is our starting point for the developments of this decade.
We also have to remember that there are great differences in
national power, differences in history and social traditions and differences in the
decision-making processes both in Australia and in Japan. To my Japanese friends here,
I can assure them that by now, I have just about learnt how difficult it is for a person
whose mind is cast in a Western mould to be able sometimes to understand quite how
slowly the Japanese work and how frequently a smile doesn't mean " yes" but all too
frequently means " no". Now the remarkable post-war economic growth in Japan has taken
her into the front rank of the industrialised nations. Her gross national product is now
third in the world after the United States and the Soviet Union, and she is emerging
as a major Asian/ Pacific and world power.
You may ask what will this economic strength do to us?
It has already done much, and we expect those benefits to increase
in the future. It is natural that we should because we have the commodities Japan
needs, mostly right in quality and price, and available on a relatively short haul,
while Japan can supply the exports we want and cannot yet make ourselves. 
In short, our great natural resources provide Japan with the raw
and processed materials she does not possess and we can get from her the products of
her highly advanced technologies those products we cannot yet provide economically
or in significant quantity to meet the demands of our industrialised society.
As you all know, vwe are twelve and a half million people,, and
the Japanese are over 100 million people. If we look to our relationship as a kind of
partnership, is it lop-sided? I don't believe it is.
Each of us has strengths to share which are not determined
by numbers. I think the relationship can be divided up into three phases.
The first followed the end of the war when Japan became a
substantial buyer of our primary products, mostly wool.
Then came the second phase when we found a fortune-in
minerals. This gave us the boom years of the sixties. Japan took our coal, our iron
ore, our bauxite, and our maganese in addition to our wool, our sugar and our be.-A
Today Japan takes 25 per cent of our total exports over four
times what she did twenty years ago and of this, minerals and metals takes up
54 per cent. Now we are into the third phase. This is where we move on
into a broader economic relationship. This third phase, as we see it, involves a
continuing, and I hope, an enlarging market in Japan for our rural products and our
minerals, the introduction of more joint enterprises, particularly in the minerals
and metals industries, and finally, new outlets for our manufactures.
To date, Japanese investment in Australia has been small. For
the last financial year, it accounted for only about two per cent of total direct
investment in Australia. Now, while I expect this to increase, and no doubt it will be
concentrated in the natural resources area, at this stage it seems unlikely tcb; very
large in relation to the total levels of private overseas investment in this cou:. r.
Now so far, most investment from Japan has conformed with
our preference for foreign investment in the form of equity participation with
Australian enterprises. There is, I am glad to say, plenty of movement at both
Government and business level in this third and latest phase.
There have been annual consultations at official level between
our respective Foreign Ministries since 1967 as well as ad hoc co'nsultations bc,
other Ministries. Frequent consultations at Ministerial level will now take a mn~ are
regular character with the formation of the Consultative Committee to which I have
already referred. At industry level, a Business Co-operation Committee bas
existed for the past nine years and meets regularly. This year tv, inpo~ ec onomic
missions have come to Australia. One was financial and the other was concrnned
with natural resources. */ 6 
I am confident, therefore, that the right climate now exists for
us to go ahead even better than we have done in the past and, I think to do so for the
benefit of both countries. Ladies and gentlemen, I believe that the consolidation and
development of our bilateral relationship with Japan advantageous to us both in national
terms is also of considerable importance to the economic and political stability of the
region and I believe that together, and with others in the region, we can take a fuller
part in regional affairs in the future.
Because of her economic strength, Japan has a formidable contributic
to make to economic aid in the region.
The Japanese Government last year announced a 1975 target for
foreign aid, both official and private, equal to one per cent of GNP. If this is achieved,
then something like 500 million will be given in that year just about three times
what was given in 1969. Already there has been a 40 per cent rise in Japan's foreign
aid for 19703 over the preceding year.
Now, two-thirds of Japan's total foreign aid contribution goes to
Asia. This makes Japan a force of tremendous importance to the economic fortunes of
the developing countries in the region.
Australia's role in this, compared with Japan's, must necessarily
be small, but it mus t be remembered that we rank very high among the aid-givers in
relative terms and we, too, are committing about one per cent of our gross national
production to developing countries. mainly in Asia and the Pacific and including the
Territory of Papua/ New Guinea.
Might I interpolate this comment to you on, DAC aid, particularly
the kind of aid Australia gives to the Asian countries, because last . year at the DAC
meeting in Tokyo, when we were starting to talk about the figures and I have never
had them analysed as well as I had them analysed by our own people in Japan we found
that when it came to official aid, that is, aid of a kind that is giver, by the Government
rather than private enterprise assistance, that without any doubt at all, we led the
way. Or, if I could put it a little differently, with the exception of France, in connection
with its colonial territories, and Portugal, there is no other country that makes the
same kind of contribution as we do to official aid. And the value of that official aid,
being on a non-repayable basis, and at the request of the country concerned, has the
highest possible quality. So we spectlcally asked that in future whenever the DAC was
considering aid programmes, it had first of all to divide the aid into official and private
aid so that we can come to our own conclusions about the contribution made by the
Australian taxpayer. And secondly, when we were looking at the components of the
official aid, we had to make up our minds as to its quality and, consequently, the debt
repayment problems, and the problems of the recipient countries, whether they
willingly participated, or the ones that were initiated, the kind of aid that they wished
to receive. You will be familiar with the multilateral organisations to which
we belong, and where we sit in Japan's company. / 7 
I refer to ECAFE, ASPAC, the Asian Development Bank, the
Colombo Plan, and the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD to which I
have just referred. WIe also share common membership of aid co-ordinating groups
assisting individual countries in the Asian region.
There are, inevitably, political associations which develop as the
result of increasing regional involvement, and I believe Japan will assume a larger role
in the future. It is true, too, that while we may separate trade and politics,
economic progress cannot take place in a political vacuum.
I think the presence of Japan at last year's conference on
Cambodia at Djakarta was one of the first signs of her growing political influence and
its deployment to the region's advantage.
I see no reason why Australia cannot work usefully with Japan at
the political level as well as the economic level.
And if I can come back: to Djakarta, I do comment very favourably
about the role taken by Mr. Aichi as the representatives of the Japanese Government
and people. And I do comment very favourably about the arduous efforts they made with
the Malaysians and the Indonesians to try and induce other countries to try and restore
the ideals of the Geneva Conference in 1954 and to try and get the various elements to
the conference table to see if we could establish peace in Cambodia.
I now come to the question of Japan's military strength, its defence
capability and how I see it now and in the future.
It was recently announced that Japan's Defence Agency would be
doubling its defence expenditure during the period 1972-1976. The amount to be spent
will still be only about 1 per cent of her gross national product, which is far less than
the percentages committed by other major powers. COurs, by the way is 3. 69 per cent
of GNP. Now these are the facts. For obvious reasons, we dislike any
increases in defence expenditure. Japan has given repeated assurances that she
does not intend to pursue a military role beyond that of self-defence. We fully understand
this attitude. We note that the programme has been public knowledge for a year
and that all expenditure has to be approved by the Diet. In other words, it has a full
exposure to the public, and is dealt with by democratic processes familiar to us.
The programme provides for only small increases in defence
manpower and for moderate increases in equipment. It will aim particularly at
strengthening the air and sea self-defence forces. 
Japan's defence role was set out in a White Paper last year. This
showed that while Japan would maintain its security links with the United States, it would
assume, because of its economic strength, greater responsibilities for conventional
defence. It would not possess offensive or nuclear weapons.
And I remind you, too, that Japan is perilously close to Mainland
China. Mainland China is in possession of thermonuclear weapons. Japan has none. I
want you to remember that Japan is in a very vulnerable position and that a few thermonuclear
weapons could, of course, do permnanent harm if they were ever used against
that country. And, of course, we have to remember that Japan would also have
had to-provide for enlarged defence responsibilities when the United States handed over
Okinawa. To sum up, ladies and gentlemen, I believe Australia and Japan
can enlarge the base of their friendship and co-operation to the benefit of both
countries. I believe that together we can do a lot to help stability and
economic progress in the Asian and Pacific region. I believe that what we do together
and what we do within the region will continue tc 11-s based on mutual respect and
trust, and I believe that we can know each other better.
So we want to help, and we want to help with the co-operation of
all Australian people. So for that reason I want to thank you for asking me here tod-ay,
and I want to thank you, too, for coming. Arid having said that, may I now officially
declare this conference open. 



EIMBA RGOED UNTIL 3. 30 PM lON SUNDAY 13 JUNE
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
TPI-M QUT! 7E'SL'' D LIBE ,? ALCONEV2
SPEECHI NOTES ; POR TEE~ P'. RL? 3 ViINISTEa
SUINTDAY, 13 JUNET, 1971. 
GENTLEMEN: THIS IS MY SECOND VISIT TO QUEENSLAND SINCE
I BECAME PRIME MINISTER. I AM GLAD TO BE HERE FOR
TWO PARTICULAR REASONS.
. ONE IS THAT I KNOW HOW IMPORTANT IT IS
FOR THE LEADER OF THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENTARY
LIBERALS TO KEEP IN TOUCH WITH THE ORGANISATION AND
ITS MEMBERS AT STATE LEVEL AS WELL AS FEDERAL
LEVEL. THE OTHER IS THAT THE SUCCESS OF THE
LIBERALS IN QUEENSLAND WILL HAVE A SIGNIFICANT BEARING
ON THE OUTCOME OF THE NEXT FEDERAL ELECTION
LET ME SAY I KNOW WE CAN WIN, BUT I WANT US
TO WIN HANDSOMELY. TO DO THAT WE MUST BE BUSY IN
THE RIGHT WAY AND WE MUST GET BUSY RIGHT AWAY.
THERE IS NO DOUBT WE WILL BE JUDGED BY OUR PERFORMANCE
AND OUR PERFORMANCE WILL DEPEND ON HOW STRONGLY
WE PULL TOGETHER WITH OUR COALITION COLLEAGUES. / 2 
SPEAKING FOR THL PARLIAMENTARY PARTY, WANT
TO HAVE A GOOD AND INTIMATE WORKING RELATIONSHIP WITHTHE
PARTY ORGANISATION. BOB SOUTH-EY STRESSED THE
IMPORTANCE OF THIS AT OUR FEDERAL COUNCIL [ N CANBERRA
THE OTHER DAY.
I AGREE WITH-WHAT HE SAID. I DO NOT LOOK AT THE
PARLIAMENTARY PARTY AS A LAW UNTO ITSELF. IT IS BOUND
BY THE PRINCIPLES AND PLATFORM OF THE LIBE:( AL PARTY.
THESE ARE BROAD ENOUGH AND FLEXIBLE ENOUGH FOR THE
PARLIAMENTARY PARTY TO HAVE EL3DW ROOM IN HOW IT APP3LIES
THEM TO SPECIFIC ISSUES.
THE ORGANISATION WOULD NEVER WANT US TO BE
" DUMB, DRIVEN CATTLE", LIKE OUR OPPOSITION, HAVING
LITTLE LATITUDE AND VIRTUALLY NO FREEDOM FROM THE
DICTATORSHIP OF A FEDERAL CONFERENCE. BY THE SAME TOKEN,
1, FOR ONE, DO NOT EXPECT THE PARLIAME~ NTARY PARTY TO
JUST RUN WILD ON THE RANGE.
THEN IT REMAINS ESSENTIALLY A LIBERAL CONCEPT
THAT THE PARLIAMENTARY PARTY HAS SUBSTANTIAL DISCRETION
IN WHAT IT DOES. BUT IT HAS TO USE THAT DISCRETION WISELY,
AND IT ALSO HAS TO SUCCEED.
LIKE BOB SOUTHEY, I BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE TO
LISTEN TO WHAT THE MEMBERS, THE BRANCHES AND THE
COUNCILS HAVE TO SAY. THIS IS ONE AREA WHERE WE MUST
LOOK FOR NEW IDEAS. THIS IS WH-ERE SO MANY OF OUR REFORMS 
BEGIN. TIS [ S WHERE THE ROOTS OF OUR SUCCESS OR FAILURE
GO DOWN. TI-EN IT IS UP TO TIHE PARLIAMENTARY PARTY TO
INTERPRET PARTY POLICY IN ITS OWN WAY AND WITH A TIMING
OF ITS OWN CHOOSING WHEN IT COMES TO LEGISLATIVE ACTION.
I BELIEVJE THE PARLIAMENTARY PARTY IS IN GOOD
HEART AND IT WILL BE IN GOOD SHAPE FOR THE NEXT ELECTION.
CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES
A GOOD DEAL HAS BEEN SAID LATELY ABOUT TI-E
FEDERAL SYSTEM AND I ACKNOWLEIDGE H-ERE THE LEADING
k~ 7 ROLE THE FEDERALS COUNCIL AND THE PARTY ORGANISATION
I-AS PLAYED IN UNDERPINNING IT IN A MODERN CONTEXT.
I BELIEVE IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM.
I RESPECT AND UNDERSTAND THE POSITION AND
RIGHTS OF THE STATES. I DO NOT BELIEVE IN CENTRALISATION
OR IN A CONTRIVED FLOW OF POWER TO THE CENTRE THAT
ERODES TI-E SOVEREIGNTY OF TI-E STATES.
IN SOME MATTERS LIKE NATIONAL ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT, DEFENCE AND TRADE, THE COMMON WEALTHMUST
HAV'E NATIONAL POWERS, BUT THESE CAN BE H-ELD WITH-OUT
DAMAGE TO THE STATES, GIVEN CO-OPERATION AND GOODWILL
ON BOTH SIDES. 
OUR INTENTION TO ARRANGE A GROWTH TAX
WITH THE STATES WHICh WE WILL BE DISCUSSING NEXT
WEEK IS A GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE EFFORT WE ARE MAKING
TO MAKE THE FEDERAL SYSTEM WORK MORE EFFECTIVELY.
CANBERRA AND BRISBANE CAN WORK TOGETHER
EFFECTIVELY. THE QUEENSLAND AND COMMONWEALTH
GOVERNMENTS HAVE COME SOME DISTANCE IN OUR RECENT
TALKS ON ABORIGINES AND ON THE INQUIRIES WE AGREED ON
TOGETHER, INTO OIL DRILLING ON THE BARRIER REEF, THE
CROWN OF THORNS STARFISH AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
REEF AS A TOURIST DESTINATION.
I QUOTE THESE ONLY AS EXAMPLES OF THE
VALUE OF GETTING TOGETHER. THERE IS A HOST OF OTHER
MATTERS AND MANY OF TH'EM WILL BE GIVEN AN AIRING AT
THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE IN CANBERRA IN THE NEXT
FEW DAYS.
THE RECORD AND THE FUTURE
I THINK THE PROBLEMS WE ARE UP AGAINST AS A
GOVERNMENT ARE THESE:
THE CONTINUING INDUSTRIAL UNREST WHICH IS
COMPOUNDING THE EFFECTS OF INFLATIONARY
PRESSURES ON THE ECONOMY. 
( II) THE NEED TO LIMIT SOME OF THE REFORMS WE
WANT TO MAKE BECAUSE WE H4AVE TO WATCH
PUBLIC SPENDING AS AN ANTI-INFLATONARY
MEASURE.
( 111) THERE IS A NEED FOR A POSITIVE DISPLAY OF VITALITY
IN THE ORGANISATION. THE AUSTRALIAN LIKES
TO THINK ABOUT HAVING A CHANGE EVEN WHEN
THINGS ARE GOING RIGHT FOR HIM.
NONE OF THESE PROBLEMS IS BEYOND US. I IKNOW
WE CAN H-ANDLE THEM TO TH4E SATISFACTION OF THE
ELECTORATE, BUT I DON'T WANT TO BE COMPLACENT ABOUT
IT, AND THERE ARE SOME ASPECTS OF THESE PROBLEMS
BEYOND THE AUTHORITY OF GOVERNMENTS.
WE MUST TREAT EACH PROBLEM AS URGENT
AND EACH DAY AS A DAY TO GET SOMETHING MORE DONE.
THE RECORD OF THE LAST THREE MONTHS IS GOOD.
SOME OF MY STAFF WENT THROUGH TH-E LIST
OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGISLATIVE CHANGES TH-E OTHER
DAY AND CAME UP WITH THIRTY OR MORE WORTHWHILE
ACHIEVEMENTS OF A NATIONAL CHARACTER WE HAVE DONE
AS A GOVERNMENT SINCE TE-MIDDLE OF MARCH. 
WON'T GO THROUGH TI-EM ALL HEAVEN FORBID
BUT LET ME MENTION TIHREE OR FOUR OF THEM.
FIRST, OUR MEETING WITH THE STATES WHEN WE
AGREED ON SOME EMERGENCY FINANCE TO HELP THEIR
DEFICITS WAS A GOOD BEGINNING. THE ATMOSPHERE WAS
CORDIAL, THOUGH-I RETAIN A HEALTHY RESPECT FOR THE
TOUGHNESS AND SKILLS OF THE PREMIERS.
I HOPE OUR FORTHCOMING MEETING WILL TAKE
PLACE IN THE SAME SPIRIT AND 1 SEE NO REASON WHY IT
SHOULD NOT. THEN THERE WAS SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO
PENSIONERS TO MEET THE DRAIN ON THEIR RESOURCES
FOLLOWING THE UNEXPECTED RISE IN THE NATIONAL WAGE.
THERE WAS THE DEPARTMENTAL REORGANISATION
IN CANBERRA TO SPEED-UP THE POLICY-MAKING FUNCTIONS
OF GOVERNMENT AND THE CREATION OF A NEW MINISTRY
TO GIVE SPECIAL ATTIN TION TO THE ENVIRONMENT,
ABORIGINES AND THE ARTS.
AND THEN, IN FOREIGN POLLCY, WE BROUGHT UP
INTO OUR FOCUS OUR FUTURE RELATIONS WITH RUSSIA, WITH
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND JAPAN. 
WE ALSO JOINED TUE ORGANISAT ION FOR ECONOMIC
CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT.
OTHER ACTIVITIES COVERED NEW LEGISLATION
ON LAW AND ORDER, A REVIEW OF THE ARBITRATION SYSTEM,
SPECIAL AID FOR OUR HARD-PRESSED RURAL INDUSTRIES AND
PLANS FOR A NEW PROGRAMME FOR PAPUA-NEW GUINEA TO
GIVE IT AN OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE ITS OWN CHOICE OF A DATE
FOR INTERNAL SELF-GOVERNMENT.
I WOULD LIKE TO ADD HERE A FEW WORDS ON THE
AID WE ARE GIVING TO REFUGEES FROM EAST PAKISTAN IN INDIA.
TI-IS IS THE SCENE OF A GREAT HUMAN TRAGEDY.
OUR RESPONSE AS A GOVERNMENT WAS IMMEDIATE.
THE FIRST COMMITMENT OF HALF A MILLION DOLLARS IN
AID WAS CONSIDERED EVEN BEFORE THE ENORMITY OF THE
DISASTER WAS FULLY KNOWN OR ANY APPEALS HAD BE EN MADE.
WE DOUBLED THAT COMMITMENT AS THE DISASTER
GREW IN SIZE. THE CRITICISM WE HAVE HAD IS UNFAIR AND
BASED ON LI. TTLE KNOWLEDGE. 
MY GOVERNMENT CONSIIDERED THAT TO BE EFFECTIVE
WE HAD TO SEND THE AID THAT INDIA WANTED AND SEND
IT WHERE THAT COUNTRY WANTED IT SENT. IT WOULD HAVE
BEEN ABSURD TO HAVE SENT SUPPLIES OF VACCINE, FOOD AND
SHELTER MATERIALS OFF INTO THE BLUE. THAT WOULD HAVE
ONLY ADDED TO THE PROBLEMS OF THE LOCAL PEOPLE.
IT IS DIFFICULT TO WAIT EVEN A SHORT WHILE
WHEN EMOTIONS AND SYMPATHIES ARE RUNNING HIGH FOR
SOMETHING TO BE DONE AT ONCE, BUT IN TERMS OF REAL
HELP WE DID WHAT WAS RIGHT.
I DON'T THINK ANY AUSTRALIANS NEED FEEL ASHAMED
OF THEIR GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE CRY FOR HELP
DFROM OUR FELLOW MEMBER OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
BEFORE I CLOSE ONE COMMENT ABOUT THE
FUTURE. IF WE CAN CONTAIN INFLATION AND THIS IS A
REALLY SERIOUS PROBLEM THEN I AM CONFIDENT WE CAN
KEEP UP A GROWTH RATE OF OVER FIVE PER CENT IN OUR
GNP EACH YEAR, AND GIVEN MORE FREEDOM FROM THE PROBLEMS
I HAVE ALREADY MENTIONED WE COULD EVEN DO MUCH BETTER
THAN THAT. 
BUT LET US NOT TIINK ONLY IN TERMS OF
STATISTICS. TH-EY ARE DULL AND INHUMAN THINGS. LET UIS
THINK RATHER IN TERMS OF THE QUALITY OF LIFE WE WANT
FOR OURSELVES AND OUR CH-ILDREN.
EACH ONE OF US HAS HIS OWN DEFINITION. IT
IS BOUND UP WITH-HOW WE LIVE, WHERE WE LIVE, WHAT WE
DO AND WHAT IS THE MEASURE OF OUR SATISFACTION AND
HAPPINESS AS INDIVIDUALS IN A DEMO0CRATIC SOCIETY.
GOVERNMENTS CAN THINK OF TI-E PROBLEMS OF
LIVING IN TERMS OF URBAN PLANNING, OF PROTECTING THE
ENVIRONMENT, CONTR~ OLL~ ING POLLUTION, HELPINGTHl-OSE IN
NEED, ENCOURAGING THE ARTS.
BUT IN THE FINAL RESULT IT IS THE WAY THE INDIVIDUAL
RESPONDL'S, THE PART HE PLAYS IN ALL I HIS TH-AT MAKES UP TH-l
QUALITY OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE.
AND I THINK( THE FREEDOMS THAT GO WITH LIBERALISM
AND WITH A FREE ENTERPRISE SOCIETY ARE THE ONES THAT
ALLOW US TO MAK( E OUR QUALITY OF LIFE GOOD, REAL AND LASTING.
I AM SURE OF THIS THE FUTURE OF QUEENSLAND, NO
LESS THAN THE FUTURE OF AUSTRALIA, LIES IN THE HANDS OF THE
LIBERAL-MINDED, CONTROL-FREE PEOPLE IN OUR SOCIETY.
TH-AT IS HOW IT HAS BEEN FOR TWENTY-ONE YEARS OR
MORE. LET US KEEP~ IT THAT WAY. I TH-ANK( YOU. 



IZ
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT' 1 ASSOCIATION
ANNUAL MEETING -SYDNEY 21 JUNE 1971
Speech Notes for the Prime Minister
Mr. President, Gentlemen,
I have, Sir, glanced through your annual report with interest ar~ d I recognise
the frank way you have put forward the writer's views.
There are some statements with which L don't altog~ ether agree. There
are others I prefer not to comment on because it is getting too close to Budget time.
And some I am in complete agreement'
I must first confess as a basic assumption that the Government recogn~ ises the
importance of manufacturing industries to the* Australian economy or to put it
another way it is vital to have goods" made in Australia", by Australians, for the
Australian people and for export.
I wo uld like to see private enterprise pushing ever so much more strenuously
its " made in Australia" campaigns.
Your industries are a key segment and a large one in our industrialised
society because of the employment they create,
the domestic and export needs they satisfy and
the growth elements they provide.
Simply because of your remark able diversity you don't have a single image
like our rural industries or a glamorous one like minerals. Yet your diversity is
your strength and it brings in a tremendous range of technical skills and industrial
" know-how". I urge you to give away too much introspecion and not to accept the notion
that you are some kind of a cinderella in our industrialised society. The Government
doesn't think so and is giving close attention to the special interests which are
mentioned in your Report. And I know too, from nersonal discussions, that many of
you don't think this way. On the contrary, you are optimists and rightly proud of your
own industries and your performances.
It is true that, despite our current problems inflation, industrial strife
and the rural crisis our national prosperity has -increased in the past year. And it
might have been greater had there been more voluntary restraints by all parties to the
labour contract. A lot will depend on how industry and organised labour respond to the
call for price and wage restraint from now on and what contribution they make to
industrial stability.
The Government's Aims
I not Mr. President, that A. I. D. A. thinks the country might have done 
better in the past year if our national aims had been more clearly defined and more
directly pursued. It is a statement that is easy to make but which I find difficult to sustain. The
Government's aims are clear enough. Let me summarise them in the briefest way I
can. We believe in our national security and that we should take a
responsible place in our geographical region and in world affairs.
We want growth and progress, with a balanced economy. In a
diversified and industrialised society.
We stand for progressive social welfare policies, an educated
people and the right of the individual to the basic freedoms and
a good life.
We stand for minimum interference by Government in the free
workings of private enterprise.
I believe we are pursuing these objectives with vigour. But Governments
must not over-order the affairs of it's citizens and industries.
May I sound a note of caution about too much Government direction and
too much dependence on Government by industry. This would send us all high-stepping
down the socialist road. Believe me, that road does run downhill..
At a time like this, when everybody has to accept some restraints and perhaps
modify some expansion plans it is tempting to agree on the need for sacrifice and then
expect the other fellow to do all the sac riificing.
, The Commonwealth Government accepts its fundamental responsibilities.
The first of these is to make the Federal system work effectively in the interests of
all Australians. It has to give leadership. It also has to accept primary responsibilities
in matters like defence, trade and national economic management.
But it cannot be exclusive in the discharge of those responsibilities. It must
and I believe it does recognise the cardinal importance of co-operation with the
States, and co-operation with business and industry in all its forms.
I have not long come from the Premiers' Conference in Canberra where we
settled on a growth tax. We offered the States pay-roll tax which they accepted, and
made other financial arrangements generally acceptable to them.
Nothing is perfect in an imperfect world, populated, as it is, by human
beings instead of supermen. But we have, I believe, broken with an unhappy spat in
Commonwealth-State financial matters by agreeing on this growth tax which will
give the States more revenue-raising rights directly geared to growth.
I am the first to acknowledge that a final solution to Commonwealth-State
financial relationships may perhaps lie in a review of the Constitution. But let us take
one step at a time through this difficult maze. ./ 3 
And let us remember that many of those who say " change the Constitution"
don't say what changes they want or suggest how the voting public can be persuaded
from their traditional habit of voting " no" when it comes to issues of this kind.
What I am doing is to underline the fact that Constitutional review is a
difficult and lengthy business and wouldn't help us with our immediate problems.
As I have said before I think the long-term outlook for Australia is still
healthy and soundly-based but the current problem of inflation is still pressing
heavily upon us.
I made this clear I think, at the Premiers' Conference last week and I
won't go over the ground again other than to say the need for restraints in both the
public and private sectors and particularly in the public sector continues to be
great. Tariffs The subject I want to talk most about today, is however tariff policy.
Mr. President, your report refers to tariffs and to the statement recently
made in Parliament by my colleague, Mr. Anthony. There are three points on which
I want to comment. They are
Your request for more information about protection.
Your request for a more positive approach in the conduct of
the tariff review.
Your request for a clearer expression of the Government's tariff policy.
I agreed that there is a need for much more -information in some Tariff
Board reports about the effect on individual manufacturers and industries, and
) n the economy as a whole.
I think the demands which your organisation and others in the communityare
making for more information about protection is quite justifiable. That the
demands are now being made is evidence, I think, of a growing awareness in the
nousiness community of the many direct and indirect ef. Lfects of protection.
More and more businessmen are properly asking that decisions by the
Government to change levels of protection should not be made without more knowledge
of their likely effects.
Both the Government and the Tariff Board appreciate the need for more
information about protection. Mr. Anthony took Up this point in his recent statement
on tariff policy, in Parliament. " The Government" he said, " needs as clear advice
as the Tariff Board can give in its reports to enable the Government to reach
judgements on the likely consequences of implementing the Board's recommendations".
The Tariff Board also has said that more information about protection
is essential if it is to do a proper job. I am informed by the Chairman, Mr. Rattigan,
that the Board has already taken steps to get this information. For example 
It is about to un~ dertake demand, supply and inter-industry studies
to assist in estimating, how the domestic production of particular
commodities is likely to be effected by changres in their tariffs.
It is assisting in a project being undertaken at Monash University
to study the longer term effects of protection on the economy.
Itis collecting data on the profitability and capital structure of
Australian manufacturing industries to enable it to assess trends
in the financial performance of protected industries.
It has acted to improve the data it gets on imports by increasing
the detail on individual shipments and covering more shipments.
Now facts and statistics cannot be manufactured overnight and the Board's
timetable depends to some extent on the rate at which the data becomes available from
the Statistician. However, the Board has already compiled and published a good deal of
new information about the structure of protection in Australia and it has begun to
recruit the specialised staff needed to complete the job.
I turn now to another aspect of tariff policy, Mr. Chairman. You have
expressed some anxiety about inadequate provision in the Tariff Board's review for
'~ positive action to encourage desirable new industries".
This anxiety is based, I gather, on the idea that the review will deal only
with existing industries and also on the idea that it may result in more decreases than
increases in tariffs. You are worrying unduly.
While I think that a number of very difficult practical problems would arise
if the Government attempted to review industries which did not exist in Australia,
this is not to say that protection can never be afforded products in advance . of their
local manufacture. But I also think it is right that consideration of such a question would be best
made after an intending manufacturer had studied the feasibility of manufacturing in
Australia and was able to provide useful data at the Tariff Board inquiry.
Now Sir, most of the public discussion on the tariff review has been about
what might happen to highly-protected industries. Little has been said about the
Board's declared attitude to industries needing less protection.
I think the phrase " destructive selectivity" as used in your Report doesn't
put the Government's or the Board's attitudes either accurately or fairly.
It should be noted, Mr. President, that the Tariff Board has said in a number
of its annual reports that positive encouragement should be given to manufacturing
industries requiring only low rates or protection. Every industry even the most
highly-protected contains some activities requiring only low rates of protection.
Thus if the review of a highly -pr;-; otect ed industry pro duces some duty
changes which you could regard as negative it should also produce some duty
changes which you could regard as positive. 
In fact, of course, the removal of unnecessary protection in those cases
where tariffs are higher than needed to protect local production of the goods concerned
also has quite positive and beneficial effects on the industries which use the goods as
inputs in their own production.
it makes their costs, and the prices of their own outputs, more competitive
without jeopardising the competitive position of the protected inputs producing industry.
I don't think the view will be contested that consequences of this type, which
may be expected to flow from the systematic review, would be viewed as doing anything
else than benefiting not only using industries but the economy as a whole.
I was surprised, Mr. President, at your comment that, even after
Mr. Anthony's recent statement in Parliament, investment decision makers are
' still without a clear expression of Government policy and are confused as to the
circumstances under which tariff protection might be anticipated.'
Investment decision makers must now have a clearer idea of the
Government's tariff policy than they did several years ago before the Government
had indicated its general attitude towards the Tariff Board's proposals, or before
the proposals had even been made.
As you know, the Board has said that it will probably-but not necessarily.-
recommend that activities requiring high r ; ates of protection will be discouraged, and
that those requiring low rates of protection will be encouraged.
It has, furthermore, defined what it means by high and low rates of protection.
Investment decision makers who can estimate the protection which their proposed
activities will require thus have a clearer indication -now than in the past of the
likely attitudes which the Tariff Board will adopt towards those activities.
To give you an even clearer expression of Tariff policy one that will
allow accurate predictions of the amount of protection which particular activities
could expect would involve one of two things
Either the adoption of the B oard's points off reference
as the sole criteria for making tariff changes
OR
( II) The production of an unvarying list of other factors
t o be taken into account, whose relative sig-nif icance
would be fixed for every inquiry.
1. th-ink you will agree that the first alternative is unacceptable.
And for that matter so is the second. I base my comment on what you said
in the A. I. D. A. bulletin of May last year, when you listed the " circumstances to
be reported on by the Tariff Board".
You -then said that your own list was not a total list and that the Tariff
Board should be obliged to examine any " other relevant circumstance not listed". 
6.
Succinctly put you want flexibility and so do we. To be completely
definitive or much more precise than we have been would mean being inflexible.
Mr. Pr esident, I have spoken long enough but I thought it proper to let
you know the Government's view on tariffs and to tell you what the Trriff Board
is doing to develop its expertise. I have mentioned a number of points from your
report and I hope I have removed most of your fears.
I f you hadn't taken the line you did with such positive crit icism I would
have had no case to put. But there it is I have put it and I hope what I have, said
is helpful. The Government wants the confidence of its manufacLuring industries.
It knows their value and is anxious that they should continue to prosper. This is
a time when frankness and confidence must go together and this way I believe
lies success. Thank you, Mr. President. 



YOUNG LIBERALS' RALLY
MET-L BOUR NE 12 UjLY 1971
õ Sechby the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
-Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:
I want to talk to you tonight about China the People's Republic of China.
I do so for two reasons.
First, because that country will be of tremendous significance in our
region for as far ahead as we can see and therefore it should properly engage the close
attention of Liberals. And then because I feel it is time to expose the shams and the absurdities
surrounding Mr. Whitlam's excursion into " instant coffee" diplomacy. You will have
been reading thousands of words about his visit to China and his talks with Chou En-Lai.
He has spelt out a policy which is dangerous for Australia. I doubt if I
have ever read such a damaging and irresponsible series of declarations by any political
leader in all my time in politics in Australia.
. The Whitlam Policy as it stands would isolate Australia from our friends
and allies not only in South-East Asia and the Pacific but in other parts of the Western
world as well. This policy must be disowned by us. We must not become pawns of the
giant communist power in our region.
The Labor mission to China began, of course, as an ingenuous exercise
by the Australian Labor Party, instigated by Mr. Mick Young, which wanted to play
Party politics with wheat sales to China. It was turned instantly and skilfully into an
international propaganda exercise by the Chinese Premier, Chou En-Lai, who committed
the Labor Leader to a position Australia could never accept and from which Mr. Whitlam
himself cannot withdraw.
In no time at all, Chou En-Lai had Mr. Whitlam on a hook and he played
him as a fisherman plays a trout. It was done in public and in a way that guaranteed a
world-wide coverage. There are, of course, certain rules of courtesy which are observed by
visitors to a foreign country. Mr. Whitlam went far beyond what was necessary in
responding to his hosts when sensitive matters were raised. In the process he managed
to insult just about most of our friends and allies in Asia and the Pacific.
Chou En-Lai set out to denigrate the United States and Japan the first
being our greatest ally in Asia and the Pacific and the other being our best customer
in trade. He even told Mr. Nixon how to run his Administration or get thrown out.
What an impertinence to the Leader of the United States., and it is not likely to be
forgotten by the American Administration. 
Mr. Whitlam just stopped short of denouncing the ANZUS Pact, presumably
because he wants the benefits without sharing any of the responsibilities.
Chou En-Lai raised the fear of a revival of Japanese militarism when
there is no evidence to support that fear.
Mr. Whitlam accepted Chou En-Lai's statement about Japanese militarism
without question. And yet only a few months ago he was telling the Australian Parliament
that Japan had a diplomatic role in Asia and that we, in Australia, were well placed to
make an effort to have Japan become the West's bridge with China.
One voice at home, a different voice abroad. This is a typical sample of
his inconsistency. I remind you, Ladies and Gentlemen, that only a few days ago the
American Administration reaffirmed that nuclear protection for Japan would be available
from the United States if the need arose. This statement was a response to reports
that the Japanese would have to develop a defensive nuclear weapon by 1980.
It is obvious that Mr. Whitlam didn't know the facts and fell easily for a
very, very clever piece of propaganda.
He spoke contemptuously of the Soviet Union, with whom my Government
is slowly building bridges towards a better understanding beneficial to us. He described
the termination of the Sino-Soviet friendship Treaty as an " abominable" act by the
Soviet Union. He sneered at Thailand, Taiwan, the Philippines and Cambodia all
countries with whom Australia has trade and friendly relations. He said Thailand and
the Philippines were " trying desperately to insinuate themselves" into China's good
graces. What a presumption to talk about third Governments in this way, and on
what grounds. And so he went on playing his wild diplomatic game knocking our friends
one by one until he was virtually alone in Asia and the Pacific except for the communists.
The things he did not mention cried out for notice. He ignored recent
history, and the fact of China's involvement in military action on her frontier with
LIndia, the, Korean War and in Tibet.
He had nothing to say about China's part ini wars of national liberation
in Vietnam, Thailand and Laos. He did not ask what the roads China was building into
Northern Laos were for. One will run East to Vietnam and the other towards North-
Eastern Thailand. He did not make a plea for Mr. Chou to use his good offices to secure
an honourable peace in Vietnam.
Not only did he fail to do that but he allowed himself to be put forward as
a kind of intermediary and spokesman for the latest manoeuvres of North Vietnam and
China at the Paris peace talks. ./ 3 
He cabled me professing to have confidential information from the highest
source that the latest communist peace proposals were intended to " differ in kind and
extent from all previous proposals."
Without the slightest knowledge of what the other side of the picture was
-because he was travelling in a closed society, he said " 1 am convinced that America
is being given an honourable opportunity for early disengagement.
Now, this " confidential information" has already been published in the
" People's Daily" the official newspaper in Peking and references -in a similar vein are
in the transcript of Mr. Chou's public interview with Mr. Whitlam.
He must have known that the United States haS, been trying to initiate
private talks in Paris to ascertain the North Vietnam ese intentions, but the communist
negotiators there keep evading the opportunity to seriously discuss any proposals.
This is history. I told him by cable that the proper place for the Chinese to press their case
was in Paris. I have no doubt that once again Mr. Whitlam has let hinself get caught up
on a stunt. I can only think that he is doing this for such cheap notoriety as it may
bring him. It does harm both to Australia and the cause of peace in Vietnam.
I find it incredible that at a time when Australian soldiers are still engaged
in South Vietnam, the Leader of the Labor Party is becoming a spokesman for those
against whom we are fighting.
Now let us look for a moment at the question of Taiwan, because this is
the crux of the matter so far as Mr. Whitlam's recognition plans are concerned.
He had declared bluntly that a Labor Govern ment would recognise the
People's Republic on the lines of the Canadian formula. He goes further. He would take
the initiative in severing relations with Taiwan and he would visit Peking as " the sole
capital of China". By accepting Peking as the sole capital he is abandoning Taiwan, whatever
he says about the Canadian formula.
Mr. Whitlam says Mr. Chou made no reference to Taiwan in their public
discussions. But the transcript of those discussions which is freely available in Australia
and has been published in several newspapers shows that MrI. Chou did in fact do so,
and he described the island as China's " province of Taiwan"
Mr. Whitlam has made his choice. Without morality, without responsiility
he would go " all the way" with one and dump the other. He would dump fourteen million
people on Taiwan. Now, Mr. Chairman, let me tell you where the Government stands on
China with the People's Republic on the one hand arid Taiwan on the other. 
As you know, we are seeking a dialogue with the People's Republic Mil
call it China for convenience sake with the long-term object of establishing normal
diplomatic relationships. This was not a new or recent idea. It was the outcome of a study begun
long before those ping pong games were played. We have already had diplomatic
contact with China but I cannot yet report any progress. But we are not surprised.
Progress will be slow and we must be patient. We are acting cautiously and privately
as is the way with proper diplomacy and I hope the Chinese will react in the same way
if they really want to get down to a solution of the problem.
What an unpleasing spectacle Mr. Whitlam's public diplomacy makes. A
Government engaged in diplomatic activity in sensitive areas of international relations
cannot perform in public. It has to put the trappings of propaganda aside and get down to
realities. That is what we are doing with China.
The first major movement in China's bid to enter the community of nations,
so far as Australia is concerned, is likely to be her admission to the United Nations and
the security council. If it doesn't take place this year, it will almost certainly take
place next year. We have said that Australia is not opposed to this. It would be reasonable
to accept this as a recognition of a fact of life of the Chinese Government's established
authority. But there are other considerations when we come to the next stage
recognition. That may be a long way off but we are prepared to work towards it if we
get any co-operation from China as we go.
But we are not prepared to do so at any cost to our own country. Our own
vital interests will come first.
In all we are doing, we are naturally consulting with our allies and our
friends, particularly with the United States and Japan.
We are morally bound to consider the position of Taiwan. It would be our
hope that Taiwan would be able to and ready to retain membership of the United Nations
when China is admitted. We would also want to see the separate rights of the people of
Taiwan protected. We are consulting with them and with our friends on this, too.
That, in short, is the position. I believe it is the only honourable course
that Australia can take. The judgments we make must be long considered and soberly
made. Now, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Whitlam's undisciplined foray into a league that
is far too big for him began with wheat. So let me say something briefly on this point,
and on the relationship we already have with the People's Republic.
Wheat has been one part only of our trade with China, and let it be
remembered, we sell a lot of wheat to places other than China. e a 
I a There is no discrimination against China in our tariff and import policies.
Although China is not a member of GATT, we have applied GATT rules against nondiscrimination
to China and we will continue to do so. We give her, like other countries,
most favoured nation treatment.
Furthermore, we have no barriers to visitors from the People's Republic.
They can come like any others and are subj ect only to those normal procedures which
apply to visitors from any country.
On its part, China usually exercises the strictest control over visitors
from here. Now about wheat in particular. The intervention of the Labor Party in
the wheat question has not helped matters at all. The Labor delegation has played the
Chinese game by introducing politics into wheat. We think our best interests will be
served by leaving it to the Wheat Board and keeping it out of politics.
If you read the recent Chinese communique on the subject carefully
you will see they have not given any guarantees for future purchases of Canadian wheat.
They say, in effect, they will continue to treat Canada in the future as they have treated
her in the past that is to consider her first as a source.
That's not a new position. It applied before Canada decided to recognise.
It is not even a decision to buy. And what's more, even if China were applying a little
blackmail there are other markets for our wheat right now.
Now, Ladies and Gentlemen, that is the position as the Government sees
it. The Labor Party is putting politics into wheat at a time when our rural industries
need help, not hindrance. Mr. Whitlam is putting personal notoriety before the national interest.
He is showing slickness that even his critics would not have believed of him.
He has made sweeping judgments " on the voices" as it were, the voices
of skilled propagandists all on one side of the fence.
It would be laughable if it were not tragic. It would be pathetic if it were
-not so dangerous. I ask you to see this as a sample of the kind of diplomacy the Labor
Party would exercise if ever it came to power. Let this be our incentive to see that it
never does. 



OPENING OF TASMANIANT-STATE COUNCIL LIBERAL
PARTY OF AUSTRALIA DEVONPORT 16jLYj 1971
õ p! eScby the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, Senator Wright, my Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies
and Gentlemen: While I am here I want to pass on, if I can, something of the spirit
that is abroad in Australia today on behalf of the Liberal cause.
As our President has said in the last four months I have visited fair of
the six Australian States. Of course I don't count in New South Wales because it's
the State in which I live. But what I can say to you, and I can say it to you with
emphasis, is that I have been heartened by the obvious vitality of our movement, the
enthusiasm of the Party members and the readiness of the organisation and the
political wings to get together and to get things done.
Only a few days ago my Press Off icer and my Department gave me a
record of our achievements of the last four months 430 independent and separate
initiatives taken successfully by the Government. Frankly it gave me a great cause for
pleasure. We've got a good team in Canberra, and I've been conscious of a new
unity among the Branches and the councils of the Party. There is a coming together
and a gathering of the clans, as I see it, in readiness for the next election. I honestly
believe we have the team and the policies to win, and not only to win, but I believe
we will pick up seats. It's the size of the victory I want to be sure about. Now is the
time for all of us to get cracking and to make that victory, and the numbers that we
have in the House, a big one.
I'd like to get Franklin back for a start. As I said a few moments ago,
I believe that our record in the last few months has been pretty good -over 40 initiatives
successfully taken. I've met the Premiers of the States on two occasions in that time,
and I believe each time successfully.
I think I've made it clear that the Commonwealth doesn't want to play the
role of Headmaster. For political and economic and for social reasons I believe in
a Federal system of Government. But what I do want is to work together and to
co-operate closely, as we are meant to do under the Constitution. And that
Constitution belongs to you and shouldn't be altered unless it is with your consent. I
want it to survive until you change it, and I want to be able to play my part in making
it work better. The things we've done so far have included growth taxes for the States.
We gave a special increase to the pensioners, and in many other aspects of our social
welfare we have shown new inititatives. In particular I want to emphasise what has
been done for our aborigines. Because here I believe the story has been imperfectly
told. All the reforms that William Wentworth asked me to carry out as a result of
consultations with the aboriginal councils themselves, were in fact either carried out
or bettered. And our massive programme for aboriginal development in the Northern
Territory is, I think, a very good one. / 2 
We've-also been tackling a variety of problems arising from the pressures
of the-economy including a review of the arbitration system to see what can be done
about cost inflation arising largely from excessive wage increases. I'll say more to
you about this subject in a few moments'time.
We are giving very special attention to the crisis in our rural industries,
especially how we'll be able to help them when Britain enters the European Community.
But before I touch on these subjects, let me come back to Labor Party activities.
Because I believe that by their tolerance and tacit encouragement of industrial disputes
they are indifferent to the problems of the economy.
In the time that I have been Prime Minister I have nct heard one Member
of the Opposition other than Alan Fraser of Eden-Monaro, who is a Liberal in mind
and in thought raise his voice in opposition to the activities of the left-wing trade
unions and the activities of the left-wing in his own Party.
There has been an indifferent and a gross affront to law and order in
the community by elements in the trade union movement during the Springboks tour. I
believe most Australians want that tour to be successful. They don't want politics to
get mixed up with a sporting event.
You know too, the waterside workers cut off Tasmania from the Port
of Melbourne as part of an industrial campaign against the Springboks. That was a
blatant political act without any industrial motive whatsoever. And in recent weeks, in
defiance of a promise given to the ACTU and the Australian people, they're again engaged
in these tactics of depriving you people of the ability to carry on your businesses
effectively. Now the Labor Party also wants to write down our rural industries.
They said as much at their Launceston conference. Mr. Hayden, a not very eminent
member of the Labor Party, and not a man who can be regarded as gifted or knowledgeable
in rural affairs, but he said, speaking as it were for an-industrial metropolitan community,
that our primary industry should be controlled on a self-supporting basis and that
whatever reforms were to be carried out should be carried out in a defined period.
What he meant was that many of our great industries the wheat industry
and the sugar industry, both of which have stabilization schemes, should be deprived
of them, and the wool industry shouldn't be givenpprotection because it has to be
self-supporting. Those industries should be permitted to fight their own battles within
a definable period, and be permitted to fight an international company without the
support of the Government and the Australian people.
Now he, and those who voted it through just didn't know what they were
talking about. Their one so-called expert in primary industries, Dr. Patterson,
virtually disowned it publicly on television on the night the decision was made or if it
wasn't that night it was immediately after the conference. But it is the self-same
Dr. Patterson who is now playing the games of the Communists in China, by being
critical of our attitude to the sale of wiheat to China. We don't want to interfere, because
we know what a magnificent job the Wheat Board is doing, and we're faily certain that
if these attacks had not occurred, then our Wheat Board had reasonable prospects of
commencing negotiations with the China purchasing agency within the course of the
Inn foxiv u-4: 4-o it thair activities have harmed the cause of the Wheat Board, and
having harmed the cause of the Wheat Boardhave. I he-lieve. hni-mod ite anLis MIe'
Australian wheat producers. / 3 
Now if I may go further, the Party Leaders have been on parade in Peking,
in a massive propaganda exercise, skilfully contrived by Chou En-Lai, offending as
many of Australia's friends as they could. In fact, Mr. Whitlam and his entourage,
and I ask you to remember who they are, and the type of people they are, are the
advocates for China against the interests of this country. And it must be our task as
Liberals to expose the shallowness of all these activities.
Let me take two of them, and two only because as our President has
said, my time and your time is limited. I'll talk first of all about the industrial
intrusion into non-industrial matters as one subject, and our attitude to Mainland
China as the other. Let's have a look into the industrial fields first. You've heard of
Mr. Hawke I take it he's our new foreign demagogue. But he's doing a cook's tour
of Europe at the moment, after stirring up a hornet's nest here, and finding it pretty
angry one. For some months now, we have seen some elements in the Trade Union
movement, Mr. Hawke as their principal spokesman, butting into all sorts of fields
where they have no right to be, and where no industrial issue was involved, poking
their nose in because they wanted to tell you exactly what they wanted you to do. They
tried to stop the export of merino sheep and they failed. Mr. Hawke busied himself
with some gratuitous advice to a television station on the kind of programme it should
have. If he could do that, couldn't he do it to the media, all the media press,
television, radio and other kind of activities that he thought came within his sights.
He led the way in an attempt to stop the Springboks tour. And what they did was really
an attempt to deny people their freedom of choice within the law, and an attempt, as
a final result, to have a showdown with the Government.
They inspired and provoked demonstrators into actions which became a
challenge to public law and order within the Commonwealth. I believe the Australian
public is fed up with all of this, and I believe a lot of responsible trade unionists the
bulk of whom are good, hard-working Australians are also fed up with it too.
I have said many times that my Government and I find apartheid repugnant
as a political and a social philosophy. But apartheid wasn't really the issue in the challenge
to law and order when the Springboks arrived. It was a pretext and it was an excuse
by Mr. Hawke and some of his colleagues to show their form and to show their capacity
for intimidation. And the professional demonstrators and dissenters and a lot of them
were jumped on the band wagon without wasting a second of time.
Now the Government, our Government in Canberra, had to make its
position clear. And at the time I stated three important principles that were dear to
us, and that we would ensure were followed and observed. I think that they're worthwhile
repeating at the moment. And they are and I repeat what I have said but a
few moments ago that the Australian people, the you and me's of this world, the
people that constitute not only the Liberal and the Labor Parties, the uncommitted,
the young and everyone in the community, have a right of freedom of choice within
the law at all times. Nobody has the right to deprive them of this freedom of choice. e / 4 
And the second great principle is that no group or organisation should be
permitted to intimidate the lawful Government of the country whether it happens to
be State, Local Government, or Federal Government as it exists in Canberra. Now
we reject absolutely any attempt by elements in the Trade Union movement to achieve
their objectives, industrial or otherwise, by force and intimidation.
And the last one a fairly simple one is that frankly we believe there
is an area of politics, we believe there is an area of sport. We believe there are areas
of cultural relations such as musical activities, or the movement of ballet companies,
and we do not think for one moment, that the sporting and other organisations should be
under duress from any source purely for political motives. I also remind you too, if
I can~ of the basis on which we operate.
I believe that the principles that we have held ever since we were first
formed as a Party remain just as valid and absolute today as they did when they were
first announced. So what I want to read to you now is a part of what was said by us
in a little document published by Sir Robert Menzies called " We Believe". It's this:
" The Liberal Party offers the spirit of adventure, the
fire freedoms of thought and speech and choice, the
great human right to choose an avocation and fail,
or to choose an avocation and succeed.
In other words, to put it in my own way, to act as men and women, and to
be able to do what you want to do, providing you do it, as 1 said before, within the law.
I think we should keep on remembering this against the possible background of
increasing industrial outrages in the months to come.
May I now come to the other subject I want to mention and that is China.
And before I come into the body of my speech, may I just mention two facts to you.
The first one relates to the fact that memories are short, and that -there
are some discussions taking place today about the possibilities of another Geneva-type
convention. I well remember, shortly after I became the External Affairs Minister
( now the Foreign Minister) going up to South Vietnam to see our own troops and to see
how Vietnamisation was progressing. And on the way there I met representatives
of various Asian countries. Together we decided that we would have a conference
in Djakarta, dedicated to trying to get peace in Cambodia and to permit this country
to be able to live free, and particularly free from intimidation from the North.
We invited China, we invited the Communist countries, but they
blatantly refused to come. But we did send emissaries around the world trying to
find out whether there was anything that could be done and we even tested the United
Nations without result.
So I want you to understand that we as a Liberal Government have been
seeking for peace. Thinking that the cause of peace was one of the highest ideals
that we asLiberals possess, and a) nsequently I now want to debunk any idea that
somebody has take n the initiative away from us. It is totally false. We want peace,
we know that Vietnamisation is succeeding and we do know it now, we at least want to
preserve the basic cause for which we fought, and that was the right of the South
Vietnamese to be able to determine their own future. 0 0 
Now may I come to the second point that I wanted to mention to you, and
that is about recognition of Continental China, the People's Republic of China in the
United Nations, and recognition itself.
Shortly after I became Minister for External Affairs, I called for papers
to be prepared and presented to the Cabinet, as to what our attitude should be at the
United Nations, because as I mentioned a few moments ago, we had then taken up a
precise and definite attitude,
Similarly, too, did I decide, or did I recommend and the Cabinet decided
that we would make the preliminary move, called a dialogue, with the People's Republic
of China to see what their attitude might be, to recognition. Now when I talk about the
People's Republic for brevity's sake I'll say " China", but I want you to understand
that it means Peking China, or Communist China. We have had meetings with their
plenipotentiaries so far unsuccessful. Not because of our attitude -we did make
an attempt to show them what we were prepared to do-but because of the fact that
they were not prepared to listen unless we agreed to all of the terms that they had
proposed. So now may I come back then to the speech that I want to make and speak
to you about China itself.
There has been, as we all know, certainly most Liberals will know, some
evidence that China was getting ready to lift the boom which has kept her isolated from
the Western world for so long. And, as is prudent, we have had our China policy
under review for a considerable time. I repeat this again, because I don't want to let
somebody jump onto the band wagon and say the opposite that recent developments
in our policy have been precipitated by public interest in China's person-to-person
or as somebody calls it the ping-pong diplomacy.
Neither do I think China's new interest in the outside world reflects a
change of heart. I don't. It would be more accurate to describe her recent initiatives
as a new tactical approach to old goals. Not new, but with skill, and with diplomatic
common sense, they have used the Labor mission for the benefit of the Chinese themselves.
Now the goals, and I want to emphasise this of the Chinese people, are
these. You know that up on the Ussuri and other parts of the North, they have the problems
with the Soviet, and consequently one of their biggest and most immediate problems is
that of border security. They want a reduction in the influence of the United States and
of the Soviet. They want a check on Japan and they want the spread of Maoist revolutionary
theories by securing better relationships with smaller powers. And, of course,
they do want the recovery of Taiwan, that is the Republic of China.
Nevertheless whatever our dislike of her political philosophy, we
regard China as a fact of life in the region. And, indeed, as a fact of life in the wider
world, and we must look forward in the long run to normal relations with them.
But I want to emphasise, we will have a dialogue not on their terms,
but on terms that we regard as satisfactory to us as Australians and to the people
of this country. / 6 
The position now is that fifty-four countries have diplomatic relations
with China and sixty-three with Taiwan. Since last October nine countries have
announced they will establish diplomatic relations, but none of them was in our region
None were immediately to the North of us, none were countries with which we have
regional associations and relationships, and whose security we regard as important
to our own. Not only as a result of my mission to the United Nations, but in what
I have been able to learn since, I have formed the opinion that it is probably that
either this year or next, Peking will become a member of the General Assembly of the
United INations and will I think have a seat on the Security Council. We will not oppose
membership I have said this over and over again. It niusn't be forgotten. Some
people will attempt to jump on the band wagon and try and prove to the c ontrary.
But what we will do is this, we will do all in our power to ensure that
Taiwan, that has 14 million people, that is a member of the United Nations now,
and is recognised by us and is a very good trading partner of ours -Taiwan is a
better trading partner than China itself, that is Continental China -that Taiwan's
posritio2 is recogniscd and its position in the United Nations sustained.
When we are taking this action, of course, we consult with our friends,
part icularly the United States, Japan arid New Zealand. They, toohave already had
some contact with China through diplomatic sources. Or perhaps I should take that
back and I should localise it to ourselves. I don't want to speak for them. I repeat
again that we have had contact with the Chinese Government through other national
sources, We have set out directly to Peking what is our long-term goal and our
desire to take progressive steps towards this. It would be very optimistic to expect
any quick returns. We must move cautiously, with our own national self-interest
uppermost in our minds at all times. And I want to repeat that because I want you to
understand the contrast. VWe will move slowly and cautiously, beca4,% eit is our vital
interest that must be uppermost in our minds. And the contrast is the mission
of the Labor Party recently in Mainland China was moving ilot in our interests, but
dangerously close to the interests of Mainland China-, and dangerously opposed to
the interests of many of our great friends.
N-ow the question of recognition will arise in due course, but as I saidit
may be a long way off. And we don't intend to rush it. Let me give you a few more
facts about the relationships we already have with the People's Republic. This is
important, because some would create the impression that they are completely isolated.
There has been a two-way trade between us both for a good many years,
and recently, and the businessmen here should be told this, we recently liberalised
the list of strategic exports so that the range of trade could be widely extended. And
I ask all businessmen to have a look at this restricted list because they will see, that
that range of opportunities is great, and has been expanded by the Liberal-Country
Party Government in recent months.
There is no discrimination against China in our tariff and import policies.
Although China is not a member of GATT', we have applied GATT rules against
nondiscrimination to China and we will continue to do so. We give her, like other
countries, most favoured nation treatment. / 7 
Furthermore, we have no barriers to visitors from the People's
Republic. They want to come here, and unless there are defence or PtL: dLC%' 1A4 rpnwe
permit them to come, and to come freely. They can come as it were, like any
other visitors, subject only to procedures of a normal kind which I've just mentioned.
But on its part, China exercises the strictest control over visitors. Here there is no
reciprocity and this must be understood by all of us.
Now gentlemen, you will have been reading about this and I've spoken
about it a few moments ago and that is the Labor Party' s mission to China in the last
week. I have already exposed the shams and the absurdities of it all. But I want to go
over some of the points again because they are of considerable importance to you and
they are of overwhelming importance to the security of this country.
They went to China to play politics with w~ heat. I emphasise they went
to play politics. Mr. Anthony said yesterday, that we warnt to leave it to the
established organisations to carry out our trading relations, particularly if they have
been as extraordinarily successful as the Wheat Board. Mr. Anthony said only
py eusrctehradsa4y n gt haagt etnhcei eWs. h eaTt hBe oBaroda rdit sfeellft , htIt'J e had sntrcoonsagt chnotcp es that the iWhthhea t BhouarVd would
sooni have received an invitation to go to Hong Kong to negotiate further contracts.
But because of the attitude, and the activities of the Labor Partythose
hopes were dashed. Instead of going, they have had to be suspended for some time.
I want you to understand that politics and trade relations don't mix. If
you do play politics you can do great harm and damage to Australia's rural industries.
In this case I believe they have done damage to the cause of wheat.
In a series of public statements, Mr. V. 7hitlam committed himself and
his Party to a policy, which I think is an affront to most of Australia's friends and
allies in South-East Asia and the Pacific. And here again I want to interpolate that
Dr. Patterson apparently says that I have been attacking China. Far from the truth.
I've been attacking not China but Mr. Whitlam's intrusion into Foreign Affairs, and his
insulting references to our friends. I can understand Dr. Patterson's confusion of
mind. Whitlam has become the advocate for China. He is not the advocate
for this country. This I have said can be dangerous for us.
The Chinese Premier, Mr. Chou En-Lai cannot be blamed for taking
up the opportunity for some telling propaganda when Mr. Whitlam went to see him.
What is dangerous, and what is damaging, is the extent to which Mr. Whitlam picked
up and made his own the points China has been trying to impose on the world for
years. He said he would recognise China immediately if he were to win the
next elections. He went further. He would sever diplomatic relationships with Taiwan
and further still, he would declare Peking the " sole Government to China". 
In other wordshe would abandon Taiwan, that has been very close to us,
and friendly with us, and as I said a few moments ago, has been a good trading partner,
and one that has assumed its proper role in the diplomatic and international world
and does play its part as a responsible member of that world. These are perhaps
the most startling by a political leader without power or authority in many, many
years. I wonder if this could have happened if it had been the late Mr. Chiefly
or the late Mr. Curtin. Could they ever have conceived of operating in a way that could
be inimical to the interests of this country and dangerous to them.
He made matters worse by gratuitously insulting countries like
Thailand and the Philippines, who are friendly, and a country like the Soviet Union
with whom we are trying and have, in fact, developed a better understanding.
There was no dialogue about his meeting with the Chinese. He took the
bait and he swallowed it whole. He came away without any assurances from Premier
Chou at all. He made all the concessions in a field which was not in his area to operate
anyway. This is an area for Government, and not an area for an itinerant politician
moving into China, and now trying to move into other parts of South-East Asia.
In addition he allowed himself to be used as a spokesman for the North
Vietnamese and Chinese propositions at the Paris peace talks.
Altogether it was an extraordinary performance. For us it is a warning
and a sample of what Mr. Whitlam and the Labor Party would do if they ever come to
power. We as Liberals, every single one of you, from the Premier. to myself,
you joining with us, must make certain this does not happen.
I come back to where I started, that the Liberal Party commands the
loyalty of the great mass of Australians. Everywhere I've been in the last four
months, I've become more and more convinced of the certainty of that statement.
I believe we Liberals have a record behind us to justify that confidence, and that
we have progressive policies to keep that confidence alive. I am sure we will win
the next elections, but with your help, with the help of Angus Bethune, with
the help of the other Liberal Premiers, let's make it a good one. Let's make it a
handsome victory and give us the opportunity to carry on our policies, for at least
another three years. 



VICTOILIAN DIVISION STATE COUNCIL OF THE
LIBERAL PAiTY 01" AUSTRALIA
MELBOUHlNE 28 JUJLY 1971
SPEECH B3Y TILE, PRIPI[ E MINISTER, MR. WILLIAM Mcl4AIION
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It had been my intention to talk to you this morning
about Liberal Pa. rty policies and other domestic matters.
Because of recent events involving our international
relptions, I thought it would be better if I clearly identified
our policies relating to China.
You will recall that about a fortnight ago, I chose
China as my subject when I talked to the Young Liberals in
;. lelbourne Since then we have had the announcement by Presi( lent
Nixon that he will go to Peking sometime before May of next
year for talks with Premier Chou En-Lai.
The decision is of profound importance to the whole
of the free world and naturally it has attracted a tremendous
amount of interest and comment.
I informed the Australian people the day it was
announced that my Government welcomed this decision wholeheartedly
and that President Nixon had our complete support in the initiative
he was taking We sincerely hope that his journey will be a journey
for enduring peace.
There are two comments I want to make at the outset.
The first is that President Nixon's initiative is a beginning.
It is an exploration. It is not yet a settlement of matters at
issue between these two powers, or indeed of matters at issue
between the free world and the communist nations of Asia.
Therefore patience, as well as support, will be
necessary and we must not be rushed or forced into hasty
decisions. We do not want to compromise our bargaining
position qnd there is no overriding national interest that
compels us to do so. We must keep all our options open. 2/. 
It is our interests, not China's, that I am
deeply concerned with.
I also want to emphasise that my Government has, in
fact, been active over a long period. In many cases we have
been in the vanguard.
We have, as I shall show, made a number of practical
moves: To establish our position in relation to
representation of China and Taiwan in the
United Nations.
To find a way to bring about normal bilateral
relations between the People's Republic that
is Mainland China and ourselves.
We have done this without any surrender of our
national interest or the principles which govern our conduct
in international relations.
Our actions are predicated on the basis that we are
not a great power and cannot play a decisive role in resolving
the issues between East and West.
But we are independent, we have a voice which I
know is respected, in our region we have friendships and
alliances which we want to honour. We will not unceremoniously
dump our friends. 3/. 
UNITED NATIONS
We have closely watched the movement in the
United Nations towards admission of the People's
Republic and the trend towards recognition by a number
of other countries in the free world all of them, it
should be noted, outside the Asian region.
These events prompted me when I was Foreign
Minister to have a new reappraisal made of the trend of
our future relations with the People's Republic, with
the Soviet Union and with Japan. The China study began
in October ! 970. In May I announced publicly our
intention to seek a dialogue with China, proceeding
cautiously step by step with the normalisation of
relations as our final objective.
This was two months before President Nixon's
announcement of his planned vrisit to Peking with
precisely the same objectives and in much the same words.
In May of this year I said that we would not
oppose China's representation and admission to the United
Nations, and in a broader context-I said that it was
inevitable and right that China should be a member of the
United Nations General Assembly and should hold the
permanent seat in the Security Council.
I also said and I have repeated it since that
we believed the Republic of China Taiwan should be
given the chance of maintaining its membership if it so
desired. We have had talks with Taiwan on this matter and
I hope we have been able to influence her to consider
accepting proposals for retaining her membership.
It has been suggested that Taiwan may herself
decide not to seek continued membership. That, of course,
would create another situation. This would be a decision
within Taiwan's own jurisdiction and for Taiwan iiself to
make. It is clear from our talks to date with
representatives of the People's Republic of China that the
status of Taiwan is a major factor in their thinking.
So it is on our part. We have repeatedly said
we are anxious to preserve the rights of the fourteen and
a half million people of Taiwan. These include the right
to continued membership of the United Nations.
I believe a majority of Australians share this
anxiety and want us to treat Taiwan honourably. o .4/ 
The United Nations alone can decide this issue.
It is a matter for a collective decision, not for unilateral
action by us. We will not abandon Taiwan, nor prejudge
her position in advance of any decisions in the U. No,
neither will we seek by any procedural device to exclude
Peking. The People's Republic on the Mainland, has been
informed of our views on the question of admission to
the United Nations. I emphasise that my public statements
on representation are still in advance of any declaration
of attitude by America. o 
RECOGNITION
Turning now to the problem of recognition of the
People's Republic.. In the May speech I used the phrase
which had been used by the Department of Foreign Affairs
some time before, that our objective was to normalise
our bilateral relations with the People's Republic.
We have no hostility to the great Chinese people
whose history and culture have contributed much to the
achievements of mankind.
I believe that, in due time, it will be possible
to reach a point when we are able to recognise the People's
Repiublic with honour and without deserting old friends.
But 1 cannot see that happening as the first result of the
first dialogue. Other decisions have to be taken.
Meanwhile we want to keep moving towards normal relations
with China without waiting on completion of the
formalities for full diplomatic recognition.
You will recall that President Nixon said that
the action he was taking would " not be at the expense of
old friends". That, too, is our view. That is where
Australia stands.
I can tell you that we have made some progress
in our dialogue with-China. We know more about the other
side's position and they know more about ours. The
Chinese responses to our approaches have clearly shown
that the Chinese Government is positively interested in
establishing diplomatic relations with the Australian
Government. The dialotgue is continuing.
We are active in trade and we also want to develop
our cultural and scientific relationships with China.
As you know, the Minister for Trade and Industry
recently announced a liberalisation of the strategic
exports list. The goods on the restricted list are those
with defence or security importance.
I have not yet heard anyone say we should remove
these restrictions. So far as Taiwan is concerned, our exports have
increased very substantially in recent years to about
million a year.
We have therefore a substantial interest in both
China and Taiwan for trade.
Our position in regard to travel, cultural
exchanges and sport with China is free. .6/ 
We do not place any unnecessary obstacles in the
way of visits of Australian citizens to China, or of
Chinese citizens to Australia.
In all of this we have followed a consistent
and rational policy that has placed us well ahead of
most countries of the West in our dealings with China.
We have always hoped that by encouraging contacts
between the two countries in a number of lesser fields,
and by private contacts between the people of the two
countries, a greater understanding of each other's
positions would develop and the prospects of a normalisation
of political relations would be enhanced.
In taking the steps that we as a Government have
taken, we have always had in mind the need to consider
the policies and attitudes of the many Governments in our
part of the world with whom we have close and friendly
relations, and for whom China is in many cases an even more
important factor than for Australia.
Many of these, like Australia, do not have
diplomatic relations with China. Many of them have
suffered as a result of Chinese policies directed
specifically against them.
It has been obvious to the Australian Government
that any precipitate move by Australia to improve
relations with China could well have caused difficulties
for some of the countries in the South East Asian region.
We have therefore taken the course of careful
and constructive diplomatic groundwork, aimed at exploring
the areas in which we may have a meeting of minds with
China, I wonder how much Peking knows about the depth
and scope of Australia's relations with the countries of
South East Asia.
These relations are nursued for the purposes of
economic development, of stability and of constructive
regional co-operation among the peoples of South East
Asia. They arenot directed against the interests of any
country. Indeed, let me say clearly that we would not
wish to exclude China from this adventure. But this
Government will not prejudice the close and constructive
relationships we have developed with our neighbours in
this part of the world for the sake alone of better
relations with Peking.
Our relations with all of these countries are
important to us and we want our friends to understand
what we are seeking in our attempt to normalise our
relations with China. For our part, we understand and
will not denigrate the efforts of our friends to adjust
their own policies to the changing circumstances in Asia. 
VI ETNAM
Ladies and Gentlemen, I sincerely hope that when
President Nixon meets Premier Chou En-Lai there will be
another opportunity to bring fresh influences to bear
in the search for an honourable peace in Vietnam.
I like to think that the tragedy of this war
is moving to its close, but I believe that peace with
justice will only be secured if an understanding can be
reached between East and West based on the Bandung
Principle that each nation in the region shall be free to
choose the Government it wants and live the way it wishes.
When we went into South Vietnam in response to a
request from its Government we did so in our own national
interest and to honour treaty obligations. We felt that
there was a real danger at that time of the whole of
South-East Asia falling to communism.
The joint action of the allies in Vietnam in
resisting this threat and enabling the smaller countries
of Asia to determine their own future has led to a
significant improvement in the security and stability of
the region, Vietnamisation is, in fact, being
successful. With courage and determination the South
Vietnamese forces have steadily taken over the brunt
of the combat role, so much so that our operational role
is now winding down and we can now look forward to the
withdrawal of all of our combat forces.
My wish is that this should be a matter for
Parliament to consider and I shall be making a statement
on our position in Vietnam during the forthcoming session.
The withdrawal of allied forces will not, of
course, solve the problems which face the people of Vietnam.
A lasting -peace in Indo-China can only be achieved on the
basis of a political settlement in which all of the parties
participate. The Australian Government has consistently
supported the principles upon which the Geneva Agreements
of 1954 relating to Indo-China and those of 1962 relating
to Laos are based.
If a new arrangement is to be more successful than
those arrived at by the earlier conferences, there will
need to be greater participation in the formulation of
the arrangements by those most directly concerned,
including the Governments of North and South Vietnam. a. ao8 
We took part last year in the Djakarta Conference
on Cambodia in the belief that it is through the co-operation
of the countries in the region that p~ eace and stability can
best be achieved in Asia.
We believe that in any future initiatives for a
peaceful political settlement of the Indo-China question,
great emphasis should be placed on particiipation by
Asian countries. Stability is most likely to flow from greater
Asian participation in solutions to Asian problems.
The issues about which I have spoken China and
Vietnam are two important international issues. The
debate in Australia on China and Vietnam has, to an
undesirable extent, become entangled with party politics.
The search for a lasting solution in the interests
of all the Australian people has sometimes been forgotten
by some people in a scramble for temporary personal
satisfaction. These are extremely complex issues, the importance
of which no responsible government can afford to ignore.
The Government of this country is not some kind of performing
troupe that can turn on a different act in every capital of
this region. We believe that Australia has a real and
positive role to play, and is playing it, and will play it
more and more as we grow and as we identify our interests
around us. But we recognise that we cannot order the world
to our own specifications, Others bigger than we have much
more capacity to do so, Our influence can best be
exercised in concert with our friends, great and small.
We will have very little influence if we behave
inconsistently and with quixotic attention only to what is
happening day by day. What we are trying to do is to move
in an orderly and responsible way towards the resolution of
these problems. This is the reality of the position of a country
like Australia. We support what the United States is
attempting. If it leads to rapprochement with China on
fair and reasonable terms this will be good.
If the Vietnam war and the problems of the Indo-
China states can be approached initially with mutual
restraint and then at the conference table, of course the
Australian Government favours it.
We will do all in our power to help promote
international detente, but let us not deceive ourselves by
exaggerating our own capacity to prodluce it, 



N. S. W. CHAMBEROF MAN1IFACTLJRFRS DINNE R
S YDNEV, N. S. W1 29 JULY 1971
S p ee ch by the Prime Minister. Mr ' VilIIisn-1 McMahon
Mr President, Ladies, and Gentlemen:
I want to talk to you tonight about the partnership I beliee.
exists between Government and industry in Australia today. And I want to
indicate how important that is, not only to our material wellbeing, but to the
preservation of those real values that belong to a free enterprise society.
I believe that such a society is t uilt on the rights of the
individual to a good education in a secure and healthy environment. It is
built on the efforts we make collectively to use the great resources of our
land to manufacture goods and services we need and those we can sell.
It is based on initiative, encouragement and a sense of adventure.
And it will be a successful society if Government helps
to the best of its ability in national economic management, and if industry
responds as innovators and developers in a climate of vigorous and
healthy competition. I believe the problems of the day can be relatively
short-term. If we get effective co-operation between government and
private enterprise and a more mioderate and rational attitude by organised.
labor to demands on resom-ces at large, then I believe we can prosper
greatly. I don't think I need to remind you that we are now an
industrialised society, and in many segments, a highly sophisticated one.
All this has happened in the quarter of a century since the war. I take
this opportunity, therefore, of acknowledging the contribution Australian
manufacturing industry has made to this progress.
You will know, as I do, that manufacturing industry
employs 28 per cent of the Australian work force and contributes 28 per cent
of the Gross National Product. And the total value of production from nearly
39, 000 factories is getting on towards OOintiion. Its exports last year were
worth $ 724 million which is 18 per cent of our total exports and rising.
And it attracted about 30 per cent of the total direct private overseas
investment in Australia. / 2 
So you represerst, Ge-. tlemea, a very significant part of the national effort,
If you have any misgivings about your place in the scheme of things I urge you to forget
them. A Government has many demands made upon it, and if we cannot always meet
them, I ask you to understand that it is a matter of priorities and what is fair to ask
the taxpayer to pay. For, after all, it is his money that keeps us going.
At this point, Gentlemen, let me mention briefly the investment allowance.
Its suspension by the Government earlier this year was one of a series of anti-inflationary
measures which was designed to place a modest restraint on new private investment
in plant and equipment.
This action brought us quite a lot of criticism from many of you. This
was natural, and this we understand, but it was only one of a number of restraints over
the whole area of the economy.
Manufacturers were not singled out to carry a special burden. Manufacturers'
views on the matter were put very forcefully to us at our pre-Budget talks with
industry early this month and we are giving these views careful consideration.
The investment allowance, you will remember, was introduced in 1962 at
a time of declining employment, slow economic activity and uncertainty as to the
outlook for the balance of payments.
It was particularly directed to encouraging expenditures on equipment and
re-equipment of manufacturing industries which were then at a low ebb, and so to
encourage industry to show more vitality and a keener awareness of the opportunities
for growth in the Australian economy.
The concession did, I believe, contribute to the end result we were
seeking. But more recently, as you know serious inflationary pressures emerged in
the economy, and some restraints became necessary.
As I have indicated, the suspension of the investment allowance was just
one of several measures taken by the Government. All I want to say * at this stage
is that the Government's action was a suspension of the allowance, and I can assure you
the matter. will be held under review. Beyond -hat it would be wrong for-me-to-go-at
this time. Now let me say something about two aspects of economic matters which
affect you. One is trade, and the other is tariffs.
In recent years the pattern of our trade has been changing and its direction
has been more to the markets of Asia and the Pacific than to the traditional markets
of the Old World. I have said manufacturers are now providing 18 per cent of our total exports.
In 1969/ 70 sixty per cent of this total went to Asia and the Pacific area and was worth
$ 409 million. Seven out of our ten largest markets are in this area. They are, in
order, New Zealand which has been our largest market for many years Papua-
New Guinea, Japan, Singapore, Philippines, Malaysia and Hong Kong. o e / 3 
This, of course, is greatly to the credit of Australian manufacturers. But
as part of the partnership which I mentioned at the beginning of this speech, the
Australian Government has
Negotiated trade treaties in the region;
Has spent many millions of dollars on promotion of
Australian products in those markets;
Provided insurance guarantees and export incentives; and
0 Is now maintaining seventeen Trade Commissioner posts
there out of about fifty all over the world.
And I am glad to see that Australian industry is now moving quite steadily
into the area of joint ventures in the region where once it was just a case of buying and
selling. Australian manufacturing companies are now involved in joint ventrues in places.
like Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.
All this activity will assist us if and when Britain goes into the Common
Market as we expect her to. Manufacturers will, as you know, be affected by this,
although the principal impact will be on rural industries.
Britain's entry could have adverse effects on your ability to compete with
British manufacturers within Britain. It could also put you at a disadvantage in
competing with the present E. E. C. market where B ritish exporters would enjoy an
improved position. So, Gentlemen, there is a pretty healthy challenge ahead of us in our
partnership. There is the challenge br . ought about by change; by the shifting
patterns of world trade; and by our own developing interest in the Asian and Pacific
region. There is the challenge at home to diversify still more our manufacturing
industries and to support our great new mining industries with processing and
muanufacturing activities.
There are of course major problems of cost involved in these developments,
but it is encouraging that nine of our mineral companies are already committed to
begin or enlarge processing facilities associated with their operations in the seventies.
There is also the challenge to find new markets and develop existing ones.
To do this we must be able to compete effectively and this means a greater self-discipline
6n costs and new levels of efficiency.
I turn now to tariffs which are so closely bound up with the principle of
competition to which I have referred. I have concentrated in my remarks on the
tariff but there are many other ways in which the Government can assist industry
to achieve our mutual objectives of growth and productivity.
I am by no means leaving these out of account. On the contrary, in all
of these elements, we wish to continue to work in partnership with private enterprise. / 4 
There are two considerations before us in any discussion of this subject.
One is our responsibility as a Government to manufacturing industries which are of
tremendous importance to Australia. The other is the benefit which comes to the
Australian people from healthy and sustained competition.
Competition keeps prices and quality where they ought to be. This stimulates
the innovator to try new products and the manager to higher levels of efficiency. How
can we ensure that the manufacturing sector continues to contribute to the growth of the
Australian economy? The simple answer is by ensuring that it uses the resources it has as fully
-and as efficiently as possible. This is, of course, the prescr-iption that would be given
$ Dr any sector of the economy.
It is accepted by all that a rising standard of living is a fundamental objective
of economic policy, and that increasing productivity is a pre-requisite for this. But
there is less willingness to accept the implications for the way we allocate our scarce
national resources. It is in this context that I wish to raise briefly the question of tariff protection.
You will all know of the statement that was made recently on tariff policy by my
colleague, Mr. Anthony.
And you will be aware that the Government recently sent to the Tariff
Board the first ten references marking the beginning of a systematic review of the
tariff. There are two aspects of tariff policy which seem to concern some
manufacturers the more critical attitude which the Tariff Board had said it will adopt
towards highly PrutCLed activities. -and the way this attitude will be implemented, in
the review of the tariff.
I have already commented, by implication, on the first matter. If we want
a rising standard of living for a growing population, we must continuously increase
the efficiency with which we use our national resources.
If we want to increase the efficiency with which we use our resources, we
cannot be indifferent to the way these resources are allocated. We cannot accept
uncritically their use in activities which require high levels of protection because,
prima facie, such a ctivities are less suited to the Australian environment.
It has been estimated that the total value of private investment in the
manufacturing sector during the next 20 years will be at least three times that which
has occurred during the last 20 years. It seems probable that there will also be
a substantial increase in the number of persons employed in manufacturing.
We simply cannot afford to allow a significant proportion of these resources.
to drift into activities for which our environment is less suited. It is the concern of
the Government to ensure that this increasing investment of both human and capital
resources will be applied where it promotes rather than retards the growth of
Australia's future prosperity. 
We must see to it that this future investment produces the greatest benefit
to the community. To do otherwise would be to allow Australia to become a high-cost
low-productivity economy, less and less able to compete in world markets.
If our secondary industries are to export increasingly to the world's market.-
in competition with other industrial nations, we must ensure that our protection systemn
does nct discourage the development of Australian industry according to the principle
of comparative advantage.
There are several comments I would like to make about the review of the
tariff, and the apprehension which some manufacturers still seem to feel about it. It
has been suggested that entire industries are threatened with extinction.
No Government would in fact accept a series of recommendations from the
Tariff Board which had the intent or effect of dismantling large areas of secondary
industry; and I don't for a moment believe the Tariff Board would ever make such
recommendations. Those who predict the demise of whole industries fail to appreciate the
distinction between an ' activity' and an ' industry', and fail to recognise, when studying
data on average rates of protection for various industries, that an average is an
average. The Tariff Board has said it will adopt a more critical approach towards
highly protective activities namely those with effective protection over 50 per cent.
Conclusions were erroneously drawn by critics that the future of all
activities within highly protected industries was in jeopardy, when data were recently
published by the Tariff Board on the struct ure of protection in Australia whnich showed
the average rate of effective protection for industries. These erroneous conclusions
were drawn despite information the Board published about the wide variation of rates
within each of these industries.
Those who regard the tariff review as essentially negative fail to appreciate,
I believe, the complex network of inter -relationships between different manufacturing
activities in the economy.
It is only when one begins to explore the nature of these relationships that
the positive effects which the tariff review will have become apparent. For example,
a reduction in the duty on a particular product will increase the effective protection
afforded those using the product concerned. Duty reductions are not therefore
necessarily negative.
Conversely, duty increases are not necessarily positive for those using
protected products. In a nutshell, an increase in a duty does not necessarily result
in an increase in protection. An important fact highlighted by the information the
Tariff Board recently published on the structure of protection in Australia is that
many manufacturing activities do not need all the protection which the tariff at present
affords them. oes. ./ 6 
In other words, the costs of some activities using protected products are
inflated in order to provide protection to other activities which do not need it.
As your own organisation, Mr. President, has argued that high costs are
the main cause of the present inflation, it would doubtless stjppr t-. c s'e-y removal
of this excess protection. Consuming industries, for intanc2, i. I_: 2 c-. ly
from reduction of protection on their inputs in cases where exiatL=; is ar( higher
than necessary to sustain profitable local production of those inputs.
In such cases, the removal of the unnecessary protection will reduce
the costs of the consuming industries. This, in turn, will make trhe prices of their
outputs more competitive. Removal of those tariffs which do not prcAt. any local
production another purpose of the review will reduce the cos: zS of d inputs
for manufacturing. In this connection, I remind you that between 60 and 70 per cent of all
Australian imports in the main, those which are not in competition with local
production are used in direct factory production by Australian mr'-rcturers.
Removal of unnecessary protection and preferential margins on imports which
are not in competition with local production will directly benefit manufacturers using
such imports in their production. fi cases where existing preferertial margins are
substantial, their removal may also be expected to give Austra-?--:,-nufact-. r.-_ rs
access to new and cheaper sources of imported materials and eq i-ment.
In all these cases, removal of unnecessary protection in the cour3 e of
the tariff review will make the Australian manufacturing sector more competitive without
detriment to any existing Australian industry.
And the market for Australian manufactures will, as a result, tend to expand
faster. This, in turn, will increase the employment opportunities for labour and
capital in Australian manufacturing.
The review will also bring some important indirect benefits for
manufacturing industry. One such benefit, overlooked by some who are apprehensive
about the review, is the additional information which it should provide about manufacturing
activities in Australia.
For example, it should provide for manufacturers more specific information
than is at present available
about the size of the domestic market for particular products;
about production costs at different levels of output; and
about the general structure of local industry.
This is obviously basic information for any potential investor in a manufacturing
activity. 
The review should also provide individual manufactukers with a unique lIU*
between their own activities and those of the industry to which they belong to the
extent that statistics published by the Tariff Board can be compared with the more
aggregated statistics published by the Bureau of Census and Statistics.
Indeed, because of the immense volume of data already available from the
Bureau, and the new information which will become available as a result of its
in~ egrated economic censuses, links between statistics published by the Board and
those published by the Bureau will add a new dimension to public understanding of the
costs and benefits-of protection.
This will be to the advantage of manufacturers, the Government and the
community. In summary, I am confident we can expect quite positive -and beneficial
effects for manufacturing industry and for the whole community to flow from the
systematic review of the-tariff.
I believe our policy is wholly constructive. It is not punitive. It is
designed to help not hinder. It is part, I believe, of the new maturity which has come
to Australian industry and will be for the good of all. I
I do congratulate you all on the wonderful job manufacturing industry is doing
to speed the growth of the nation and on the efforts it is making to increase productivity.
This is a time when new products, new ideas and the application of new technologies are
of tremendous importance and have a fertilising influence on the whole of the economy.
Your horizons are getting wider every year and I wish you well in your
great endeavours. 


4 September 1971
Ladies and Gentlemen, My wife and I are delighted to be here. Thank you for your most generous welcome. I can assure you it is stimulating to see so many of you from my own and other Liberal Electorates here today.
Let us make today a significant date in the history of the Liberal Party and in the history of the Government in Canberra. Let us as Liberals make a new and concerted drive to fight for our own Liberal principles and our cause, in the interest of all Australians.
It is up to all of us to bring this about. We cannot expect to get it by asking or by hoping or by wishful thinking. We can get it by performance. Performance in our Branches, in our State Parties, in our Federal organisation and in the Parliamentary Party. 
If we have differences as we inevitably will let us resolve them within the Party. We should be exuding confidence in the Branches all the members playing their part. If we have doubts, let us cast them out. Don't let them eat away at us like a cancer.
Liberalism stands for the individual. For his liberties and his ideals.
All I ask for is unity in the pursuit of those ideals and objectives to which we as Liberals are committed by our platform and our policies. I ask for unity in our attack on inflation. I ask for moderation on the part of those in whose hands lies the determination of prices.
I ask for moderation on the part of industrial forces so that genuine progress is not retarded by political conflict,, and above all let us see policies rather than personalities get better recognition in the media.
We have had a period of difficulties. That is true. I want to stress that the differences were never fundamental, nor did they relate to differences in policy of any substance. I know that the Liberal Parliamentary Party is united, and united behind the leadership, and there are  good reasons for us to be confident. But there is a need to demonstrate that confidence. There are good grounds for us to be optimistic. There are none for us to be complacent.
I also want to appeal to the people of Australia for unity in a nation-wide effort to beat the problems of the day. They are not problems of survival, for we have security. They are not problems of bondage, for we are free. Some of them are largely beyond our control, such as excessive wage increases and the problem of the wool industry: some of them are not.
Let us pull together all of us to overcome them where it is in our power so to do. There is no better place for us to start than here in my own Electorate of Lowe. The people of Lowe have given me their loyalty and their support for twenty-two years. I value that beyond words. 
My duties are clear. They are to represent the people of Lowe in the Federal Parliament. to lead the Parliamentary Liberal Party and to lead the nation as Prime Minister.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I believe that my Government has done a great deal in these past six months which has not yet had a proper public valuation put on it because of the distractions of other events and because the good things of life frequently pass unnoticed.
During the past six months I have visited every state in the Commonwealth and some of the states several times. I have been concerned with achieving two objectives. One was to make it clear that my Goverwnent believes in the Federal System.
We in the Commonwealth Government will co-operate with the states to the limit to make it work in the best interests of the Australian people. The other was to make direct contact with the State Liberal Parties and Branches. I did this to ensure that those of us in the Federal Parliamentary Party were making common cause with our fellow Liberals in presenting the platform and policies of our Party in the National Parliament.
I have been encouraged during my travels. I believe our relationships with the states at the political level are much better, and I am more confident now that we are getting a better identity of outlook between the Liberal Branches and their Parliamentary representatives. We have, in short, a solid base on which to build.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I won't go over history but I do want to make some brief comments on some matters of special interest.
The first relates to the decision of the High Court in the cement pipes case. The decision should be welcomed for the reason that it clarifies the meaning of the words " tradlhg and financial corporationg' in the Commonwealth Constitution. The 1908 definition of the words in the Huddart Parrcer judgement have long seemed to me to violate the plain meaning of the words. The High Gburt has also pointed out the necessity for precision in the drafting of legislation.
The Trade Practices Law is designed to strengthen competition in Australian ' trade and . commerce to the extent required by the public interest. The law is now being reviewed and a new and strengthened Bill will be introduced into Parliament as soon as practicable. On a practical basis, the decision does not, in any sense, reduce the need for the closest co-operation between the Commonwealth and the States.
Second is the state of the economy. You have just had the new Budget. I didn't expect it to be a popular Budget, but it is a responsible one. Few people have challenged us about its inherent soundness or that it was developed with a high sense of responsibility.
Would any sensible Australian expect us to act otherwise? We had already come to grips with inflation and the rural crisis. We are working hard to get a more stable industrial situation.
The Budget took these and other factors into account. Some of the problems are short term, others longer-term, but we take them together so that we have a strategy and a purpose for the future. What I want to say to you is: Have confidence in your countryand in the strength of the economy.
The economy basically is sound. Our natural resources are substantial, our trade is healthy, our foreign exchange position is strong. There is no danger whatsoever of mass unemployment. Those who are starting this kind of whispering campaign are talking rubbish. They want to create alarm and despondency when there is no reason - absolutely no reason  - for that.
The Liberal-Country Party Government has had the confidence and support of a niajority of Australians for twenty-two years. It has never shirked its responsibilities. It has a wealth of experience to bring to bear on the problems of the day. I have no doubt that we will emerge from the present economic difficulties with our long-range prospects sound indeed.
The other matter I want to mention is social welfare. We have to look after those most in need as our first commitments in this field. We have done this with our pension rises. Those increases during my administration have been much greater than the rise in the cost of living. That, in fact, is the record in recent years. Their standard of living will be improved, but I don't want to regard our care for the needy as something based on a simple statistic or a percentage. I want to make it something which has regard for human values, for the right of every Austialian to security in his life and living.
Our work in the social welfare field is by no means done. We have the whole rang,-e of Government activity in this field under review and we will press on until we have cleaned out poverty from our communities.
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, I ask you to ignore the Jeremiahs. They come out from their holes in the ground whenever they think there is someone who will listen to them.
The problems before us are being dealt with. The future is full of promise, the Government is in good heart and we have abundant faith in the good sense, the abilities and the energies of the Australian people.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERYAUSTRlALIAN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATIONAN'NIVERSARY DIN4NER VICTORIAN BRANCIMIELBOURNE,VIC. 7 OCTOBER, 1971.SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTERMr. President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,When I look around this crowded room tonightI feel in great heart knowing that there are in everycommunity, good and able people, ready and willing tomake a deliberate effort to keep our vital friendshipsin good repair and to convince others to do the same.I am glad to be here tonight, Msr. Baxter, asthe guest of your association and its members for thisthirtieth anniversary celebration dinner of the VictorianBranch of the Australian-American Association.M4y wife and I have both travelled widelytogether in America and we are the first to acknowledgethe warmth and friendliness of its people and the greatnessof its achievements in the cavalcade of history. We haveshared many happy arnd exciting associations with our Americanfriends on the other side of the Pacific.Sir, we are delighted to see so many old friendshere tonight and if I may be forgiven for singling out twovery distinguished people I want to say it is wonderful tohave Lord and Lady Casey with us at this table. None knowsbetter than they how the links between Australia and Americahave been forged over the years and I doubt if anyone has doneas much as they have to make those links secure. I know whata strength Lord Casey has been to the Australian-American.Association since its earliest days. I do congratulate theAssociation on living this long life and one which I trusthas been a merry as well as a rewarding one. I am told, too,Sir, that the women's group and the Junior American Associationreally keep the men on their toes. Congratulations to you too.Now Sir, I hope you will forgive me for beingserious tonight but an anniversary occasion like this temptsme to look briefly over the past, and then, more particularlyto look forward into the future in our relationships withAmerica. .2/
2I think the pre' -eminent characteristic of theUnited Statlkes in the international comrmunity has been itsdeep sense of responsibility to work towards a more stableand equitable world order. It has given concrete evidenceof its readiness to make human and material sacrifices forthis purpose. It has given its blood and its treasure informidable quantities. That hasn't always been appreciatedand often not understood. If we can do something to explainand correct this we serve our own interests and take up aproper position as fair-minded people.It is easy to scoff at our democratic institutions.The way they .) ork and the things they do, be they of theAmerican, the British or the Australian order; And I quoteFranklin Roosevelt on this point. What he had to say was thisandI quote'-" I get everlastingly angry at those who assertvociferously that the four freedoms and theAtlantic Charter are nonsense because they areunattainable." if those people had lived a century arid a halfago they would have sneered and said that theDeclaration of independence was utter piffle." If they had lived nearly a thousand years agothey would have laughed uproariously at the idealsof Magna Carta.Ancz if they had lived several thousand yearsago they would have derided Moses when he camedown from t-he mountain with the Ten Commandments".ladies and Gentlemen, your Association was born inthe dark days of World War II and at that time, and in the yearssince then, the United States has been a significant, and ind~ eeda decisive, factor in our security. We must be grateful ' for thepartnership with the United States which prevented a possibleinvasion of Australia and led to the re-conquest of the Pacificby the allies. Australia was, of course, an essential base for operations.Then we must acknowledge the effective leadership given by theUnited States checking communist aggression in Korea and inVietnam. We signed the Anzus Treaty wnith them and to this daythat Treaty ranks as our most important Treaty.I have travelled the Pacific many times. I have seenthe distance shrink as the jets have devoured the space and Ihave seen South-East Asia change from a region of turbulenceto one with a more settled and confident prospect.I have sat in the Australian Cabinet for many yearsand joined in the vital decisions we have taken to identifyourselves more deliberately and more closely with the region towhich geographically we belong. .3/
-3one of the essential elements in our policy towardsSouth East Asia has been the Australian-Amierican alliance.It is of crucial importance to our foreign folic7. This willcontinue to be a basic element of our policy, but the changednature of the political situation in South East Asia mustcarry with it changes in the nature of our relationship withthe United States in that region.The United States and Australia have sir~ illar objoctives.We should both like * to see a region which is stable politically,developing rapidly economically and within which the peoplesare free to choose their own forms of governments. NeverthelessAustralia must recognise that its own particular interests in thispart of the world may call for different judgements on its partfrom those of the United States.Let us look at some of the chanaes that have occurredwithin our own part of the world. The first which hasreceived widespread publicity has been the change in UnitedStates policy itself, broadly encompassed under what is knownas the Nixon Doctrine.Clearly the United States is no longer prepared toattempt alone and on a global ecale the containment ofaggression and the construction of a reasonably stable frame=work of international co-operation. While maintaining itsgeneral support and protection, it has called upon the countriesof the region to do more to help themselves. rle accept this,and the challenge and responsibility of greater self-reliance.The second major change within the South-East Asia regionhas been the re-emergence of tha influence of powers other thanthe United States. This re-emergence has begun to complicatethe ' international political situation.Japan with its enormous economic strength is in a positionto make a major contribution to the development of the region.It has regained its international confidence, and its relationswith South-East Asian countries will be increasingly importantin the political equations of the area.The People's Republic of China appears to be giving-lessemphasis to the rigidities of ideology in the conduct of itsforeign policy and to be showing a new interest in the establishmentof more traditional diplomatic and commercial relationships.Russia, too, has begun to try to increase its influencein the area, and to seek closer ties with South East AsianGovernments. All these moves are only to be expected;, greatpowers have always interested themselves in affairs outsidetheir own borders, and will continue to do so. ./ 4
The third major change that I shall note in theregion has been the establishment of increasingly confidentand capable national governments, dedicated to the objectivesof economic progress, social welfare and regional co-operation.This is a development which has been made possible in largemeasure by successful allied resistance to the aggressionagainst South Vietnam.Most of the peoples of the countries of the regionhave now established their national identity and have installedgovernments capable of planning their futures, and resisting,with a minimum of outside assistance, efforts by minority groupsto overthrow the national political order.Of one thing I am sure, in the period that lies ahead,the need for consultation between us will not be less, butgreater. Increasingly with our political and defence relations,other aspects of our relationship with the United States can beexpected to assume greater importance for example trade,investment, civil aviation.In the process, differences between us are bound toarise but there is no reason why we cannot continue to discussthem fully and frankly, as we have in the past, and in a spiritof give and take. This is what a partnership is for.We look forward to a future where the United StatescQntinues to take a wise and constructive role in theachievement of a peaceful world order and we expect to makeour own individual and independent contribution to therealisation of the same objective.We have shared the dangers of the past in friendship.Let us share, in the same way, the promise of the future.I thank you. 1ZI



ATLAS COPCO OPENING OF NEW PLANT
BLACKTOWN N. S. W.
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
Ladies and Gentlemen: 11Otbr97
Thank you Sir-Ian for referring to my friendship with
Dr. Wallenberg. I know him primarily as a very distinguished member
of the banking community, and a financier of international repute.
And I also know him but in a lesser way as an industrialist. So
I looked forward, when I was invited here, to being able to renew
my acquaintance with him. And I hope at the same time, to be able
to try and get his impressions of what is happening in the international
O maobnoevet arayll , m arwkheetns , w e whcaenn wheo pec anf orh opteh e foArm erai craena lisgunrcmheanrtg eo f onp ariimtpioerst, s and
to be removed. I
But that meeting will be delayed. I hope it's in the not
too distant future that I'll be able to meet him again.
And Sir Ian, if I can . thank you particularly when you
referred to compression, compressed air and similar matters, that
you did it in an industrial context, and not in the context in front
of my colleagues of compressed air in the Federal Parliament. I
can assure you, we're grateful that this subject wasn't raised
with all the implications it has for my colleagues on the other side
of the House and for myself.
But having said all that, may I join with you Sir Ian, in
hoping that in the not too distant future we will be able to get a
resolution of world parities in the international money markets.
Because I believe that while it doesn't interfere with us to any
great extent at the moment, nonetheless, it does interfere with the
free flow of world trade, and consequently if it proceeds over a
very long period of time, it must effect us. It effects us indirectly
because it will effect the trade of the developing countries and
for that matter, all the developed countries as well.
And I can add to that that I do hope this surcharge that has
been imposed is also removed in double-quick time, because of the
impact that it can have, and the reaction that is likely to be-caused
in other countries if it is not taken off very quickly. The Americans,
we know, have a major problem a very big one because their
balance of payments deficit is a huge one. But other countries are,
I am sure, looking at it in a realistic way. We want all countries to be
able to play their part in trying to come to a speedy resolution for
all of us. But now, Sir, may I turn to the substance of what I wanted
to say to you here today. And the first point that I want to mention
is that we do welcome our friends from Sweden and , their new enterprise.
This enterprise Atlas Copco brings with it a very famous Sviedish
name. It is associated with the name of Wallenberg and that name is
very well known in this country of ours. / 2 
Now I'm sure of this. That because of the management
techniques that are so well-known to your Corporation, because
of the new type of product it is now introducing, that it will
be a great asset to this country. And one I can assure you
that as an Acting Treasurer and as a Prime Minister, we welcome.
Now the second reason why I want to welcome you here
is a pleasant one. You mentioned the word growth. We like to
use three different phrases together, or three different words
together growth, progress and prosperity. 7,
And I believe that not only do we ensure growth in
the material sense as a result of the establishment of these new
sections of your factory, but it will also add to our progress
in this community, and I think to the prosperity of many, many
sections of our people as well. Because a new plant does mean
progress, and a new plant does give a demonstration from overseas,
and capital is a very sensitive thing and usually works in
those places where it can get the best and the most stable return.
But it also demonstrates the confidence of your own people, and
the management of your own people in Sweden in the future
prosperity of this country.
There is another reason too and I'll have to come
back to what both you and Sir Ian said a few moments ago -and
this does give me the opportunity for a little propaganda -that
whilst at the moment we have a very satisfactory trade balance
and we've got a very happy balance of payments surplus at the
moment too, nonetheless, we do want to be able to ensure, that
over a long period, we can not only have trade surplusses, but
the problem of balance of payments difficulties will be banished
for all time. Now I think you know Sir, that so far as our direct trade
with Sweden is concerned, we export to you only a little less than
one sixth of what you export to us. And so consequently we've
always looked forward with a great deal of pleasure to the day
when industries could be established here that could in some way,
rectify to a moderate extent the difference in the balance of
payments between the two countries.
Naturally I a4leased to be able to say in your
presence, and in the presence of Sir Ian as well, that last year
our trade increased by something of the order of thirty per cent.
So we can look forward in the days to come in an improvement in
the balance. But what is much more important to us is that you are
engaging in new activities and that those activities will in
the future permit us together to improve the export trade.
And again if I can refer to Sir Ian in a very favourable
way. On the last two-occasions when I've had the pleasure of
meeting him in Canberra, he's advised me of' the kind ofa. ctivities
that he is engaged in. And he gave me an insight at least into
one industry, that was exclusively oriented towards the export
markets. I believe Sir, that your Corporation is oriented to
export markets as well. 
Now when I heard of these ideas and these new enterprises, I
couldn't help but think of the words " taking coals to Newcastle". It's
not so many generations ago when nobody thought it was within the bounds
of contemplation that anyone could shift coals to Newcastle. But we in
this country seem to be developing the facilties to move all sorts of
commodities to all sorts of hitherto unexpected places. We export quite
a lot of spaghetti to Italy. We send a lot of our flowers to Holland.
And I am pleased to be able to state, that as a result of some discussions
I have had in Melbournewithin the course of the last few weeks that
we are now sending knives and forks to Sheffield.
So you can see, Sir, that we are getting heavily engaged in
international trade and we are doing so in a very sensible way..
But today I don't want to refer principally to these matters of
trade. To an audience as distinguished as this, and one heavily involved
S in the problem of industrial management and productivity, I want to
Vmention three matters that I regard to be of crucial importance to us
ones that have to be solved.
The first one involves this Corporation in the same way as
it involves every other corporation manufacturing goods in AustralhV
And the problem that we face today is this. That now for a little
more than a year, probably approaching a period of about two years,
we have had wild-cat strikes, unpredictable wild-cat strikes of a size,
of a dimension that I believe are cutting back our prospects for
production in the future. And they are most certainly reducing our
productivity and therefore the very basis on which we are able to get
a reduction of costs and one of the instruments through which we can
effect inflation. Now many of them, and I want to emphasise these
words, are strikes that are purely based upon domestic political
Srequirements that have no association whatsoever with the idea that they
can win greater pay packets and more purchasing power for the people
who might be employed in the industry involved.
They're certainly helping prices to go up. Looked at in the
other way, they're not helping us to keep prices down. And I repeat it
again, because it is of basic importance to us : It is one of the
greatest impediments that we have to keeping inflationary forces under
restraint. And equally too, because of the difficulties it creates, the
uncertainties it creates in the minds of so many people, I think it
is preventing domestic demand from increasing at a moderate pace and
in a way in which I can assure you we would like it to increase at the
moment. But coming back to this problem of political and other industrial
wild-cat strikes the point that I want to make here today is that last
year the working man lost $ 31 million because of industrial disputes.
That is three times more than they lost in 1967. It's an appalling record
and it's an appalling record against the backgroun ' d that average earnings,
and if you like average wages, are increasing at an unprecedented pace.
Now my worry, and it's one of the biggest worries, is that it's
left-wing and communist controlled unions, that are, I believe, probably
responsible for more of the strikes than from any other section of
the community-. / 4 
But I also want to emphasise that I do not believe that the
great majority of working men want these strikes to continue. They
want to get on with the job. They want prices to be fairly stable.
They want to be able to look after their families. And consequently
it must be our responsibility as the Government to try and ensure that
it is the wish of the working man that prevails and not the wish of
their left-wing supporters.
And the second point I want to mention concerns what is funadmental
to industrial success. And that is our system of arbitration. Now this
is a system that most of you know has stood us in very good stead ever
since the arbitration system was established. As a member of a Cabinet,
who for eight years was responsible for the Department of Labour and
National Service, I can assure you that I developed a respect for the
system of arbitration. I know the advantages that it can bring. And
it must be our responsibility as a Government to try and strengthen that
system, and not permit others to destroy it, or weaken it. We must
ensure that objective if it is practical.
The arbitration system has served Australians remarkably well.
._ Ihats banished sweated labour into the recesses of history. It brought
W a degree of equality in payment-for work performed that could not be
brought by any other system. There is one regret that I have at the
moment, and it is a very deep regret. It is the way in which under the
present system of settlement of industrial disputes the rewards
are not going within a fair degree of equality to all workers, but are
going into the hands of those where the industrial might and strength
is the greatest and where they can use the greatest muscle in order
to wring rewards out of employers.
But I don't for one moment think that this is the end of the
problem. I can assure you that we are doing all in our power now, to be
able to contemplate first of all, and finally to be able to bring
reforms to Parliament in order to strengthen arbitration and to look at
the whole system of industrial strength to see what advantage we can
obtain from it.
* And whenlI look at this I want to assure you that the system of
sanctions must remain as an essential element in the arbitral machinery.
And they must apply, not only to the employee or to the trade unionist,
but as you know as well as I do, they have to apply to the employer as
well. Now I can't stress too strongly how fundamental the preservation
of the arbitration system is to industrial peace and stability. I want
to assiire you that we will do all in our power to sustain arbitration.
We will not permit it to be destroyed.
So I must urge you not to sell it short. Don't drop it because
you've nothing better to put in its place. Don't nege it, or don't
please I ask you, let it fail by lack of use.
The final point I want to put to you, and this is one, 1-believe,
Sir, will appeal to you. That is the problem of productivity. All of
us, I think, understand this problem of productivity and inflation. But
the moment there is any increase in average incomes or earnings that is
greater than the increase in producitivity, then naturally enough you
do get an inflationary pressure. Something of the order of 6 or 7 per cen.
today that is the difference between the growth in productivity
and'-'-he growth in average earnings. 
Now what we want to attempt to do, although it is a very difficult
objective, is to try and reduce the gap to the maximum extent that we
can do. Not that we believe it is a tolerable alternative, because we
don't think we can. But what we want to do is to reduce the gap so
that we get a degree of inflation that is acceptable and one that
can be readily absorbed in the international community.
The next point that I want to make to you about productivity is
this It doesn't necessarily mean more work. It doesn't-necessarily
mean more work. It doesn't necessarily mean that you work harder. It
has, Mr. Johnsson, as you so clearly implied, meant that you have to
work with a greater degree of efficiency. And it is for this, and for
other reasons why we welcome your Corporation coming here. Because we
do feel from what we have heard and what I have seen, that you would
introduce efficiency into the management of this plant.
Now Mr. Chairman, I haven't had a good look around this
factory. I regret to say I have to go to Canberra quite soon. But from
what I have read, particularly from the little pamphlet that was sent
to me a few days ago, I can assure you that I recognise the degree of
efficiency that you show.
I know of the management and labour skills that you have in
this factory in Blacktown.
I believe the manufacturing industries of Australia are making
a magnificent contribution to our growing industrial greatness. They
are providing resourceful and skilful service, and they are doing much
to strengthen our self-reliance as a nation. This new plant today adds
to their number and their diversity. 


F A' 1 -kr V TSe.I OF'TM ! AC 1FIT" ZODThe P~ rime M'ilEtur ovaid in reapon., o to P. cquetio-nfrom the Editor ( Vr Oakeso that he did not ocoasidor tiio i-rapaton Australian policy of China's entx7 Into the United lationawould be groat. lie aoo sald that he did not think the t actthat ive had vote-d againot the Albaniari, iieol~ utl oL 1'~ vn&amp; uy par'ticul~ ar effcct on the wa'y in our rolations wt'itthe 1P. H. C. would davelop.Th ?-4riae Xlnietor szaid th-at the concrctclv ot. x1of China's member13hip of' tho United IEationz, or indece, otdiplomatic recoenitiona of China, were ztill tnccrtaino Foroxamplo, it had made little difference to the 1Jriitod xln-domi orcso far, to Ctujada. The Prinme NIiister said it was important thatChina be drawn, into the comity of nations, but we should a. otforget that China was still willing to assiot revolutionarymovements in the Aaian region, including those on the Thai border.Asked uhy so few of its major allieo hadsupported the United State position1 on China, the Prime 1œ 4inistorsaid that the European countries, for example, were fuirthor awayfrom the north Asian region. They tendered to be se1Af-coi2tredand remote from the problem. B~ elgium had probably not roupportedus after saying it would because it was not consitlted about thetiming of the second Kissinger viIcit to Poking.
2-Tho Prñ i M~ nloter &amp;~ dtho ncxt few yearswould be a crucial pr : od in which it i-would be necess= y tofind a new balance botween theo great pawars -the Un-Itod3taton, the Soviet Union, Clhinao Japtx and an intogratedEurope to ensure an onduiring peace.IUiIT.* D ~ TT3AFTSR-VIRT NAP! OThere wasi somel discussion as to whether' or notthe United States was turning ieolationist of tho rolewhich the Unite~ d tatea smiglht usefully 9ack~ to p. hay in Aziain the futre. The Priae niotar said it was unlikelir thatthe United fota" Gea vould got involved again 1. u a land rar ia0Ania. Its rolc ahculd be to enoure st' ic~. it finanasoictence and aid to mtaintain the viability of the coiuitricain thie region, In Viet Nam and Cam~ bodia, in particula-r, theUnited States should assiat in providinS adequate training oflocal forces ac wollas necesedry air and naval support.JAPAN. Tarning to Japani, theo Primie Minister said that-howanted to emphasine the crucial inportanco of Japan. A91riupolicios had already dairiaged the Sato leader2hip. There wasnobody who could replace him. Otherwise, he would probablyhave fallen by n~ ow. This waa partly due to United Slitatec failureto handle its approach to Japan on major iseues adequately.
It waa LrVortaimt that in any Anncirlcem atem~ ito got a detente witil Ch~ ina ara the S3ovict lVntonq japan Musjtnot be forgotte'z Tho United States should not viork in awav; hich w~ ould hinder Japan developingj irear trade.CHiINA: Ini answer to anothor quention about obanpin~ gattitudoe to China, the ]? rinc Alinistor sead that bAstraliahad movod away from the Lullee theories of corxtaiyument andinaotive anti-co== i a~ m, Since last year we had been ret'l-inking the bauis of our policy to-wardo China., This w~ asnot beuause we hacd. csaaed to lie antipat1hetic to comuiibut we accepted the neod to livO ' With It on tho ba~ sis of auaocommodation, Thic acooawodation, howevero atill needed~ tobe backed by strength. In response -to &amp; rnother question, the Pritne k-iistarvaid that it iw true that the United ' States was g~ oing through-somiething of a dowestio trauma. However, he haxd no doubt thatthe problome giving rise to this would be overoome and theUnited btates would continue to play a vcry importwant and activerolo in world affairs.~ i'IG~~ TIN. Asked by the E~ ditor about our "' exclutsive" immigrationpolicy, the Prime ninister said that this was a misleading phrase.Our im. igration policy was restrictive, but it was not exclusive.hlon-Buropeans# including black Americana, could enter Australia for
4 .1aCehe crtvi for inc ude-matf. Were ttmt tho &amp; plicant , toul. dmied to be ) alc to g'tt Into Aœ or&amp; all 2vlt Pnld th~ at h(, xjoha~ ve ' ckilln vhlch iio neecd in Autmla Our policyhad been coniqra~ biy libralifQCd : W 1966aThe IPrituo ! Uiater6~ added tha~ t , x hnd actu&amp; ally bcm,tc. UW. in too nxtiñ y miret zmd he had had the irntake r; dtued x'eoon-t1S. B. C. m~ uoit be aieod. Hiroverv the Euopancontiocondiioted 4-0t', of the rldla trado amd i. t im-ad bo rjnl_tq inditoo t ': Ie to eant into fre trode. inrp coato be~ outuard lookcine a~ nd underiutnd~ t1o value~ of~ larae oltrae. The . C woUdl need to Ulto c glob,-, r-flor th. arogiñ ona1 approach.* 1'" 11TV43 Im, reiaporns to a questiong the 2rimme 1' Uniotvrsaid tha~ t i~ t Umat Auztralia'o view that it wa neczmvry to oometo a qiLck ncozi~ odation on foreign oxahauro ratev and thñ e revaluation~upwarda of the Thin, 11eutch Rmr e2nd gold. 120 ntian. dolt-! tiouldbo hurmful. It seevdod strarq to hi that the United ktates amntedSD., AOu# but wa ro1uotamt to aeie toar. 2vinreace iii tho prico of~gold*



Today before we turn to our questions I want to talk about
some of the problems that we face. First of all yesterday I did
have the great privilege of having a long talk with President
Nixon.. and Dr. Kissingen I can assure you that those talks
could not have been more intimate and I could not have wished
that The President would have taken me into his confidence to
a greater degree than he did. Little was left unsaid and he
I did convince me that he is on the right track in trying to get
a rapprochement in world affairs and to try aiud get a reduction
in tensions so that we can divert our attention to the gcod life
and better opportunities for our citizens than to devoting
so much of our time and so much of our effort to the impediment
of var. No7 I've welcomed my discussions too with Mr Laird and
Mr Packard who will shortly go to Australia. I've welcomed the
discussions I've had with Secretary of State Rogers, who I think
I can claim is a personal friend and a man very Qell known to
me. In Australia we are building one society and I want to
emphasize this. We want one society united in mutual loyalty
but richly diverse in ethnic, religion and cultural back. rounds and
influences. As to our national development and the state of the
economy, I see ahead for Australia a remarkable prospect. 7e
have by good fortune, and I think too by good management, created
all the basic conditions that are the ingredient for success. I
don't know of any country that I have visited in recent years
and I've visited a great number of them but I don't know of ary
countxy that offers quite the same prospects as we do. So if aj of
you feel you would like to become immigrants to nj country just slip
a note up to Mr. President. Let me know your name and address and 
I'll hand it on to one of my officials and see if you're w~ orthy
of becoming a member of my own press corps, particularly if
I feel that you're indulgent towards myself. 14ow as to the
basic ingredients for success. Our population is growing, our
economy is sopundly based. It has diversity and strength and our
national resources are not only immense, but they're growing day
by day. If you open the paper and don't find some newl discovery
that is likely to add to our wealth it's a strange day for the
press I can assure you. are too developin6 all those skills
that the technological age demands and through the combination of
all these qualities and virtues me are becoming a middle power. I
think ' we have a significance in the Pacific theatre that is out of
all proportion to the wealth that is being produced in my country.
I believe we are getting into this position of trust, a position
where people eousult us because they know that over the years we
have been S completely trustworthy and reliable ally. They know
that in terms of the aid programmes civil aid programes on an
official basis that we do at least as well as any other countxy.
pAnd v hen the numbers go up I can assure you that you will see that
our name in terms of performance per head of population is
regarded as remarkably good. As I came along one of your avenues
today, Independence Avenue, I couldn't help but ask myself -the simple
question " Wihy is it tha-t we don' -t parade this virtue of independence
and inter-dependence in the same ways you do here. We have the same
lusty vitality, the same desire to feel that we can express our
opinions and our views. Vie know too that in a world that's becoming
increasingly complex, in a world where you never know what is likely
to happen in the forty-eight hours that are to come, we also have
to have friends and allies. Consequently we want friends and allies wh(
are juist 
as trustwiorthy and reliable as tie are ourselves. There are certain
factors in the Australian economy that ' we have had to 6ive some
considerable attention to in recent years, particularly over the
last twelve months. Not that these problems are singular
to Australia. I can assure you they are not, but we do. face the
problem in exactly the same way as you do. But re have cost
inflation and we have to a minor degree the appearance of a small
degree of unemployment that we feel that ' we have to overcome
as quickly as we can. We have certain other ~ economic problems
too that are not so much the direct consequence of internal
problems but are problems that arise as the resul. ofi our
relationship iith other countries and the changes that occur
in our trade, particularly lately the changes that have occurred in
our international currency situation. May I now turn to one
of your problems the one relating to the currency crisis.
First of all might I say that of course we understand your
position. For long the United States has, as it were, shcltered
more than a fair proportion of the burden of the world. Not
only in the way in which it has provided security for so many
countries but also because it has been a reserve currency able
to provide the additional international currency that it has
provided the free exchange of goods and services. We understood
therefore it " ias necessary not only that you should reduce the
burden of your defence effort but also that you should have
the opportunity to get a better balance in your payment
system. All that ' we had to decide was the amount of the
turn round that was necessary somewhere 
near eight thousand billion dollars per year, but the
ways and means that turn round was to be achieved.
But I go on further to say this: that so far as
we are concerned we are not in a position where we
can be explicit about what our own intentions will
be because we are not a member of the group of ten. We
don't belong to working party three of the OECD.
Consequently un. til decisions are made by the countries
that have the decisive influence in world finance, it
is not sensible or prudent for us to be making up our
minds the way we'll go. On the contrary it seems
sensible that we keep all our options open. Wlhen
the major decisions are made, particularly on the DM
and the yen, we'll be able to make up our minds what
we are to do. What we do hope is that there is an
early re-alignment of currencies, and we hope, even
more importantly, that before that occurs that your
imports surcharge is removed and that trade will be
freer. This way people will have the stars by which
they can guide their economic fortunes, rather than the
mysteries of today that are confusing everyone. If the
difficulties remain for much longer then I think you can
have action by other countries in retaliation and a
hardening of ideas into dogmas that I think can do
damage to all of us. So I do hope therefore that we
will have changes and I hope that those changes take
place fairly quickly. I can assure you that in my
conversations with various members of your Administration
I learnt that they share exactly the same view as we
do in Australia.
The next economic issue is Britains entry into the
European community. For our part we have always C~~
accepted the right of the United Kingdom's Government
to make up its own mind what it thought was in its
best interests. Nevertheless, what we felt was that
Britain, with whom we have had so many years satisfactory
and reasonable trading relationships, would represent
our interests in the European community and try a a 
and protect our exports into the Community countries,
particularly the primary imports to the maximum of our
capacity. But now we do find that there are these
growing trade barriers probably as much as $ 350 million
worth of our goods. We regard it as of critical importance
to us all that not only does Britain do its best
to represent our point of view and attempt to protect
our interests, but that we ourselves discuss with all
the European Community countries our problems, to enlist
support to see that there is a greater interchan:: e of
commodoties in the world. And. that far from being
isolationist and internal-looking that they. will be
outward-looking. And that the principles of the Kennedy
round of negotiations will once again be respeClted in
the world and that freedom of trade will become the
catch-phrase rather than the alternative.
May I now turn to our foreign policy and defence.
Because as I said last night at the dinner that was
given to me by the President: we believe in Australia
and I am sure you believe it to be true too that profound
changes are taking place in the policies and relationiships
of the super and middle powers. The KPeoples
Republic of China has now entered the United N~ ations
and ever since February of last year, continuing right
through to March and until representation was achieved
a few days ago, we have persisted with the poli'cy that
first of all the Peoples Republic of China should have
the permanent seat on the Security Council. At the
same time, because we believe in the principles of
the Charter itself and we believe in the Charter of
* universality, we wanted Taiwan also to remain a member
but a member of the General Assmebly. We-too look at
the Soviet Union with its increasing power and the
kowledge that it is a world power as well. It has L&amp;
begun. starting to exercise that power -Ln a part of
* world the Indian Ocean. Up to the present moment it
has to be confessed that they have not had large fleets 
there. Up to twenty vessels might be there at any one
time. They have pretty considerable afloat capacity and
they have some access to port facilities and to airfield
facilities. We understand just as well as anyone else
the reasons why they want this present. In some way
to counteract the influence of China, in some ways to
balance the influence of the to protect their own
trade interests, and we also believe to be able to make
some political influence on the littoral states if they
feel that the opportunity arises. For our part, and
on behalf of the U. K. we are watching this position very
carefully. Your Government has decided to put in a
signal station in the Diego Garcie, I think I could
take it for granted, although I have not V~ een given.
any concrete assurances about it that you yourself ril
have a counter balancing force there from time to time.
Not necessarily permanently based, but I believe you
will have a counter balancing force that will show to
the littoral states and show to the world that the U0
is prepared to live up to its obligations in the Indian
Ocean as well as it accepts the international burdens
of being the greatest of the western powers and the
greatest of the super powers as well. We are building
a naval base in south western Western Australia at
Cockburn Sound and a first class airfield at Learmouth.
We do hope the United States will be able to join with
us in the use of these facilities when elements of their
fleets might visit our shores. So too the United Kingdom
that has its small interests in South Africa and has also
agreed to take part with tte United States in the signal
station in Diego. Garcia. So you can therefore see that
we are there -the three of us are there not because
we believe that we have any offensive operations in
mind, but purely for defensive purposes. To show the
rest of the world that we are determined to support
the cause of freedom and make our contribution to freedom
whenever the opportunity should arise~. What I do say
to you is this: that we hope that in time our Asian 
and Pacific neighbours will come to form a close-knit
community that will have a political weight and an
importance of its own. By that I mean that I do believe
that we have a degree of importance in the South-East
Asian countries that is out of all proportion to our
own industrial strength and our military capabilities.
But I believe that they think this way because of their
trust in us, but much more importantly believe in it
because they know that we feel that by creating an
Asian identity, by creating the feeling that in cooperation
we can be a deterrent to aggressive action by
insurgency and by other kinds of subversive operations.
By that means we can ward off attack and we can devote
increasing quantities of our assets to developments in
the future, particularly developments for those who
today suffer from hunger and the privations of a primitive
community,,
Might I come to the next and probably the last point
that I want to mention before questions are asked. I
want to again emphasise because it becomes an, article
of faith with my own people that whenever we are faced
with a problem, whether it is in security area cultural
relations, trade or finance, we do make up our own minds
what is in our interest. But I like to use the word
" independence" at the same time as I use the word interdependence.
It indicates the kind of attitude we have
to the world in which we live as well as the world
with which we have to associate. I 
W~ hat re were doing provides a framework for cooperation
amongst several of the countries of Southeast Asia. In particular,
only a few days ago we have sig-ned or initialled a five part
agreement with Yalaysia, Singapore, the United Kingdom, New
Zealand and ourselves. And what we hope is that in time
our Asian and Pacific neighbours will come to form the same
kind of close knit community which will be similar to the five
power arrangements we have with the countries I've mentioned
and that will have political weight and importance of their
own. As we see it this will not be a military alliance or bloc
but a grouping of like minded countries engaged in close
cooperation for their mutual welfare and development whose
collective voice will count for something in the world. None
of this involves any reakening of our alliance with the United
States which remains, and I emphasise this as I emphasise it
again and again the sheet anchor of our security. Indeed we
would not be able to play our part in the security of our own
region without the support for our own defence efforts which
the ANZUS treaty provides. Yesterday, the President himself gave
his assurance in the clearest terms that the treaty was there to
stay and has continuing vitality. Our relationship with the
United States has been tested in conflict. Australia and the
United States have fought side by side in world wars, in Korea
and in Viet-Nam. W~ e have worked closely together for the
development and welfare of Southeast Asia and we enjoy the
closest cooperation and consultation in the day to day condaict
of our international relationships as my~ present visit has
underlined. Of course we make our own independent assessments of
particular situations and problems. T. e vigorously defend and
pursue our own national interests in the international 3cene 
and in your bi-latera. relations. At times there are of course
differences between Australian and American assessments and between
particular Australian and American. interests but the sum of the
differences that mayr arise between us is small compared with the
interests re have in common, the ideals and objectives which
tie share. We see ourselves as a partner Pith the United States
in efforts to produce a durable world order and a balance in
which the medium sized and smaller powers will be able to consolidate
their independence and. live in peace. The support we offer is
the support of a significant and independent countxy in the
Asian and Pacific regions. A countzy grow~ ing in strength and
influence. In short 11Mr President, we see our relationships
not as an echo, not as a satellite but as a partner in the
Pacific. U 
I also emphasise the very close and cordial relationships that exist
between your country and ours. At times, of course, there are differences
of opinion between us, but they axe not very great. It is the coimmon
interest we have and coimon ideals we have that I think are much more
important than the differences of opinion wherever they have occurred.
In the discussions that I have had with your Administration I have found a
very strong disposition to come to terms Pith us whenever I have raised
some difficulty that I think it would be better if we solved. And I
think as a result of the discussions I have had in the last few days we Pill
be able to talk on a more frank and, I believe, more sensiblc basio with
Mr. Packard and Mr. Stans and others when they come to Australia than Re
would have been able to do just a few weeks ago.
Question: Mr. Prime MiUnister. Is Australia worried about deteriorating
relations between the United States and Japan and the resulting effects
on security in the Pacific?
Prime Minister: Yes. We were worried about the ostensible deterioration
in relationships between Japan and the United States because we think that
there are five powers that must take place in a general rearrangement of
equilibrium in the world if we are to ensure the basic conditions of success
both in peace and in future developments and we Iaaow that Japan has to
play a particularly iniortant part in the Pacific theatre. I think that
when the first visit of Mr. Kissinger took place to Peking there was, I think,
a feeling not only of disappointment but almost of despair in the case of
Japan. And since the currency crisis and the ten per cent surcharge has been
imposed I think that the worries of Japan have become increasingly great.
Now it is our view that unless these problems of the currency crisis and
a freer exchange of goods and services take place then you are likely to
have a period of retaliation and you are likely to find, as I said in the
body of my speech, that the views that are held temnoarily can easily tur-n 
into dogmas. I have discussed this -with the President; I have discussed it
' with other members of the Administration; they understand the position
equally as much as I do, and I think I can assure you they know the
necessity for a quick solution. But they also point out and I think it's
wise that I should point this out to you too that the answer doesn't fall
exclusively in the minds and the hearts and in the intelligence of the
~ American and the Japanese people. The EEC countries and particularly
France axe involved and consequently it is wise that we try and get a general
realignment, a general rearrangement of parities as wdll as getting the
import surcharge taken off at the earliest moment. Bthx it will not be of
great advantage to any of us if we find that some countries in the Group of
Ten, not Australia, because we are not a member of it, but if some countries
in the Group of Ten refuse to play their part, particularly refuse to play
their part in ensuring that there is a turn round of something of the order
of eight billion dollars in the balance of payments as between the United
States and the rest of the world.
Q~ iestion: What do you see as the future defence alliances in South East Asia
in the light of the United Nations vote and President Nixon's revised China
policy. Prime Minister: I don't think that there will be any general realignment of
security or military alignments in S. E. Asia because-the truth of the matter
is there is not one country there that is on its own or in combination with one
of its allies capable of defending itself against a major attack by one of
the super powers or one of the very great powers. The second point is that
I don't think the Nixon doctrine itself has undergone any change whatsoever
as a result of the new China policies or the meeting of the President with
the heirarchy in Moscow. I believe that this policy still holds good and it
is a policy identical with our own. Primary responsibility for defence
= awt reside basically with the country concerned but if in the case of
insurgency or subversion it becomes beyond their capacity it becomes an area 
responsibility. After that I believe that is protection against attack by a
nuclear power, whether by nuclear weapons or otherwise, that the United
States will live up to its treaty obligations and its defence obligations.
Consequently I can't see the necessity for any great realignment in the
defence or security sense. I believe the position remains much the same as
it was before these general security realignments took place.
Question: Mr. Prime t-Unister. If Uncle Sam is moving into a balance of powe-.
with Red China where does this leave Australia?
Prime Minister: First of all I don't think that this ifteans that there could
be an alliance between the Peoples Republic and the United States. In myr
view the motive, in fact the sole motive behind the actions of the President,
is to try to get a balancing of power in order to ensure that countries
can look forward to the future free from the dangers of an imminent var and can
consequently devote more of their efforts to developing projects and to be
able to provide the under-developed countries of the woxld with better
opportunities for better living. In other -words I don't think for one moment
the U. S. ' wants to change its relationship with Japan. So far as we are
concerned I have received unqualified assurances from the President as well as
the Secretary of State that the ANZUS Treaty remains as valid today as it did
on the date on which it was signed. So I just want to, if I can, dismiss the
idea of any alignment of the U. S. or ganging up by the U. S. with the Peoples
Republic of China or Russia. On the contrary what he wants to ensure is that
there is a reduction in tensions and the countries, of course, that must
make the major, if not the sole contributions towards the reduction of tensions
is the U. S. S. R. and in particular too China as it moves into the nuclear age. 
Question: Will you please expand on your reference to the dialogue with
China. How soon will relations be established?
Prime Minister: Our own?
Questioner: Yes.
Prime* Minister: This again is one of those questions that is extremely difficult
to answer. As long ago as February/ March last year I did ask myr Department,
I was then the External Minister, and later on I became the Foreign Minister
too, to develope a series of position papers relating to China, that is the
Peoples Republic to the U. S. S. R. and to Japan. We then decided not only
did we rant representation of China in the United Nations but that steadily
we should move toward bilateral improvement in our bilateral relationships
between China and ourselves. You will notice that I don't use the word 6
" recogaition" because I think that would be moving a little too quickly for
some sections of public opinion in Australia itself. I have also been
reminded by many people that when you are dealing with the Chinese they take
their time so you don't want to be in too great a hurry. For example
one country reminded us that it took sixteen years for them from the date they
started till the date recognition or the formalities of recognition were.
completed. So far as we in Australia are concerned we permit our own citizens
to move freely subject to security requirements. We have got a very liberal
trade attitude. Apart from strategic goods of a war-like character we permit
them to sell to us and for us to sell to them. In cultural and scientific
relationships there are no bars whatsoever. So far as we are concerned, leaving
defence and security out of it, there is complete freedom of movement and
restrictions are very very few. We do have some problems on trade. And at
once I think I sho" u I make it clear that if China has the opportunity to play
politics of course it will do so, but equally too if it believes it can get
advantage out of trade or other relationships with Australia or some advantage to
China, there might be greater advantages to ourselves, of course, it will
deal with it in a matter of fact and businesslike fashion. So me are there 
ve have been negotiating with them in various countries and particularly in
Hong Kong. Wie haven't got very far in the improvement in our relationships
but the matter is in their hands if they indicate shortly that they would
like a trade mission to go to China or they would like officials of our own
G~ overnment to be associated with a trade mission ' we would take action, but
we are in no hurry. At every step we vill consider our own interests, our
own best interests, and what we should do in our best interests. We certainly
are not going to be creating the impression with the Peoples Republic of China
or the Government of the Peoples Republic of a great anxiety at any time
to have better relationships with them. Vie will do what we can but we ' Will
be just as patient as they are and above all we will be continually
considering Australia's major interests.
Question: Would Australia favour a U. S. military presence in South East
Asia after Vietnam and also what do you consider the prospects for peace
will be in Indo-China after the American withdrawal?
Prime M-inister: The first part of the question is very easy to answer.
But it is a question that should be directed to the United States Administ.-atio
and not to me, because in a country where I am a guest I think it is a little
imprudent to be offering suggestions to the gove rnm ent of that country as to
its conduct of either -diplomatic or military affairs. I believe in the
Bandung principle of non-interference in the affairs of other countries, but
speaking as it were at a press conference where I suppose everything will be
kept relatively secret, of course we want the American presence to remain
there just as long as it can and of course we want them even when ground
combat troops have been withdrawn. We would like them to maintain residual
air and naval forces providing the people of the United States feel that it is
proper and in the best interests of the Indo-Chinese people. As to the
question of the viability of Indo-China, or the four states of Indo-China,
from all that I have heard during the course of the last few days, and I 
have been briefed at very senior levels, I think that both aspects of
Vietnamisation are turning out to be successful. First of all on the
military level your own advisers informed me that the poeple of South
Vietnam axe increasingly able to look after themselves, and the United States
Administration is determined on an aid programme that will give them the
opportunity for development programmes that in a civil sense permit them to
remain viable. As to our own efforts ve. have a very large civil aid programme
of the order of twenty five million dollars and vie have now under
consideration proposals for agreement in cooperation with N~ ew Zealand and
the United States proposals to establish or to participate in, training
centres both for advisers and for military training personnel. We will
do this in South Vietnam not only for the South Vietnamese but for the
Cambodians; in other words what I do say is this; that whereas five or six
years ago it looked as though it was impossible for South Vietnam and
Cambodia should remain independent and free. The prospects are much greater
today and with a little good fortune and a little good luck and provided
' we are able to give the civil aid programme what they need in a residual
capacity in terms of military effort,, then I think the prospects of success
are ever so much brighter than they were two three or four years ago.
Qaestion: Senator Muskie a likely Presidential candidate says that it
is only a matter of time before South Vietnam goes communist* Do you agree?
Prime Minister: If you express an opinion iike that frankly ittS one of
the occasions when I'm driven to despair. It would be a tragedy for this world
if after so mach American blood and effort had been spilled, after so mach
life has been lost, and such a tremendous effort has been devoted to the cause
of South Vietnam, of the right of the South Vietnamese people to determine
their own future, we should be so despairing as to think that all we have done
will turn out to be valueless and that the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong 
r~ ill overrun South Vietnam and probably too Cambodia. I hope it doesn't occur.
I don't kn1ow on what grounds Senator LMuskic has made his views known other
than of course he is an aspirant for Presidential honouxs. But if I
emn take note of what was said yesterday by men I believe to be ever so much
better informed than he is, then in their views the prospects of survivial
are pretty good. I would be inclined to take their views ever so imch
more than I take the views of Senator Muskie. I 
Question: Would Australia, and New Zealand and the free nations of South
East Asia feel more secure if the U. S. kept a permanent naval for-ce in the
Indian Ocean to counter Soviet influence in that area?
* Prime Minister: Not only can I give the most emphatic yes to this but it
would be a constant source of delight to me and as one who is given to
turbulence in the middle of the night I can assure you it would make my
life ever so much happier and my evenings ever so much more enjoyable.
qu~ estion: Do you have any reservations at all about f6reign investment in
Australia. If so, could you tell us what they are. Do you have any preference
between sources of capital inflow?
Prime Minister: Wie haven't any strong preferences for where capital comes from.
But what I can say about capital coming from North America is'that they, I
believe more than most other countries, want to live up to the basic principles
of overseas investment in Australia. First, we want increasing Australian
equity participation in corporative activities. Second, we want AostraliJans
to be able to participate in management and administration. For that reason wte
welcome American participation. We also welcome their technological Ikiowhox
and the contributions they have made particularly in the development of our
vast mineral deposits in the west andour Bass Strait oil deposits. I can't
in a question like this go right into the details, but American investment in
Australia is welcome to us providing only the provisions I _. entioned a few
moments ago are observed. * V'e do want greater Australian participation. WNe
do want greater Australian participation in management, but at the same time
we welcome American contributions to our future.
Q4uestion: One of your predecessors once said here regarding Vietnam
" all the way with LBJ". ould you now subscribe to the 1968 political assertion
that " Nixon's the one?" 1 
Prime Minister: I think it would be indelicate of me and a kind of plagiarism
if I was either to copy or appear to be copying what was said by my predecessors.
And I don't know which one of my predecessors you're referring to in the last.
part of what you said. I think prudence demands that I keep my own counsel.
I coin imy own phrases and if before the next ouestion is asked I can think of
something even better but less provocative I will tell what it is.
Question: In view of Australia's strong protest to the* French over its
pacific nuclear testing programme do you propose to make similar protests
to the U. S. over its controversial underground test this weekend?
Prime Miniter: I think you can take it that our attitude has been ,: ade clear
in the agreements we have made. So far as nuclear testing in the atmosphere
is concerned we have protested no matter what country carries out nuclear
tests in the atmosphere. So far as underground tests are concerned wie have no
agreement and consequently we do not think that we are in a position legitiinatel
or according to international law, to make a protest. But we have also been
assured that these underground tests do not have the dangers or anywhere near
the dangers that can be carried out either in terms of pollution or danger to
life or limb that you have from atm~ ospheric tests. Consequently no protest
will be made by us. certainly anxiously enquire as to what the prospects
of pollution, what the prospects of danger might be, not only to Australia but
to the people of other countries as well.
Question: Has the all-white( IMj@ igtatinpolicy of Australia changed?
Prime Minister: I don't know that there ever wls an " all-white" policy in
Au stralia but I think I could say this to you, and it is worth while repeating.
Ibelieve that in my own country there is less of a feeling about racism than
in any other country I have visited. In short while there can be a lot of
discussion in the media and there can be a lot of provocative talk about it,
Australians do accept people of other races and other colours and they are an 
extremely tolerant people. Tolerance probably isn't the right word. They
just happen to accept people and particularly they accept the people of
South East Asia. Nlow our policy is a quite clear one. We want one Australian
people. 11* wiean t those who come there to live permanently to be Australians.
We don't want little enclaves that can be a source of irritation or a source
of difficulty for us. Secondly vie do permit non-Europeans to come in providing
and providing only three qualifications are complied with. The first one is
that they have the skills that we need, the second one is that they will make
a contribution to our development. The third is that'-they are capable of
intergrating and in fact do become integrated with us so that in time,
particularly in the case of their children, it is impossible either to discern
the origins of their parents or that they have any other loyalty than loyalty
to the country in which they reside and in which they find their welfare. So
I just have to say this about any so-called rarticular Australian policy: it is
one that I think is wise and prudent. It is one that is not based upon racisim,
it is one that I believe that anyone who has been to the country will1 recog-nise
that the people are not given to racism but to welcoming people for w: hat they
are and what they are capable of contributing rather than the origins of their
parents. uestion: Prime Minister. The--ydney Opera House has been called Australia's
Fill. Which will get off the ground first? And also how does it compare with
the Kennedy Centre?
Prime Minister: Fortunately the opera house is on the ground and as yet we
haven't been able to get the 1ll off it so I can't in precise terms answer your
question. As to the Kennedy Centre and the opera house I don't think you can
compare them. The opera house, our opera house, is something completely novel
and astonishingly beautiful. You have got to see it; it is not built in
accordance with what I would regard as the Washington model. You see a building
that is rectangular, however beautiful it might be, but nonetheless it conforms 
to classical Greek or Roman tradition. The opera house is entirely novel
and I wouldn't therefore like to make a comparison. But to each and everyone
of you who are here and you wouldn't be here if you weren't interested in
Australia the opening will be in 19735. I hope you will be able to have some
little investment in the future of Australia and by 1973 You will be able to
-have sold your investment and out of the profits attend the opening concert
when it appears. because I hore by that time not only wuill we have a good
orchestra but the best singers we are capable of taking from the United States.
Question: As England joins the Common Market won't this bring Australia and
New Zealand closer together?
Prime Minister: Vie are pretty close and the only time vie ever seem to, or we
appear to be disagreeable, is when it is suggested that New Zealand should
become the seventh State. But without saying it so that it can be heard in
New Zealand, we still look at them as the seventh State, but I don't think the
relationship between the two countries is capable of very much improvement today.
p( 4uestion: There are easy questions also. Will there be war between Pakistan
and India?
Prime Minister: I don't think that either the Government of India or the
Government of Pakistan want war. The real danger arises from the fact that the
people of East Pakistan are being trained in guerilla warfare and by accident
it could so happen that armed attack might occur either from the Pakistan army
or the freedom fighters in East iakistan itself. No one, I believe, can tell
you what the prospects are likely to be. What we must all do, and I will
certainly be playing my part ,41 will have the good fortune to talk to Mrs. Ghandi
tomorrow A, is to press with her and to press with the President Khian that
war must not take place. It can't benefit India, it can't benefit akistan and~ 
Zil
above all it cannot benefit any of the people of these two countries. Those
of us who feel we can play a part, however humble it might be, have got to
bring home to everyone the lesson that war will benefit no one. The sooner we
can persuade the Pakistanis to permit democracy or democratic regime to be
established under the Awarni League in -last Pakistan as part of a total Pakistan
solution, the better it will be. He has made his promise. I only hopne he will
be able to live up to it.
Question: The final question: what impelled you to buy the dress M'rs. Mc~ iahon
wore at the VWhite House last night?-
Prime M'inister: I know her better than anyone. I like the shape of her legs,
I like the look of her face, I like the fact that she chose me for her husband
at the same time I chose her to be my wife. V.' hen I happened to be walking past
a shop in Double Bay and saw a dress in black I then said to her I thought she
should buy it. That was six weeks ago, before the President had asked me to corm'
here, and before I knew the President was g iving a State Dinner in our honour.
When I beard of the dinner I gave instructions not that they matter very much
in my household but I gave instructions that she was to go down and have
the dress, not in black because i thought that there was nothing to mourn about,
but in white because this was something we could acclaim. And above all as
immediately before I had the good fortune to become the Leader of the Liberal
Party in Australia,-one of the assets I wa.; supposed to have was a photograph of
my wife with one leg projecting unnecessarily from a maxi shirt. I felt, well,
if you can have one split on the maxi side, well why couldn't she have two
sides it might be twice as good for me so there's the answer. I wish,
Sir, that I had known you were going to ask this question because as I chose
the dress, I practically designed the colour and insisted on the two splits up
the side, I think I could have ensure~ she wore it here today even though
it isn't the kind of dress that you would wear on an occasion similar to this. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE UNTIL 8 PM ( EST)
" ADDRESS TO THE NATION"
BY THE PRI7E MINISTER, MR WILLIM Mc!,' AHON
OVER THE NATIONAL RADIO AND TV NETWORK 26 NOVEMBER 1971
Good Fvening: I want to report to you tonight about my recent
mission to the United States and to the United Kingdom.
About the middle of October, i received a personal
invitation from President Nixon to visit the United States. Now
I did so in extraordinary circumstances because momentous events
were occurring in world affairs which intimately affected us as
well as the rest of the world.
There was a growing change in the balance of power
amongst the great countries. No longe2 did the United States and
Soviet Russia dominate the scene. Communist China was becoming
increaslingly important, and so, too was Japan and the European
Community, including Britain. As well, the President of the United
States was about to visit both Peking and * oscow. And Dr Kissinger,
on his behalf, had been to Peking on two occasions. There was an
international monetary crisis. Britain had just decided enter the
European Community and, of course, in the countries that I was to
visit, aueries were made about problems that we might have to face
at home. So I went to the United States first, that is, to New
York and to Washington. And I had interviews with most of the
important members of the United States Administration, from President
Nixon down. In my discussions with him, he first of all raised the
question of the .7erican presence in South Vietnam. And he explained
to me in detail what the Americans intended to do and the rate at
which their forces would be withdrawn. He also gave me and I regard
this as of vital importance to us but he gave me an assurance that
the ANZUS Treaty was as valid today as it was on the day on which
it was signed. Now this Trepty is important to us for this reason:
That, as you will probably know, the ANZUS Treaty provides that in the
event of an armed attack on Australia, the United States and New
Zealand would act to meet the common danger. There could not have
. een a better assurance than he has given, and it virtually guarantees
our freedom from attack.
I also had discussions on such matters as trade of
meat particularly and a visit of Y'r Stans to Australia, their
Secretary of Commerce, relating to the problems associated with
wool. It was also suggested to me in discussions with their Treasury
officials that the United States, Japan, and ourselves, should
co-operate in order to try and get better terms cfaccess to the
new European Economic Community. / 2 
2
Of course, I had other discussions, but I haven't the time
to be able to go through them tonight. But I did have discussions
on the environment and pollution. And the Americans assured me
that our officials would be able to go there, and they would make
available all the information they had so that we would avoid the
errors of other countries.
So I can assure you of this. The visit was timely it
was successful and it was to your advantage.
I then went to the United Kingdom, and had discussions
with Mr Heath, the Prime Minister, and most of his senior Ministers.
The big problem we faced there was that Britain was
shortly to enter the European Economic Community. And that
consequently the historic trade ties between Australia and the
United Kingdom would cease.
So I sought guarantees that our interests would be
protected. And I am glad to be able to say that from Mr Heath
down to his Chancellor of vhe Exchequer and the Minister responsible
for Economic Affairs in the European Community, Mr Rippon, that
they would do their best to protect our interests now. And they
gave me three guarantees.
The first one was that if we did have some difficulties
with particular agricultural industries, we could make representations,
or the British would make representations for us, to the Community
to try and get corrections made. They also agreed that if we had
a threat of serious injury, we could take it up with the European
Community. And above all, they stressed the nend for industries
themselves to become involved in these problems, and not leave the
sole responsibility to the Government.
In the case of Papua-Mew Guinea, they said that if the
Community could be prevailed upon to accept their ideas, they would
give special privileges to the export of goods from Papua-New
Guinea into the United Kingdom. Yesterday I received a message
which I'm glad to say I was able to relay to the House, that they
had lived up to their promise and special advantages would be given
to Papua/ New Guinea, a dependency country that is really for the
time being dependent on us.
So, too, did I have pretty important discussions on other
economic matters. It was oointed out to me that Australia and
England are both great trading powers. And consequently in the case
of the United Kingdom, the greater the trade and the greater the
degree of flexibility, the better it would be.
For my part, I asked them in fact I impressed upon them
that they must not be isolationist and inward-looking, but Britain
should exert its influence to ensure that the European Community
was outward-looking and international. / 3
L 
3
Now I am sure that the arrangements, or the arrangements
that we made, will be of advantage to Britain, to the Common
Market, to the world, and above all to ourselves.
I then had discussions with the Minister for Defence,
Lord Carrington, well known to most Australians. And again
we discussed problems of great importance to us, the first being
the recent signature of wh,, t is called the Five Power arrangements
relating to Malaysia and Singapore.
Now, as you know, Malaysia and Singapore, together with
Indonesia, are vital to us.
We want the British to maintain a presence East of Suez,
and particularly in Malaysia and Singapore, just as long as they
can. And I received assurances of this kind from the Government.
They are willing to participate in the security, and tq
engender a feeling of confidence in this part of the world, and they
are certainly willing to participate in training arrangements for
the Malaysi-ns and Singaporeans. And so it went on.
I had discussions on many other subjects of great
importance to us: Consultations with very nearly every senior
Minister there was in the United Kingdom.
And this brings me to the story that I want to tell to you
as Australian people.
The first one was that on each occasion the consultations
were full, frank and with candour. Nothing was held back. They
told us what they knew and we told them what we knew.
For example, I was told of what was about to happen in
Rhodesia. Mr Nixon told me of his hopes in the visits that he
intended to make to Moscow and to Peking.
And I can assure you, and I want you to realise this fact,
that they trust us, I believe, more than they trust most other
countries, and are willing to confide in us and are willing to
co-operate with us too,
The second point was this: Wherever I went I found that we
were regarded, not as one of the super or the great powers, but we
were regarded as one of the medium powers one that was playing
an increasingly important part, and having an increasingly important
influence: Not only in South-East Asia, but in the United Kingdom
and the United States as well.
The next point that came home to me and I want to repeat
it to you ia that now that we are accepted as a completely
independent country, that our foreign affairs reflect the interests
of the Australian people, we must also recognise the fact that we
have to take primary responsibility for our own defence. And we have
to take complete responsibility for our own economic affairs, although
the others will assist us when the occasion is needed. / 4
.01 
-4
But let me look at the problem of our economy first.
We have a great economy and I'll say a little more about this
later but in our economic affairs overseas, we have to fight the
battles.. and industry has to join with the Government in achieving
success and not lot the Government do all the fighting for it.
And on defence, too, the primary responsibility depends
uuon us. Now it's true tL.. t we have the ANZUS Treaty, and we have
the Five Power Arrangement with Malaysia and Singapore. But that
doesn't mean that we can just lay back and let the others take the
responsibility. In fact, what it does mean, and this is certain and
something that has to be conveyed to you over and over again
that the more we do, the more they'll be inclined to do with us.
But when we get into a position as we got into at the
middle and the latter parts of World ! Iar II, then we will know we
have reliable friends and allies, and that is why the ANZUS
Treaty will be so valuable to us, and that is why for the Moment,
and while the British orcsance is maintained, their presence in
Malaysia and Singapore will be valuable too.
And the third point that I had to make and I want to
make is thisz There were some misgivings in both the United
States and the United Kingdom as to where we were going. They had
heard of the problems of inflation, industrial disputes they knew
of thie problems associated with the sale of wool.
I was able to give them this assurance, and T think they
recognise it now because they admit there is no country that is
more suitable for investment or more attractive to investment
than Australia is.
This, I believe, is the test of how a country is going
and how great its prospects for the future are.
But I did point out to them that our population is now
thirteen million and growing, that our production is growing at
the rate of somewhere ab. out five per cent per annum, and that our
industry has now become much more diversified and stable than
ever before. So we you and I have got every reason for confidence,
and I believe they have confidence in us too. In short, I think
I was able to point out to them that we know where we're going
and we know how to get there. They understand co'ar problems and
thev understand the outlook for the future. It is a future in which
via should have absolute confidence, and I want to express to you
tonight my personal confidence too.
So as I said, we pointed out to them we know where we're
going. I hope thie Australian people will accent the fact we know
where we ' re going and we will get there and I am sure in a way
that will be satisfactory to you.
Good evening and thank you. 



OPENING OF THE NATIONAL JEWISH MEMORIAL CENTE
CANBERRA
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon
13 December, 1971.
Mr. Jacobson, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies
and Gentlemen-, This afternoon we are about to add something to the
history of Canberra and something of enduring importance to the
vast panorama of the Jewish story in Australia.
I wonder if I could, with some architectural licence
considerable licence in fact describe this fine new building as
a pillar. I do so because I see it as a pillar of faith in our
national capital. A pillar of faith which will stand for a long,
long time,. as the national centre of Australian Jewry the first
of its kind and as a meeting place, a House of . worship, a school
and a memorial to Jews who died for Australia.
I sometimes think we miss the sight of history in the
making whken we get mixed up in the process oursel-es on a summer
afternoop in Canberra with familiar sights and familiar faces around
US. But history this is, and my wife and I are h1onoured be with
you on this very special occasion. I'm afraid we arc both ' oing to
make speeches. We each know what the other is going to say and as
I'm speaking first I have to be careful to keep in my own corner,
Sir, I think it is almost ten years since the foundation
stone was laid here by Rabbi Brodie, Chief Rabbi at that time, you
have built well as the result of your own energetic fund-raising and,
I understand, some help from friondly governments. The Commonwealth's
corntribution to this centre.. as you know, is a perpctual lease of the
land for a rental of ten cents a yaar on demand. To my knowledge the
demand has never been made, nor likely to be, it's just one of those
curious things put in to make overything look legal. All this
having been said, I do congratulate those who havc worked so hard to
make this Centre. You should bc well content and very proud. It is
a handsome addition to the buildings in Canberra and, as I said, at
the beginning, it is -a pillar of faith in our midst.
Jewry has won an honoured and permanent place in
Australia and I am proud to be Primo Minister in a country where
bigotry is at a discount and where Australians accept each other
for what they are. We are not troubled by what each man's faith
might be or what form t4-he worship of his God might take. And I
take this opportunity of acknowledging here what the Jewish community
has done for Australia. It is to the la~ sting credit of the Jewish people and it
is evidence of the durability of the spiritual values which bind them
together that they have maintained their identity no matter where
they have been born or where they have settled. ./ 2 
They have done this in Australia and their integration
in the Australian community is complete. The Jewish community in
Australia has given much to the development of an. Australian culture
by the infusion of elements of their own rich, rare culture. And
its members are sharing, very fully, in Australia's great effort at
nation-building. I take just two names among many from the list of
distinguished Jews who have brought honour to Australia. The late
Sir Isaac Isaacs, our first Australian-born Governor-General and the
late General Sir John Monash who led us in the first great war and
gave so much of his talents to works of peace in this country when
the battles were won. We remember them today because they were big
men who thought and acted in a big way. They were national in their
outlook and in their achievements.
I think, too, gn this occasion, it is right that wt
should pay our tribute to the fortitude of the Jewish people in
Israel who press on with nation-building though the shadows of war
lie always along their frontiers.
There are three things, I think we should remember
about Israeli-
The first That Isreal came to be because of the courage of
its people.
And the determination of a majority of nations that
the Jews shQuld be free, independent and able to live
in the land of their fathers.
Through its active membership of the United Nations
Palestine Commission and the General Assembly, Australia
helped to make this possible.
The second That forbearance, courage, resolution and industry have
made a nation in a timeless desert.
And by that result the world is reminded once again
that there are few limits to what men and women can do,
given freedom and faith.
and
The third That the future holds a tremendous challenge for
Israel, for other countries of the Middle East and
indeed for us all. A challenge which has its dangers
as well as its opportunities.
Sir, there is much in common between cur two countries
and in many ways we have faced the same hazards of nature in nationbuilding.
It is distressing that tho issues which divide Israel
from its Arab neighbours, with all of'whom Australia enjoys friendly
relations, have not yet been resolved.
The Australian Government is convinced of the need for
a settlement which ensures the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Israel and all other states in the Middle
East. Without that there can be no lasting peace.
Sir, this year international attention is being focussed
through the United Nations on prejudice and discrimination on racial
grounds. 
My Government has strongly supported, in the United
Nations and elsewhere, the riahts of peoole, including minorities,
to freedom from fear and suspicion-without distinction as to race,
language or religion.--In the United Nations last month, we again urged, as
we have in earlier years, that Governments which find it difficult
to eliminate prejudice against, for example, Jewish minorities,
should at least allow those people to emigrate if they desire to do
so. We hold strongly to the belief that people should be
able, both in law and in practice, to pursue their cultural and
religious heritage and traditions as they wish. This national
centre, this -pillar of faith, reflects that belief. It expresses,
too, in a noble form the confidence of the Jewish people that while
their ancient homeland lies faraway along the Jord7. n, they have a
home here where they are part of one people inhabiting one continent.
And where Australians of every faith and persuasion are free to walk
the ways of peace together.
Now Mr. Jacobson, Ladies and Gentlemen, I understand
I am to unveil the plaque and n-. mo this building. I am delighted
to do so, and I name this building " The Mona and Louis Klein
Building". 



VISIT OF PRESIDENT SOrEHARTO
OFFICIAL LUNCHEON, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
Speech~ by the Prime Minister, Mr William McMahon
7 FEBRUARY 1972
Mr d aaeSoeharto, Presiding Officers, my
Minist-rñ and Parliamentary Colleagues, Members of the
Diplomatic Corps and Distinguished Guests:
Today, Mr President, we welcome you to Australia and
we do so with warmth and with sincerity, not only because you
have chosen to come here, but because you are the represk: ntative
of 130 million Indonesians, and our nearest ncighbours, and
people for whom we have the greatest friendship and the greatest
goodwill. Now, Sir, this afternoon I want to speak from three
different points of view about your visit to Australia today and
the few days that are in front of us.
First of all, I want to speak to you about the leader
Of Your country and yourself as a man. Then about our international
relationships, the relationships between two great countries, and
then the purposes of your visit here now, and in the days to come.
First of all then, as to you as a man. I know you
won't mind my saying that you were born to a farming family just
outside Jogjakarta, and if fate hadn't inte -oned, or if history
had moved along its normal course, then I haven't the slightest
doubt in the world that by now you would have been the head of
the Country Party of Indonesia, with probably a deep and permanent
influence on the mind and activities of my own Deputy Prime
Minister. But fortunateily for the world, fortunately for us
and fortunately for Indonesia, you decided at a favirly early
age that you would enter the Army at the time of the Dutch
administration. And from then on in successive movements, you went to
the leadership of the Arrmy and in a way that I would like to
stress at this moment. Not only did you move through the
brigades and the divisions, but at añ very critical time in the
history of Indonesia, you became the Supreme-mmander of
Operational Command. And then later on, you went to a more
significant post and that was to the leadership of the Strategic
Command of your own country.
And again, I believe on this occasion that Providence
intervened and placed you in a deci4sive position and one in which
you were able to exercise your power and influence on the future
in a way that no other person in the history of Indonesia had been
able to do. And, Sir, because of those two actions your decision
to enter the Army, your progress to the supreme leadership, you
were, I think, and in fact did, make the decision that saved
Indonesia and I think has brought peace, order and goodwill to
your own country. / 2 
2--
And, Sir, I think I should emphasise that in each of
the posts that you have filled you have been in a position where
you could exert influence of a different kind as well, because
You did take part at the end of the Japanese Occupation. Later
on took piart in the decisions relating to the independence of
your own country. And then at the crucial moment, at the time
of the attempted takeover of Indonesia by elements that were
foreign to the wishes of ftie people of Indonesia, you took control
and you have accomplished in a brief space of time what few other
men would be capable of achieving.
Sir, vno ur talks to me this morning, you used the
phrase, or if it wasn't you, it was your interpreter viho used the
phrase " a new order". You were, I believe, and I know, not
only the architect bu1t the administrator of this programme.
And what has it brought to Indonesia?
Firs-t, I hl~ ave to go back again if I can to your history
as a farmer, because as you well pointed out to me this morning,
that not only do you look at Indonesia from the point of its
international politics and its -,-fence ministry, but you give
primary place in all your thinking to the social welfare and
social justice within Indonesia itself.
And, Sir, you have given emphasis to matters that
Perhaps other people could easily have forgotten. You have
stressed the necessity for the average man, woman and child in
your own country to have the basic necessities of life whetheF
it might be food, whether it might be clothing, whether it might
be shelter. And, Sir, I was glad to hear you say this morning
that these will remain your primary objectives during the time
that you remain the President of your great country.
So~, Sir, we compliment you not only for what you have
done, but the idealism you have brought to this very difficult
ta of yours. Then, Sir, if I look at the changes that have occurred
in the period of the new order, few of us could have thought
that in a period of what is but a few years, not many years
anyhow, few of us could have thought that order could have been
created out of chaos. Few of us could have thought that your
production would have been increasing as rapidly as it has,
and few of us could have thought that you would have brought
inflation under control as rapidly -and that your trade, Indonesia's
trade would be expanding, and gradually you would be placed in a
position of being able to pay your own way.
So, Sir, for all these reasons, I think we in Australia
appreciate what you have done and it adds warmth to the welcome
that I have just conveyed to you on behalf of the Australian
people. Now, Sir, may I turn to our international relationships,
the relationships between our two countries, and again on a much
wider canvas as you expressed to me this morning, the need for us
Jointly and co-operatively to play our part in the peace, freedom
and independence of all of the peoples of the Asian and Pacific / 3 
-3
region. First of all, Sir, in matters of defence, you know that
we are willing and anxious to play our part and to give you
assistance, not only in military aid but also where we can in
training your own people. And whilst we respect the fact that
you want to remain non-aligned and that you want,-as far as is
humanly practicable to be able to take an bttitude of complete
independence from the operations of others, nonetheless you do
4ccept the view that when it is in the interest of Indonesia,
Australia and the free world, then we can co-operate together
ia military area because here we know we are acting in the
* nterests of humanity rather than our own individual interest
Or own political decisions.
So Sir, we play our part and I believe we play our
part together, too, b) ecause we have the same objectives, the
same basic principles in our approach to a common solution of
our problems and those are and again I have an adaptation of
Your own words that you believe, Sir, not so much in establishing
a peace zone in a particular area that may perhaps be indefensible,
Out you do believe in making a maximum contribution to the peace,
to the prosperity, the independence and freedom of every country
in the region in which both ycu and I live.
So these, Sir, are the ideals that ptomote our
activities and determine what we should do. And if we look, too,
in terms of trade and aid, so far as we are concerned, our trade
is improving every day and I hope yours is too. And so far as
our aid programmes are concerned, leaving aside our own external
territories, there is no country to whom we give greater support
and greater assistance than we do to yours. And you very well
said to me, as you reminded me this morning, that not only do
we piake this contribution willingly and freely, but we do it
without expecting any repayment, without any prize of any kind at
all and there is no other country that gives quite as
generously or quite as freely as we do.
There is only one exception here and that is with
pev~ sa Kredi*. and of course with this we have agreed to your
recormmendations and we have ties associated with this kind of
aid, Similarly, too, if we look at other parts of our
programme, I think yn-u can find that there is a willingness in
our development programmes to be able to be of assistance.
And I well remember wheD. I was in Djaklarta probably two years ago,
or probably not quite thatlong ago, I was able to discuss the
development of the port of Tjilatjap in the South of Java, that
it could be done first of all by a feasibility survey then by
ddvelopment from Australian and other resources. And at that time
I was able to tell you and now I confirm what I said then, that
Australian manufacturers will be only too happy to go there and
are now ready to establish factories if they can find, as I am
sure they will, that the opportunities for development are there
and that the markets will be able to absorb their products. .4 
A And so, Sir, may I turn to the purposes of your visit
to my country today. The first one, as I think you will make
more than abundantly clear, is that you want to keep the process
of goodwill and keep the process of mutual co-operation going. I
am certain you will be successful.
The second one is that you want to look at Australian
industry to see whether parts of it are suitable to be created
and developed in your own country. Again I believe you will be
looking at a glass factory in .1elbourne, and if I can take notice
of one of tepeople who talked to me on Monday, he will be
anxiously looking to see whether he will have the opportunity to
develop in your country.
And finally, Sir, again if I can repeat what you said to
me this morning, you did refer to the doctrine of Pantjasila.
Here in other days, we always referred to it as " Panchsheel",
and that is the right of each country to independence and the
wish that each country should let its neighbour live in peace
and freedom from interference from bigger neighbours and bigger
people who have predatory desires against them.
So, Sir, here we are together, joining in common cause
wi~ th our hearts all set on a common destination and common
o ) jectives. I believe if . you look at it in this way, I can
complcte what I want to say to you and to an Australian audience
and to an Australian Parliament.
But you can well go home even now, Sir, not that I want you
to, and I wouldn't let you, but you could go home and you could
hava two words prominently in your mind and I think they would be
in the minds of most people here today, too; you can go home with
Madame Soeharto; you can go home with your friend, Adam Malik,
the three of you together can on the plane t'Lrip home say " Mission
accomplished. We have met with a lot of goodwill. We know they
are friends. We know that they will play t--heir part in the
devqlopment of the free world in that part of the region in whiich
we all have the good fortune to live". 



YOUNG LIBERALS' CONVENTION
SURFERS' PARADISE, OLD.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon William McMahon CHMP
11 February,_ 1972
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I want to talk to you today about three thingsfirst
the economy second the role the Government has to playand
third the Liberal Party.
I realise you have dealt with these subjects in
one form or another during your Convention. However, I want to
give you the Government' s view because we are immediately concerned
with decision-making on these matters of direct concern to us all.
This is election year. And a year where we have
inherited problems from the past, many of them not directly within
our control, and also commu~ on to most industrialised countries
throughout the world. They are our problems, however, and we are
at grips with them. They are well-known to you all. There is inflation.
It continues to threaten us and, so far as it is in the Government's
power to do so, our measures to contain it must be constantly under
review and flexible in their application.
There is unemployment, which is the cause of
considerable public anxiety, though by world standards the level
is low, and it is by no means chronic.
No matter what a Government does its efforts will be
aborted unless there is confidence on the part of the public,
business and industry, and, I emphasise, the Trade Union movement.
I am well aware that there is some lack of confidence, we in the
Government are as sensitive to this as we are to the root causes
inflation and unemployment. We are doing everything in our power to correct this
and what we are doing is dictated entirely by the national interest
In other words, we are not looking at it from the point of view that
this is aA election year. We are not looking at it from the point
of view that there might be some very favourable signs and some that
are unfavourable. We are looking at it in order to ensure that
immediate and the long-term public interests receive paramount
concern. There are, with all this, a number of encouraging signs.
/ 2 
4 
In the long-term, of course, our prospects are
excellent. Even the Jeremiahs concede that. Our international
situation is very sound both in terms of trade and financial
resources. And we are showing strength and steady growth on the
domestic front. But it is the immediate problems that are commanding
public attention in Australia today, as you so well know. We have
to make sure that growth continues while we apply remedies to our
immediate problems. We must not throw the baby out with the bathwater.
This, therefore, is a time for carefully-considered
decisions, taking both the immediate and long-term situations into
account. There is absolutely no cause and no need to press the
panic button now. That, briefly, is the position in Australia today.
Now about the Government's role. We are tackling
the causes of inflation at every point we can. Inflation I want to
assure you, has been largely caused directly and indirectly by
excessive wage claims and wage rises in Australia. It is no good
putting blinkers on about this problem.
If you don't get a lift in productivity when you get
wage increases, then you are bound to got inflation no matter what
action the Government night take, and we haven't been getting a lift
sufficient to cushion the impact of those wage rises. On top of
that, industrial disputes and lawlessness, and political strikes, are
making the problem a great deal worse. But I can illustrate this
in a few sentences. The total man days lost was 2,877,000 compared
to 2,283,000 last year. To give another example of what disputes are
costing the wage earner himself, the total loss in wages for the
first eleven months of 1971 was $ 43 million, compared with $ 29 million
for the corresponding period of the previous year.
Look at the trouble in the Post Office, look at the
trouble we now have with the S. E. C. in Victoria. Having said this,
I think you are entitled to ask: What is the Government doing about
it? What can the Government do? And what sort of leadership is it
providing. most people don't rea~ lise and I want to stress this to
Young Liberals that one of the impediments we have is that, under
our own constitution, the Government is very limited constitutionally
in the action it can take.
Nevertheless, time and time again, we have sounded
the warning thiat excessive wage increases must be resisted by
Governments, by wage-fixing tribunals and Private employers and
that the Arbitration Court must take into account the national
interest and ability to pay. We have intervened in the national wage
cases and will continue to do so. This is a positive contribution to
the task of getting all the facts, the most important facts, on a
national scale before the Arbitration Commission. And we are
determined that a $ tate of full employment will be achieved and
maintained. ./ 3 
I 
The Government undertook at Budget time last year
to keep the economy constantly under review, to be flexible and act
promptly in response to trends and movements. This we have done.
We made a review in October/ November. In December we decided to
review the economy again in January. This we have done and Cabinet
has discussed the results fully in recent days.
We have made and announced various decisions, as you
know, particularly on monetary matters, as a result of which interest
rates on Government Bonds have been substantially reduced, and, of
course, the maximum overdraft rate his also been reduced.
There are now some indications that some interest
rates in the private sector are starting to fall. Just two other
examples of action we have taken
We made a special interest free capital grant of
million to the States for the building of primary
and secondary Schools and
We limited the -migrant inflow during the period when
school-leavers would be coming on to the labour
market. In recent months we have also intervened in other
significant cases before the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission,
with some effect, as in the annual leave case. These interventions
included the carpDenters, bank officers and the Victorian Electricity
Commission cases. Much of this has largely escaped public notice but
I believe these actions show decisiveness and leadership on our part.
We have always insisted that the Arbitration system must be preserved.
Generally it has served us well since Federation. If it is
weakened or destroyed by pressure tactics from anyone, then both the
boss and the working man will really be in trouble. We insist that
industrial disputes must be settled by Conciliation and arbitration.
You will understand that I cannot go into details of
our latest review as I am to meet the State Premiers next week and
we will takre a number of decisions which will. be important for the
future. But I want to say this. The Government has acted
deliberately, and I believe sensibly, to demonstrate flexibility in
its management of the economy. It will continue to do so.
My Governm1ent is concerned to see that a State of
full employment is maintained. I am confident that the immediate
pressures can be eased off if there is a concerted community effort
to face up squarely to the problems of the day. The employment
position, no matter what the underlying trends are, can be seriously
compromised by prolonged and unnecessary industrial stoppages, of
the kind which is being experienced in Victoria and which is
forcing employers to stand down a large part of the work force. The
current level of registered unemployment in Australia is 1.6 per
cen~ t of the labour force, after adjusting for normal seasonal
influences. 
This is a little higher than the average level of
1.4 per cent achieved over the last fifteen years but it is still
very low by world standards. Australians have come to expect very
high rates of employment and my Government is determined that this
expectation will be fulfilled. There is no reason at all why anyone
should join the " disaster lobby" and become crepe-hangers and
mourners about something that hasn't happened.
We are determined to continue to give leadership
in economic management. And are confident that the inherent
strength of the economy will show itself increasingly as the year
goes by. We will continue to take prompt action to anticipate and
deal with specific conditions as trends develop.
There is good news today as well as bad. The bad
news must not be swept under the carpet. It must not be concealed.
But neither should the good news. When the number of days lost by
strikes goes down, when productivity -goes up then let the story
be told. When wool goes up as it has. When the stock market liftsas
it has when companies show better trading and increased profits
as many are then let that story be told too. This is the way to
sustain confidence, encourage develop ment, create more employment
and take us forward to better days.
Despite all the difficulties we have had in the past
year the Government has made a great deal of progress on a wide
front. Time doesn't permit me to give you a list of many of the
things we've done, but I leave with you a paper which records in somie
detail our decisions and achievements from March of last year to date.
There are pages of it.
And in the first month of this year we have already
announced An important decision on bond and interest rates.
A new deal for our aboriginal citizens.
A major re-organisation of the Army and other
defence developments.
A decision to make Australian pensions payable
overseas. A decision to make Government papers and Cabinet
records available sooner to the public.
And there's more to come.
Now about the Liberal Party. First of all your
Conference. I am delighted to hear from those who have been here
throughout the Convention that you have really been getting down
to things. 
You have:-demonstrated in the most vigorous way your
loyalty to the Party, your concern for the future of Australia,
your interest in the well-being of the Australian people and your
determination to help us win the election. I congratulate you and
I thank you. For my part let me assure you the Parliamentary
Party is in good shape and so is the Government. We are a good
team pulling well together and we are going to win the next
election. I have had talks with the Liberal Party's Federal
Policy Committee in Canberra this week, and I think you'll find
we'll have a first-class, forward looking, refreshing election
policy for the Electorate. A number of Party Committees have been
busy for several months overhauling all aspects of Party pclicy and
they've done a good job. I am sure that relations between the
Parliamentary Party and the Liberal Party Organisation have never
been better. One can look at an election two ways. You can
mention the risk of losing, to prod the faint hearts into action,
or you can make up your mind you are going to win and get that
message across loud and clear. That's the way I prefer to do it.
In the months -that remain before the Poll we have
to make a concerted effort to strip the mask off the Lebor Policy
and its pretensions, so that our policies can be judged on their
merits against theirs. We can best do this by putting our whole
effort into our own performance as a Party and a partner in
Government. Don't believe the rubbish you hear ." that we've been
on the Government Benches a long time and that's good enough reason
for a change." It's good enough reason to stay. The record of
achievement during our 22 years of office has-been remarkably good
and the Australian people like the way we do it. But again, don't
be complacent. We mustn't take it easy. There's too much that's
new going on all around the world and yesterday's iiet isn't always
the best for tomorrow. I belive Liberalism has its greatest opportunities
-ahead of it in this decade of the seventies.
I 
3\-I) 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
/ 4x~ n Oeni' g Statement by the Prime Minister 14 FEBRUARY 1972
IT IS OPPORTUNE THAT WE SHOULD MEET HERE TODAY FOR A
WIDE-RANGING DISCUSSION ABOUT THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY AND YOUR STATE
FINANCES. THE TIMING HAS NOT COME ABOUT BY CHANCE. WHEN THE
COMMIONWEALTH ACTED-IN A NUMBER OF WAYS LAST NOVEMBER TO ASSIST DEMAND
AND MAINTAIN GROWTH IN THE ECONOMY, WE HAD IN MIND THAT IT WOULD BE
APPROPRIATE TO REVIEW THE POSITION AGAIN ABOUT THIS TIME TO STAND
OFF FOR A LITTLE AND THEN HAVE ANOTHER LOOK AT THE TRENDS.
THE DATE WHICH WE THEN SUGGESTED WAS CHOSEN WITH THAT
CONSIDERATION VERY MUCH IN MIND. THE APPROPRIATE TIMING OF THESE
DISCUSSIONS THUS RESULTS RATHER FROM POSITIVE FORETHOUGHT, CONSISTENT
WITH THE ASSURANCES OF THE TREASURER AND MYSELF TO KEEP THE ECONOMY
UNDER REVIEW, AND AS PART OF THAT PROCESS.
WITH THIS TIMETABLE IN MIND, WE IN THE COMMONWEALTH
UNDERTOOK LAST WEEK A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF THE ECONOMY.
AS A CONSEQUENCE OF THAT REVIEW WE HAVE COME TO CERTAIN
BROAD CONCLUSIONS. BEFORE FINALLY MAKING OUR DECISIONS OR SOME
OF THEM WE WANT TO HAVE THE BENEFIT OF YOUR VIEWS IN PREMIERS'
CONFERENCE. WE SHALL, NO DOUBT, FIND OURSELVES IN BROAD AGREEMENT
WITH SOME OF THE VIEWS THAT SOME OF YOU WILL PUT TO US AND IN
DISAGREEMENT WITH OTHERS. THAT IS IN THE NATURE OF CONFERENCES
AND NONE OF US SHOULD FIND IT IN ANY WAY SURPRISING. .0 ./ 2 
-2
OVER THE PAST FEW MCNTHS THE GOVERNMENT HAS MADE
SEVERAL CONSIDERED ADJUSTMENTS TO POLICY TO MAINTAIN AS FAR AS
POSSIBLE OUR OBJECTIVES: THE MAINTENANCE OF ECONOMIC GROWTH WHICH
IS ESSENTIAL AMONG OTHER THINGS TO OUR PURPOSE OF MAINTAINING A
HIGH LEVEL OF EMPLOYMENT; AND THE CONTROL OF INFLATION,
IN THE LIGHT OF OUR DELIBERATIONS I WILL ANNOUNCE SOME
FURTHER ADJUSTMENTS WITHIN THIS BROAD POLICY FRAMEWORK.
I WANT, AS AN INTRODUCTION,, TO SAY SOMETHING ABOUT THE
CURRENT AND PROSPECTIVE ECONOMIC SITUATION AS WE SEE ITol
WE HAVE BEEN DISTURBED BY WHAT WE BELIEVE TO BE THE
EXCESSIVELY GLOOMY VIEWS BEING PUT ABOUT RECENTLY REGARDING
CURRENT AND PROSPECTIVE ECONOMIC CONDITIONS0 ACCORDINGLY9 WE HAVE
GIVEN THOSE VIEWS THE MOST CLOSE AND CAREFUL EXAMINATION. WE HAVE
COME TO THE CONCLUSION THAT THESE EXTREME VIEWS ARE SIMPLY NOT
SUPPORTED BY THE FACTS. I SAY THAT BECAUSE WE MUST GUARD AGAINST
BEING OVER-INFLUENCED BY SUCH VIEWS.
REASONED CRITICISM IS ALWAYS WELCOME,-AND IT IS
IMPORTANT THAT WE SHOULD BE AWARE OF AND UNDERSTAND SUCH
CRITICISMS. BUT THE MORE OMINOUS OF THESE STATEMENTS CAN HAVE;
IN SOME DEGRIE., A SELF-FULFILLING CHARACTER IF THE COMMUNITY
TAKES THEM SERIOUSLYA
PUBLIC CONFIDENCE CAN BE VERY SENSITIVE, FOR THAT
REASON. IT IS I THINK THE DUTY OF ALL OF US TO EXAMINE THOSE
AREAS OF THE ECONOMY WHICH COME WITHIN OUR RESPECTIVE
JURISDICTION AND TO ASK OURSELVES ARE THINGS REALLY AS BAD
AS SOME ARE CLAIMING THEM TO BE? 0 0 0 0œ. 
-3
WE THINK THAT THE ANSWER TO THAT QUESTION IS CLEARLY IN
THE NEGATIVE. THAT BEING SO, THOSE WHO SO SHRILLY VOICE THlE OPPOSITE
OPINION BEAR A HEAVY RESPONSIBILITY TO THEIR FELLO CITIZElNS.
THE ECONOMY HAS BEEN GROWING STEADILY. THE GOVERNMENT
IS RESOLVED TO SEE GROWTH CONTINUE. WE HAVE NOT THE SLIGHTEST
INTENTION OF COUNTENANCING ANY OTHER OUTCOME. IT IS A TRAVESTY OF
OUR VIEWS TO SUGGEST OTHERWISE.
THERE ARE, IN FACT, CLEAR ELEMENTS OF STRENGTH IN THE
ECONOMY WHICH WOULD, EVEN IF NO FURTHER ACTION WERE TAKEN NOW,
ENSURE CONTINUED GROWTH IN THE MONTHS AHEAD.
IT FOLLOWS THAT ANY MEASURES NOW TO BE TAKEN AN]) I
HAVE ALREADY SAID THAT WE PROPOSE SOME WILL BE DESIGNED TO
STIMULATE THAT GROWTH.
CERTAINLY THE ECONOMY IS NO LONGER IN THE STRAINED
CONDITION OF A YEAR OR MORE AGO. LT WAS, IN'DEED, A BASIC AIM OF
OUR ECONOMIC POLICY THEN TO MODERATE THAT CONDITION. IF WE WERE
TO AVERT THE THREAT OFA SELF-PERPETUATING WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL, THAT
WAS A NECESSARY PRE-CONDITION AND~ OF COURSE IT REMAINS SO. FOR IT
REMAINS TRUE THAT THE MOST DIFFICULT TASK, AND ONE WHICH IS STILL
BEFORE US, IS TO QUELL INFLATION.
BUT THAT IS NOT TO SAY THAT WE CAN TURN AWAY FROM OUR
OTHER HIGH OBJECTIVE, NAMELY, TO MAINTAIN THE MOMENTUM OF ECONOMIC
GROWTH, WITH ALL THAT MEANS FOR EMPLOYMENT. o/ 4 
-4
HERE ALSO WE HAVE PROBLEMS, INCLUDhING THE RURAL RECESSION
AND RESULTING RURAL UNEMPLOYMENT, WHICH WE HAVE ALREADY TAKEN STEPS
TO MEET AND WHICH WE SHALL DO MORE ABOUT IN ACCORDANCE WITH DECISIONS
WHICH I WILL MENTION LATER.
THESE FURTHER STEPS ARE IN LINE WITH THE FLEXIBLE APPROACH
THE GOVERNMENT HAD ADOPTED IN DEALING WITH PARTICULAR TRENDJS AS
THEY EMERGE. THEY REPRESENT A FURTHER MEASURED RESPONSE DESIGNED
TO MEET PARTICULAR PROBLEMS, WHILST MAINTAINING OUR COUNTERINFLATI
ONARY STANCE.
HERE I PAUSE TO LOOK MORE CLOSELY AT THE PROBLEM OF COST
AND PRICE ESCALATION. ONE DOES NOT HAVE TO SEARCH FAR TO FIND THE MAJOR FACTOR
PUSHING COSTS AND PRICES ALONG AT THE PRESENT UNACCEPTABLE AND INDEED
DANGEROUS RATE. IT MUST SURELY NOW BE CLEAR TO EVERYONE THAT THE
VERY RAPID INCREASE IN WAGE AND SALARY COSTS IS THE MOST IMPORTANT
FORCE WHICH HAS CHARACTERISED RECENT PERIODS OF~ COST AND PRICE INCREASES.
WE ARE, OF COURSE, AWARE THAT THERE ARE OTHER FACTORS; BUT WE SHOULD
NOT ALLOW THEIR EXISTENCE TO DIVERT OUR ATTENTION FROM WHAT IS CLEARLY
FAR AND AWAY THE MOST IMPORTANT CAUSE.
IN THIS FIELD, THE COMMONYEALTH HAS VIGOROUSLY PUT TO THE
ARBITRATION COMMISSION ITS VIEW THAT EXCESSIVE WAGE INCREASES IN THES
CURRENT CIRCUMSTANCES ARE VERY MUCH AGAINST THE COMMUNITY'S BEST
INTEREST. IN SOME DECISIONS TOWARDS THE END OF 1971 IT APPEARED THAT
THE COMMISSION HAD TAKEN COGNIZANCE OF THE EFFECTS OF ITS DETERMINATIONS
ON THE ECONOMY IN GENERAL. THERE HAS ALSO BEEN SOME WELCOME REDUCTION
IN THE RATE OF INCREASE IN OVER-AWARD PAYMENTS. 
5
NOTWITHSTANDING THESE MODERATELY HOPEFUL SIGNS.. THERE
ARE STILL EXTREMELY SERIOUS UPWARD PRESSURES ON THE WAGES FRONT
PARTICULARLY ON AWARD. WAGES, I WILL HAVE MORE TO SAY ABOUT THIS
MATTER LATER115 REDUCING THE IMPACT OF INFLATION IS~, AS I SAID, ONLY
PART OF OUR TOTAL OBJECTIVE,.
IN RELATION TO OUR GROWTH OBJECTIVE-THERE ARE SOME
FLAT ELEMENTS IN THE ECONOMY. THERE IS THE DEPRESSED SITUATION
IN SOME OF OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES AND THERE IS THE SUBDUED GROWTH
OF CONSUMER EXPENDITURE,-THERE IS ALSO EVIDENCE TO SUGGEST SOME
PROSPECTIVE LEVELLING OFF IN CERTAIN AREAS OF PRIVATE INVESTMENT
EXPENDITURE,. FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE FIELD OF NON-DWELLING CONSTRUCTION!
AS THE ECONOMY HAS COME OFF THE BOIL THERE HAS TOO,.
BEEN A RISE IN UNEMPLOYMENT -A RISE WHICH SHOULD NOT BE JUDGED,~
HOWEVER BY COMPARISON WITH THE VERY LOW LEVEL OF UNEMPLOYMENT
WHICH HAD BEEN REACHED IN 1970.
A GOOD DEAL HAS BEEN SAID IN RECENT MONTHS ABOUT THIS
LATTER ASPECT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND I THINK IT IMPORTANT
THEREFORE THAT I SHOULD SAY SOMETHING ABOUT IT.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT THE CURRENT ( END-JANUARY)
LEVEL OF UNEMPLOYMENT, AT 1. 62 PER CENT OF THE WORK-FORCE IN
SEASONALLY-ADJUSTED TERMS, IS LITTLE DIFFERENT FROM THE LONG -TERM
AVERAGE OF 1.4 PER CENT EXPERIENCED IN THIS COUYNTRY; AN]) THAT
LONG-TERM AVERAGE IS REMARKABLY LOW COMPARED WITH THE EXPERIENCE
OF MOST ADVANCED WESTERN NATIONS, 
-6
CERTAINLY, THE UNEMPLOYMENT SITUATION IS MUCH CLOSER TO THE
LONG-TERM NORM THAN IS THE CASE WITH PRICES, WHERE THE CURRENT RATE
OF PRICE INCREASE ABOVE 7 PER CENT PER YEAR CONTRASTS WITH OUR
EXPERIENCE THROUGH THE 1960' s OF SOME 2--3 PER CENT PER YEAR.
SECONDLY, I POINT OUT THAT THE TREND OF UNEMPLOYMENT HAS
VIRTUALLY FLATTENED OUT IN RECENT MONTHS. IN SEASONALLY-ADJUSTED
TERMS, IT HAS-INCHED UPWARDS DURING THE PAST FEW MONTHS FROM ITS
LEVEL OF 1 .53 PER CENT AT END-SEPTEMBER TO 1 .62 PER CENT AT ENDJANUARY
THAT IS, A RISE OF LESS THAN 0.1 PER CENT OVER FOUR MONTHS.
ANY BALANCED APPRAISAL OF OUR PRESENT ECONOMIC CONDITION
AND PROSPECTS MUST HAVE REGARD TO THESE POINTS. WHAT I WANT TO
STRESS IS THAT IT IS WHOLLY CONSISTENT WITH OUR OBJECTIVE OF
MAINTAINING STEADY GROWTH IN THE ECONOMY THAT WE SHOULD MAINTAIN A
HIGH LEVEL OF EMPLOYMENT.
IT WAS, INDEED, WITH THAT IN MIND THAT THE GOVERNMENT
LAST NOVEMBER AND DECEMBER TOOK A NUMBER OF STEPS STEPS WHICH
I SHALL NOT DETAIL AT THIS POINT BUT WHICH, AS YOU KNOW, INCLUDhED THE
ARRANGEMENT FOR-GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR THE RELIEF OF UNEMPLOYMENT
AS WELL AS A NUMBER OF OTHER ACTIONS.
SUBSEQUENTLY, AS PART OF THE THOROUGHGOING REVIEW OF THE
ECONOMY WHICH HAS BEEN PROCEEDING SINCE ABOUT MID-JANUARY, WE MOVED,
WITH YOUR APPROVAL, TO EFFECT FURTHER SHARP REDUCTIONS IN INTEREST
RATES ON GOVERNMENT SECURITIES. AT THE SAME TIME, AND IN PART AS
A CONSEQIJENCE, WE MOVED ALSO TO HAVE SIGNIFICANT REDUCTIONS MADE IN
TRADING BANK LENDING AND DEPOSIT RATES. THESE LATTER MOVES WERE,
IN EFFECT, FRUITS OF THE REVIEW WHICH COMMENCED SOME WEEKS AGO. 
7
BEFORE ANNOUNCING WHAT WE NOW HAVE IN MIND AS A FOLLOWUP
TO THOSE RECENT AND EARLIER ACTIONS; IT MAY BE WORTHWHILE FIRST
TO LOOK BRIEFLY AT SOME PARTICULhAR ASPECTS OF THE CURRENT ECONOMIC
SITUATION AND THE REASONS FOR THE CHANGES WE INTEND TO MAKE,
NON-METROPOLITAN UNEMPLOYMENT
ONE IMPORTANT ASPECT OF THE CURRENT LABOUR MARKET
RESULTS FROM THE EXTRAORDINARILY DIFFICULT SITUATION WHICH IS
CONFRONTING SOME OF OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES. THE GRANTS WHICH WE
INTRODUCED LAST DECEMBER FOR RELIEF OF NON-METROPOLITAN
UNEMPLOYMENT HAVE. IT IS TRUE, ALREADY HAD A USEFUL IMPACT ON
THIS ELEMENT IN THE SITUATION.
THESE GRANTS ARE DESIGNED) TO FINANCE ADDITIONAL LABOURINTENSIVE
ACTIVITIES OF A PRODUCTIVE KIND BY STATE, SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES IN ORDER TO PROVIDE EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES IN NON-METROPOLITAN AREAS, AS SUCH,-THEY HAVE
ALREADY PERMITTED MUCH URGENT AND USEFUL WORK TO BE UNDERTAKEN
AND HAVE MADE A SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS THE STRUCTURAL
PROBLEM OF NON-METROPOLITAN UNEMPLOYMENT THAT [ S INVOLVED,,
IN THE LIGHT OF EXPERIENCE WITH THIS SCHEME, THE
GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT MORE COULD NOW BE DONE IN THIS AREA.
WE THEREFORE PROPOSE9 SUBJECT TO YOUR AGREEMENT, THAT THE MONTHLY
RATE OF EXPENDITURES.. UNDER THE SCHEME BE*' TNCREASED,
AT PRESENT2~ THE GRANTS ARE SET AT $ 2,25 MILLION PER
MONTH,, WE BELIEVE THAT THIS AMOUNT COULD BE INCREASED; EFFECTIVE
AS FROM TODAY,. TO A RATE OF $ 4 MILLION PER MONTH. IN THE BALANCE
OF THIS FINANCIAL YEAR AND SUBJECT TO REVIEW IN JUNE THE
ADDITIONAL FUNDS INVOLVED WOULD AMOUNT TO $ 7.75 MILLION. v/ 
8-
IN TERMS OF IMPACT ON THE ECONOMY, A CLEARER IMPRESSION
IS CREATED IF WE THINK IN TERMS OF AN ANNUAL RATE OF INCREASED
SPENDING OF $ 21 MILLION PER ANNUM' BRINGING THE ANNUAL RATE OF
SPENDING UNDER THE SCHEME, AS REVISED, TO $ 48 MILLION PER ANNUM IN ALL,
IN REACHING OUR DECISION, LA ST DECEMBER, TO OFFER THESE
FUNDS FOR NON -METROPOLITAN EMPLOYMENT PURPOSES, WE WERE OF COURSE
VERY CONSCIOUS OF THE PARTICULAR PROBLEMS AND SOCIAL COSTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT
IN RURAL AREAS, WHERE AVENUES FOR NEW EMPLOYMENT ARE OFTEN VERY
LIMITED. UNEMPLOYMENT, HOWEVER, CAN AND DOES BRING HARDSHIP WHEREVER
IT OCCURS. THIS IS THE REASON WHY THE GOVERNMENT HAS, OVER THE YEARS,
PAID BENEFITS TO ELIGIBLE UNEMPLOYED. IT IS SOME TIME SINCE THE RATE
OF THIS BENEFIT WAS INCREASED. FOR THAT AND OTHER REASONS WE THINK
THE TIME OPPORTUNE TO CHANGE THE RATE. WE HAVE DECIDED TO INCREASE
THE ADULT* RATE FOR UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT, AND ASSOCIATED SHORT TERM
SICKNESS AND SPECIAL BENEFITS, FROM $ 10 PER WEEK TO $ 17 PER WEEK.
JUNIOR RATES FOR 16-17 YEAR OLDS AND FOR 18-20 YEAR OLDS WILL BE
INCREASED RESPECTIVELY BY $ 3 AND $ 5 PER WEEK.
WE WILL BRING FORWARD LEGISLATION TO THE PARLIAMENT To GIVE
EFFECT TO THESE INCREASES AS A MATTER OF URGENCY.
SOME MEASURES, SUCH AS THE NON-METROPOLITAN EMPLOYMENT
GRANTS, HAVE A DIRECT INFLUENCE UPON DEMAND FOR GOODS AND SERVICES,
INCLUDING LABOUR. BUT BROADER MEASURES WHICH SHOULD INFLUENCE CONFIDENCE
AND ACTIVITY WILL ALSO BE OF BENEFIT. THE GOVERNM4ENT HAS ACCORDINGLY
DECIDED THAT ADDITIONAL MEASURES OF THIS BROADER KIND ARE NOW
DESIRABLE. 
9-
INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE
WE HAVE HAD IT PUT TO US FROM MANY QUARTERS IN RECENT
WEEKS THAT THE SINGLE MEASURE MOST LIKELY TO BOOST CONFIDENCE AND
ACTIVITY ON THE PART OF INDUSTRY, AND MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY IN
PARTICULAR, IS THE RESTORATION OF THE SPECIAL IN-VESTMENT ALLOWANCE
FOR MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY.
THIS WAS, YOU WILL RECALL, SUSPENDED TWELVE MONTHS AGO.
ALTHOUGH THE MAJOR DETERMINANT OF IN-VESTMENT EXPENDITURE MUST, OF
COURSE, BE THE EXPECTED GROWTH OF DEMAND RELATIVE TO EXISTING
PRODUCTIVE CAPACITY, WE ARE PERSUADED OF THE FORCE OF THE VIEW I HAVE
STATED ABOUT THE INFLUENCE OF THE INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE IN BOOSTING
CONFIDENCE. ACCORDINGLY, THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED TO RESTORE THE
SPECIAL INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE ON NEW INVESTMENT IN MANUFACTURING
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT AS FROM THIS DAY, IN THE FORM IN WHICH IT
PREVIOUSLY EXISTED. ON THE BASIS OF THE VIEWS THAT HAVE BEEN PUT
TO US, THIS STEP CAN BE EXPECTED TO STIMULATE ACTIVITY ACROSS A WIDE
SPECTRUM OF AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY.
THE TREASURER WILL MAKE A FURTHER STATEMENT ON THIS SUBJECT,
IN A MORE DETAILED FORM LATER TODAY.
THE MEASURES WHICH I HAVE JUST ANNOUNCED, TAKEN TOGETHER
WITH THE MONETARY MEASURES WE ANNOUNCED LAST WEEK AND THE ACTIONS
WE-TOOK LATE LAST YEAR, WILL WORK BOTH DIRECTLY AND INDIRECTLY TO
ENCOURAGE ACTIVITY IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
PUBLIC SECTOR FOR OUR PART, WE THINK THIS IS APPROPRIATE. BUT THERE
IS CLEARLY ALSO A CASE FOR SOME MEASURED ADJUSTMENT TO DEVELOPING
CIRCUMS'" ANCES IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR. 
10
PUBLIC AUTHORITY EXPENDITURE OVERALL IS PRESENTLY ONE OF
THE STRONG POINTS IN THE ECONOMY. IN REAL TERMS, THE OVERALL POSITION
IS ONE OF STRONGER GROWTH THAN LAST YEAR. WITHIN THIS OVERALL PICTURE,
TOTAL PUBLIC AUTHORITY CAPITAL EXPENDITURE IS GROWING MORE SLOWLY
THAN CURRENT EXPENDITURE. THIS FOLLOWS A PERIOD WHEN, IN 1970-71 THlE
IMPACT OF RAPIDLY-ESCALATING WAGE COSTS ON STATE BUDGETS WAS SUCH
THAT, DESPITE CONSIDERABLE SPECIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE COMMONWEALTH,
A NUMBER OF IMPORTANT STATE WORKS HAD TO BE DEFERRED.
SIMILARLY, THE WORKS ACTIVITIES OF CERTAIN OF THE STATE
SEMI-GOVERNMENTAL AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES HAVE ALSO HAD TO BE CURTAILED
AND WE ARE AWARE, FROM THE DIRECT REPRESENTATIONS COMING FORWARD TO
U31IN THAT FIELD, THAT SOME RELAXATION THERE WOULD BE WIDELY
WELCOMED. IN THIS RESPECT I MENTION THAT THE SEMI-GOVERNMENTAL
AUTHORITIES HAVE BEEN VERY SUCCESSFUL IN THEIR LOAN-RAISING ACTIVITIES
IN THIS FINANCIAL YEAR TO DATE.
WORKS AND HOUSING AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT BORROWING PROGRAMMES
IN THE LIGHT OF OUR OVERALL OBJECTIVES, WE BELIEVE THERE
IS NOW A CASE FOR SUITABLE INCREASES BOTH IN THE STATES' WORKS AND
HOUSING AND THE SEMI-GOVERNMENT BORROWING PROGRAMMES. ANY INCREASE
IN THE WORKS AND HOUSING PROGRAMME TO WHICH WE MIGHT AGREE WOULD,,
OF COURSE,* INVOLVE THE COMMONWEALTH IN TAKING UP PART OF SUCH
INCREASE, 24.4 PER CENT TO BE PRECISE, IN THE FORM OF INTERESTFREE
CAPITAL GRANTS.
IN PROPOSING TO INCREASE THESE BORROWING PROGRAMMES, WE
SEEK YOUR ASSURANCE THAT THE ADDITIONAL FUNDS SHOULD, SO FAR AS
IS PRACTICABLE WITHOUT LOSS OF EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS, BE
UTILISED QUICKLY, HAVING IN MIND WHAT I BELIEVE TO BE OUR COMMON
OBJECTIVES RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT. / 11 
11
AS WE UNDERSTAND IT, YOU HAVE NO LACK OF TASKS TO BE
DONE, PARTICULARLY IN YOUR URBAN AREAS. HOUSING, SCHOOLS, WATER
SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE ALL THESE, WE KNOW, AND OTHERS, PROVIDE
OP'OORTUNITIES FOR EXPENDITURES OF THE KIND WE HAVE IN MIND.
STATE REVENUE BUDGETS PROSPECTIVE POSITIONS
SOME PREMIERS MAY WISH TO REFER NOT ONLY TO THEIR LOAN
PROGRAMMES BUT ALSO TO THEIR PROSPECTIVE REVENUE BUDGETS FOR
1971-72. I TAKE THE OPPORTUNITY OF INFORMING YOU THAT, SINCE THE
COMMONWEALTH BUDGET ESTIMATES WERE FRAMED, THERE HAVE BEEN REVISIONS
TO ELEMENTS OF THE FORMULA DETERMINING THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
GRANTS TO BE PAID TO THE STATES IN 1971-72.
THESE REVISIONS WILL RESULT, ON PRESENT FIGURING, IN AN
INCREASE IN THE AMOUNT STATES WILL RECEIVE BY WAY OF GENERAL REVENUE
ASSISTANCE IN THIS FINANCIAL YEAR. WHILE THESE ESTIMATES, LIKE
OTHERS MADE AT THIS TIME OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR, CAN ONLY BE BEST
GUESSES, WE PRESENTLY CALCULATE THE INCREASE IN-VOLVED AS OF THE
ORDER OF $ 20 MILLION.
IN THINKING ABOUT THIS MATTER MORE GENERALLY, WE HAVE
IN MIND THE UNCERTAINTIES WHICH SURROUND OUR OWN BUDGET-ESTIMATING
PROCEDURES EVEN AT THIS TIME OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR. WE EXPECT THAT
SIMILAR UNCERTAINTIES ALSO EXIST IN THE CASE OF STATE BUDGETS.
FOR THAT REASON, OUR OWN VIEW HAS NORMALLY BEEN THAT THESE
MATTERS ARE MORE APPROPRIATELY SUBJECTS FOR DISCUSSION AT THE
REGULAR JUNE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE THAN AT A CONFERENCE SUCH AS THIS
TODAY, CONVENED AS IT HAS BEEN PRINCIPALLY TO DISCUSS THE ECONOMIC
SITUATION. / 12 
12
THIS IS NOT TO BE TAKEN AS IMPLYING THAT THERE CANNOT
BE DISCUSSION. WE SHALL LISTEN CAREFULLY TO ANYTHING THAT YOU
MAY'CARE TO PUT ON THIS POINT JUST AS YOU WILL, I AM SURE,
CONSIDER THE VIEWS WE HAVE AS TO WHETHER ACTION IN THIS AREA IS
NOW APPROPRIATE. THE MEASURES I HAVE ANNOUNCED AND THOSE THE GOVERNMENT
HAD PREVIOSLY TAKEN IN RECENT MONTHS ARE DESIGNED TO DE~ AL WITH
SPECIFIC PROBLEMS WHILE AT THE SAME TIME PROVIDING A STIMULUS TO
THE ECONOMY IN LINE WITH OUR CONTINUING OBJECTIVE OF MAINTAINING
ITS GROWTH ' MOMENTUM.
BUT I MUST EMPHASISE THAT THERE IS A FINE LINE BETWEEN
ACTION DESIGNED TO THAT END AND ACTION WHICH WILL TILT THE BALANCE
TOO FAR, RESULTING IN THE LOSS OF SUCH HARD-WON SUCCESS AS HAS SO
FAR BEEN ACHIEVED IN CONTAINING INFLATION.
THE MEASURES WE HAVE CHOSEN, AND THEIR EXTENT, ARE
DESIGNED TO MAINTAIN THE BALANCE. IN THIS RESPECT WE HAVE A
NARROW PATH TO TREAD: WE MUST TREAD IT.
INFLATI ON HAVING ACTED TO STIMUIATE ACTIVITY AND EMPLOYMENT, WE
MUST CONTINUE TO SEEK ANOTHER OBJECTIVE THE CONTROL OF
INFLATION. FOR THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION ARE INSIDIOUS. IT IS
NOT MERELY AN ECONOMIC PROBLEM, BUT ALSO A SOCIAL ONE. o / 13 
13
I HAVE ALREADY MENTI ONED) THE COMMONWEALTH'S
INTERVENTION IN ARBITRATION COMMISSION AWARD HEARINGS. IN RECENT
TIMES THAT INTERVENTION HAS. IN RECOGNITION OF THE INCREASING
GRAVITY OF THE PROBLEM OF WAGE-INDUCED INFLATION,; BEEN MORE
FREQUENT AND MORE VIGOROUS THAN FOR MANY YEARS PAST,
I INSTANCE AS EXAMPLES THE'CARPENTERS CASE, THE ANNUAL
LEAVE CASE AND THE BANK OFFICIALS' CASE. I ADD THAT WE WILL; OF
COURSE,. BE MAKING VERY STRONG REPRESENTATIONS TO THE COMMISSION
IN THE NATIONAL WAGE CASE WHICH HAS BEEN LISTED TO RESUME NEXT
WEEK. IT HARDLY NEEDS SAYING THAT THE OUTCOME OF THAT CASE WILL
BE OF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO YOUR OWN BUDGETS AND WILL HAVE A CRUCIAL
IMPACT ON COSTS AND PRICES IN THE FUTURE.,
WE HAVE BEEN URGING PIVATE EMPLOYERS TO RESIST
EXTRAVAGANT CLAIMS FOR INCREASED WAGES AND IMPROVED CONDITIONS
MADE UPON THEM,. AND WHICH CAN CIY RESULT IN FURTHER PRESSURE
UPON THEM TO RAISE PRICES IN ORDER TO CARRY THEIR INCREASED COST
STRUCTURE, WE RECOGNISE, HOWEVER, THAT VE CANNOT HOPE TO EXERCISE
A SIGNIFICANT INFLUENCE IN THAT WAY IF THERE IS ANY WIDESPREAD
FEELING AMONG BUSINESSMEN THAT WE ARE NOT; IN FACT, EXERCISING
RESTRAINT WITHIN TH-E AREAS OPEN TO OUR DIRECT INFLUENCE THE PUBLIC
SERVICE AND THE VARIOUS COMMONWEALTH STATUTORY BODIES.
THE COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD HAS, IN FACT:, A
FIRM POLICY OF NEITHER LEADING THE WAY IN ITS DETERMINATIONS ON
WAGES AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE NOR LAGGING SO FAR BEHIND THAT
RECRUITMENT TO AND THE EFFICIENCY OF THE SERVICE BEGINS TO SUFFER,. 
14
I WISH TO UNDERLINE THAT POLICY.
AT THIS TIME, HOWEVER, WE HAVE A PARTICULAR SITUATION
REL; ATING TO THE WHITE COLLAR AREA WHICH GIVES CAUSE FOR VERY
SERI'OUS CONCERN NOT MERELY TO THE COMMONWEALTH BUT I THINK TO ALL
OF US HERE TODAY.
IN ONE STATE, ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL OFFICERS WITHIN
THE PUBLIC SERVICE AN]) THE STATUTORY AUTHORITIES HAVE BEEN GRANTED
AN INCREASE OF 9 PER CENT IN WAGE RATES.
I AM NOT CONCERNED TO-CANVASS THE CIRCUMSTANCES IN WHICH
THAT INCREASE CAME ABOUT, ALTHOUGH I NOTE AND WELCOME THE SUBSEQUENT
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE PREMIER OF VICTORIA THAT HE PROPOSES A RADICAL
OVERHAUL OF THE WAGE-FIXING MACHINERY IN HIS STATE DESIGNED TO
ENSUR~ E THAT SUCH A CHAIN OF CIRCUMSTANCES COULD NOT OCCUR IN
FUTURE. WE SHOULD BE GLAD TO HEAR FURTHER FROM HIM ON THAT MATTER
SHOULD HE SO DESIRE.
WHAT I AM CONCERNED ABOUT NOW IS TO ENSURE THAT THE
INCREASE IS " QUARANTINED" TO THAT PARTICULAR STATE, AS FAR AS OUR
OWN ACTIONS AN]) POLICIES MAY MAKE THAT POSSIBLE AND THAT THIS
INCREASE DOES NOT SPREAD GENERALLY TO WHITE COLLAR WORKERS THROUGHOUT
-TH1E ECONOMY. SHOULD WE FAIL IN THAT RESPECT, THE CONSEQUENCES ARE
CLEAR. STATE BUDGETS WILL ONCE AGAIN BE UNHINGED, PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
AT ALL LEVELS WILL BE FORCED ONCE AGAIN TO CONSIDER RAISING THEIR
CHARGES TO MPEET THEIR INCREASED COSTS, AND THE INFLATIONARY SPIRAL
WILL BE GIVEN A NEW AND SERIOUS TWIST. SUCH AN OUTCOME WILL OBVIOUSLY
BE DAMAGING TO THE BEST INTERESTS OF THIS COUNTRY. 
15
I THEREFORE TELL YOU NOW THAT THE COMMONWEALTH PROPOSES TO
TAKE WHATEVER ACTION IT CAN TO CONTAIN THE FLOW-ON OF THE 9 PER
CENT INCREASE TO WHICH I HAVE REFERRED IN THE AREA OF THE COMMONWEALTH
PUBLIC SERVICE OR COMMONWEALTH INSTRUMENTALITIES. WITHIN THE
PROVISIONS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE ARBITRATION ACT, WE WILL PUT OUR
CASE RELATING TO SUCH INCREASES AT APPROPRIATE STAGES OF THE ARBITRAL
PROCESS. WE WILL ALSO INTERVENE, WHENEVER THE OPPORTUNITY IS OPEN
TO US, AGAINST CLAIMS OF A LIKE KIND IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
THIS IS A SERIOUS DECISION, AN) NOT ONE THAT WE HAVE
TAKEN LIGHTLY. NEVERTHELESS, WE BELIEVE IT TO BE NECESSARY IF THE
UPWARD THRUST TO THE GENERAL LEVEL OF WAGl COSTS IS TO BE BLUNTED AND
IF ANY REAL PROGRESS IS TO BE MADE IN THE BATTLE AGAINST COSTINFLATION.
IT IS CLEAR, HOWEVER, THAT THE PROSPECT OF ACHIEVING THOSE
OBJECTIVES WILL BE VERY MUCH ENHANCED IF A UNITED FRONT IS TAKEN
TOWARDS THEM BY THE PUBLIC SECTOR AS A WHOLE. TO ACHIEVE THIS
OBJECTIVE, I INVITE THE PREMIERS TO JOIN WITH THE COMMONWEALTH HERE
TODAY IN EXPRESSING THEIR DETERMINATION ALSO TO RESIST THESE " NEW ROUND"
CLAIMS WITHIN THE AREAS OF THEIR OWN PUBLIC SERVICES AND STATUTORY BODIES.
WE REGARD THIS AS A MATTER OF HIGH NATIONAL IMPORTANCE.
WE SIMPLY CANNOT STAND ASIDE AND PASSIVELY ALLOW THE
EVENTS THAT HAVE ALREADY OCCURRED IN VICTORIA ( AND WHICH OF COURSE
CANNOT NOW BE UNDONE) TO BE MULTIPLIED ELSEWHERE WITHIN THE ECONOMY.
THIS, GENTLEMEN, IS THE PROGRAMME WHICH WE PUT TO YOU
TODAY FOR* DISCUSSION AND ON WHIChf WE INVITE YOUR VIEWS. 



C . JJ AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER
OLYIIC APPEAL FUIOD
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. William McMahon, C. H. , M. P.
21 February, 1972
Good Evening;
Nineteen hundred and seventy-two is another
Olympic Games Year and the Australian Olympic Federation, of
which I happen to be the President, wants to send about 200 of
our top athletes to iZunich, Germany, to compete in the Games.
Now you know as well as I do that the Australian
is a great sportsman, and that he can compete and win in world
company. So we plan to be able to announce the team in May of
this year and to get them to Munich as soon as we can so that they
can compete in the Games in late August and early September.
In order to do that we have to raise something
like $ 400,000 to permit the mission to take place. My Government,
the Australian Government, has provided $ 80,000 to permit this to
happen and we have to collect the balance from people like you,
from companies and corporations, from associations and from the
trade unions as well.
We have to do this if the mission is to be
successful. So I ask you tonight to contribute to the maximum
of your capacity, and to make this trip a success.
Please do so, and give our athletes the opportunity
to compete and to beat the best from other parts of the world.
Good ni-ht and thank you. 


SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM 23 February 1972
On behalf of the Australian Government I welcome you to Canberra for the Second Session of the South Pacific Forum. Most of you have been here before, but this is the first time we meet together in Australia as neighbours and friends to discuss matters ofcommon interest. 
During my period of office as Foreign Minister, I wholeheartedly supported the concept so I have a direct personal interest in the Forum. Obviously there was a need for a forum for political discussions as well as discussions about other matters of common interest. In short we need a forum such as this. And I recommended to my colleagues we should identify ourselves with the Forum when it was set up. I assure you we will co-operate in every way we can. We share a common purpose for peace, security and progress in the South Pacific Region and our destinies are permanently linked in many ways.
Historically, the first links were forged when Captain Cook explored the Pacific two hundred years ago. He then established links between Australia, New Zealand and the Islands which have increasingly brought us closer together in friendship and trade. And, we share the conviction that independence, freedom and security are the rights of our peoples. We are all involved in the hectic movement of political and economic change that marks our time. This helps to strengthen our relationships and gives us a regional identity in the wider world beyond the South Pacific. And like you, we are busy with the adventure of nation building, economic development and social progress. We possess in common the tradition of parliamentary democracy and a community of interest in the ties and institutional patterns of the British Commonwealth. But we recognise, too, a wider Pacific community with which each of us is already linked in the South Pacific Commission.
This Forum has, in a sense, other and wider political interests to pursue. Equally it is able to build on our experience of co-operation and adaptation to change which has marked the twenty-five years of the Commission. We live in an era of aroused expectations, stimulated by the ease of travel and the soread of communications If a world where every Government has to chart a course and navigate according to its assessment of its own best interests. But none of us can be wholly self-sufficient, or live in isolation. Neither can we afford to neglect opportunities to widen our duderstanding of the environment in which we live, or to make known our interests to those who share that environment with us. We must continually develop our capacity in self-reliance against the background that the formal protection by other powers which was previously part of our colonial experience, is no longer wholly valid. For these reasons I welcome you to this meeting.
There are many practical issucs and questions of immediate  concern on the agenda, and we look forwafdto the opportunity to learn about your problems and the solutions which you favour. In fact and substance this is a meeting where we are all equal and where the importance of regional co-operation is uppermost in our minds.
Our first meeting in Wellington was a natural success. It showed that despite our diverse histories, we had 1problems in common and the will to solve them. I am confident that this meeting will be as successful and my Government will spare no effort to make it so. It is my hope that from this meeting will develop a stronger friendship to reinforce our sense of regional identity and common pu. rpose, harnessed to the welfare arnd prosperity of all the peoples of the South Pacific.
We are glad so many of you have found it possible, in spite of your many and urgent responsibilities, to spare the time to see at first hand a little of our country and our Australian community which shares to the full in the welcome I give you today.
I declare the Forum open. 



PRIME MINISTER
REGIONAL DAILIES ASSOCIATION DIVINER
CANBERRA, A. C. T. IIARCH, 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon CHMP.
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I feel a little like Daniel as the guest of the
regional lions. Mostly, I come face to face with the papers in
the morning an hour or so before breakfast. On this occasion,
it is a pleasure to meet you at the end of the day, and in pretty
distinguished company. I know you have no intention of spoiling
m y dinner as you sometimes spoil my breakfast.
As I see it, 11r. President, the reqional dailies are
to the Metropolitan press what local Government is to State
Government. They are closest to the people. And like their
Metropolitan brothers, they are free and independently minded, very
independently minded.
We in Canberra respect the regional papers for the
qualities they have. But please don't misunderstand me, I don't
agree with everything you print, far from it.
Over the years, experience has tempered my judgemient
and I am now a fatalist where newspapers are concerned. Frc'm my
experience, a reply to a newspaper article resermbles the t Dnt of
Hercules to crop the Hydra. There isn't t"-he slightest chance of
ultimate success. But I am an optimist too, and tonight I want to
talk a little about why we are going to win the next election.
We have been through a difficult economic period. There
are still plenty of difficulties around. But I can see daylight
and so can many of the people around me. Not only in the Government,
but in large sections of business and industry where the man who
spots the trend early qets the advantage as the recovery gathers
momentum. II
believe that as we generate more
confidence, Lnd we in Australia have greater reason for confidence
and future prospects than most other countries I know, if we can
have less industrial trouble and less wage and price movements, we
can get smoothly into ton gear again. Here the press ha-r a vital,
indeed critical, role. / 2 
You are professional newspaper people, and you have
every right to say you are the best judges of what is news.
What I can do is to make an appeal for a place for good news
alongside the bad to make an appeal for some priority for
matters of substance over trivia.
Confidence has a psychological basis and you cannot
beat this by Government edict and action alone. It needs to be
attacked on a broad front with the intelligent understanding and
support of the Press. People do believe what they read in
newspapers and that is why those of you who belong to the
honourable profession of journalism have a great trust to keep.
You are a spur to governments and a voice for the people.
It is a year since I became Prime Minister and I
confess it has been a tough year, tougher than I thought it would
be. We have faced up to taking unpopular measures. We have
accepted our responsibility to hold firm. We have set ourselves
unmistakably against the social and economic evil of excessive
inflation. And now we are finding some satisfaction in seeing
the right trends beginning to emerge.
That is not my opinion alone. Remember what Mr
Gibbs, the Managing Director of GMH said only this week about the
upturn in the economy. His company is going to put on about as
many men as it laid off in recent months. Two thousand are going
back on the payroll. Mr Gibbs anticipates more people will be
buying cars in the next few months as the stimulus measures
announced at the Premiers' Conference work through. It is a
hardheaded business assessment based on experience, facts and
estimates. We support it.
Then there are signs, too, that the rate of increase
in savings bank deposits is starting to slow down. As people get
more confidence, they will be spending more. These are facts,
not wishful thinking. We heard nothing, I note, from the Leader of the
Opposition this week about his famous prediction in January that
we were going to see a further 50,000 people out of work in
three months' time. Well, all I can say is that two months ha-e
gone by and in the first of those months, unemployment fell by
15,000. Unemployment is on the way down. And we can be sure that
in this month of March there will be a further improvement.
Mr Whitlam now seems to be whispering his predictions.
There has been a similar deafening silence on this
subject from Mr Clyde Cameron who went even further out on a
limb. He forecast 200,000 out of work. I ' now it is hard to
believe. It was a completely irresponsible fear-promoting
exercise that got about as far as Mr Cameron's other short-lived
attempt at getting the Labor Party to agree on its industrial
policy. His efforts as sha-low Minister for La -ur have not
exactly been crowned with success.
The Labor Party is very fond of substituting wishes
for predictions and speculations for certainties. We are going
to see a lot more of it this year. When you do, take a moment
to remember those predictions of theirs about unemployment. / 3 
3
But let us turn from their wishful predictions to
more of the facts as we know them today.
The economy is healthy and growing
Look at the country. What a depressing outlook it was
a year ago! The bottom had fallen out of wool, it
seemed, and rural unemployment was high. Now wool and
other commo . r-ity prices have got better and the rural
depression is lifting.
tany companies are showing better results and the stock
market is more buoyant, without the previous unhealthy
sneculative elements.
Overseas trade is healthy. Our reserves position is
strong.
Interest rates are down. Money is available for
investment. These are ingredients for success. But the fight
against inflation must go on. As we have said often, the remedy
lies in wage restraint together with increased productivity.
Before the year is out, we will be going to the polls.
I will say I believe we will win, and win on our mcrits. We will
fight and win on the vital issues of the day on the economy
defence social welfare national development.
I do not yet want to nominate a priority of issues.
They are all very important. We will show how wide the gulf is
between the Government Parties and Labor on issues like imnigration,
industrial lawlessness and thE-ANZUS Treaty.
Only yesterday, the Presidential envoy, Mr Marshall
Green, re-emphasised the closeness of the trust which has been
renewed between ourselves and the United States. Australia is
a close friend with whom we share our confidences to a degree we
do with no-one else, uas how Mr Green put it, on arrival in Sydney.
We will also show how fundamentally cur -hilosophies
differ ours the philosephy of individual rights and free
enterprise theirs Labor's the dominance and supervision of
the state. Who governs this country? The elected representatives?
Or a small band largely nominated and dominated by the Left Wing
Unions? That is another major issue.
We all know industrial lawlessness took the edge off
the reduction in actual unemployment last month. And it remains a
constant threat to the pick-up in the economy to whieh I have just
referred. / 4 
A
I note what Mr Hawke has had to say about industrial
action in an election year. He wont-hold off to help his political
friends, as the Labor Executive meeting showed. He is a law unto
himself in these matters. He has encouraged certain unions to go
in for non-industrial strikes.
We have already had enough industrial strikes for
non-industrial reasons. The public is sick of them. Only the
noisy minority with motives of their own support them. They
climb on any lawless bandwaggon that comes along. Some of the
Left-Wing unions go beyond the bounds of all reason and commonsense.
There are other issues. We will show we are real
federalists with true respect for the rights of the States. We
will remind Australians that our commitment to the sanctity of
our foreign relations is firm, and that we will not, like Labor,
brush aside the arrangements we have in Asia and the Pacific.
At the same time, we will show that we can progress
step by step towards more normal arrangements with foreign
powers having political philosophies alien to ours.
These are some of tho issues to be argued this year.
We will do so against a background of an impressive record of
constructive legislation.
We have done a lot in a year despite economic
difficulties difficulties of a type which hc-V taxed the best
economic managers in the Western world. The list is available.
I want to mention just three examples which show conclusively
I have not hesitated to grasp the nettle.
First; Trade union amalgamations. We are determined
to stick to our policy not to interfere, despite apparent political
advantages. Second The doctors. We did not hesitate to aopoint
the Arbitrator once it became clear that negotiation was not going
to settle the common fee issue in New South Wales.
And third The Public Service unions. I was accused
of political cowardice for not acting in the postal workers disputes.
For the first time since Federation, we have now introduced
reasonable legislation which can, if necessary, be used in such
situations. Does anyone seriously suggest that such actions taken
in an election year are those of an indecisive Government?
Does it also show indecision to stand un and state our belief that
wage increases must be curbed to control inflation and then to
back up our statements by intervervening in every mator wage
hearing? What rubbish! If our critics can't come up with
something better than that, we won't have to worry much about which
way the votes will go.. 
In the samne way, the Parliamecnt has recently been
misu~ sed by time-waiting and q * uite childish arguments over the
interpretation of one word or another. Some may say that is fair
game in politics, but it reflects no credit on the Opposition or
dignity on the Parliament. op~ position membe-rs ought to have
more resp'ect for themselves as Parliamentarians than to operate
as a " jeer squad" In the House.
I also emphatically reject Labor's recent pathetic
and transparent manoeuvres to show some contrived differences
within the Ministry and the Party. It was ridiculous to suggest
a rift between the Treasurer and myself because he gave a pa * per
to the Taxpayers' Association meeting that I hadn't read first.
There was no earthly reason why he should. He was not committing
the Government. I don't read advance conics of every speech
responsible Ministers make.
In the Party room, as in the Cabinet room, I encourage
the freest discussion. That's the Liberal way. We stand for the
rights and freedoros of the individual. Not like the straightjacket
policy fastened on the Parliamentary Labor Party by its
outside Federal Conference.
The Coaliti-Pn, too, is as solid as a rock. My colleague,
the Daputy Prime iMinister, who is at this table tonight will, I
am sure, ag~ ree with that.
He will also agree that together we are going to win
the election. 



IAS TRALIAN MININC IND) USTRY C. OUNC IL
Speech by the mime Minis-ter, The Rt Hon. W-illiam Mc?' ahon, M. P.
Mr Prbident, Distinguished Guests and Gentlemen,
This occasion offers both to my Government and to your Council,
the chance to exchange views at first hand. The establishment of
the Ki~ ning Industry Council just five years ago showed the importance
you attach t1-o the communication of your views and trends in your
industry to the National Government here in Canberra.
For our part, we have for a considerable time now conducted
regular consultations at the Cabinet level with the organisations
representing the major groups in the economy. Your Council has become
a more important part of these regular economic consultations in recent
years, reflecting the dramatic increase in its conttbution to the
national economy. We consider this direct consultation1 to be an
important two-way stream of communication between the Government and
other component parts of the economy. We want it to continue and
develop, and I am sure you do too. You know the figures relating
to the Mining Industry's contribution to the nation just as well as
I do. Nonetheless, these figures need emphasis to a much wider
audience. Since the mid-sixties the Mining Industry in Aus; tralia
has trebledits performance in both total production and in its share
of our export income. In 1965, the " ex an" value of mineral
production was worth $ 542 million. By 1971, the figure was
$ 1600 million. In 1965, minerals and metals brought us in about
$ 300 million in export income. For 1970-71, the industry earned
$ 1250 million overseas or about 29 per cent of total exports.
These are impressive, and I am told that on present indications,
there could be a further trebling of export earnings from mining and
metals during the seventies to reach $ 3,500 million by 1980. Tib
upsurge in mining activity and production of minerals which those
figures describe has had the most significant effects on the growth
and progress of this nation. Our ' jpattern of trade was transformed
as the export contribution of minerals firstly overtook 1969
wool, and has since continued to overtake the contribution of the
whole of our other rural exports. T~ Iere are those who assert for
example that without the minerals boomt of the late sixties and early
seventies, Australia could have been faced with s _ vece balance of
payments problems.
That is the external picture. At home, there has been a matching
development boom accompanying the great new m~ mmaq projects and
involving new ports, hundreds of miles of new railway lines, and more
than a dozen new towns have been created in remote parts of our
continent. 
It is clear from this that the mining industry has contributed
very substantially to the broadening and diversification of the economy.
But in more recent times, your industry has, along with other important
sectors of the economy, suffered from the effects of the world currency
realignmentheoThe Government has been concerned at the effects of this
downturn in/ rate of development of world trade, and in particular, the
effects of mineral production and mineral exports. On the production
side, cost increases, falling demand and prices and currency realignment
have had their effect on iron ore, coal, copper and lead. On the export
side, we have seen the requests by* Companies to reduce below
the quantities specified in contracts, the tonnages of iron ore and
copper for delivery to their mills and smellfrs,.
Now I said the Government was concerned about this situation and
it may be asked,' well, what has the Government done Ve have taken
a number of important initiatives, both to assist the major exporting
industries generally and the mining industry in particular. Firstly,
there was the question of the revaluation of the Australian dollar.
In terms of pure monetary theory there could, of course, have been a
full appreciation to the'dia.-. point of 8.57 per cent in the Australian
dollar as against the American dollar. In reality, there was a
situation where major mineral contracts were affected to the extent
of approximately $ 8 million for each per centage point movement in
the appreai-atioi_ of the Australian dollar; where our other primary
industries faced difficulties in competition with other nations which
had already devalued and where the success of the manufactured
exports drive could have been affected. Above all, there was the
impact on confidence in the community generally to be considered. At
the time, confidence was not particularly strong, although I now
believe that with fresh signs of the recovery showing up, confidence
is being restored.
That brings me to the second point. One of the stimulus measures
we announced at the recent Premiers' Conference was the re-instatement
of the investment allowance which was mentioned so generously here
earlier tonight. As I am sure you are well aware, the Government is
keen to see a greater degree of processing of our minerals, especially
where this is economic and where it represents a rational use of
resources. We have assisted this aim in a number of ways. There is
the re-instatement of the investment allowance, which we believe will
prove to be a big help to the mining industry in establishing
processing and manufacturing plant. There is also our undertaking to
provide about $ 80 million to the Queensland Government for the Gladstone
power station of 1100 megawatts. We regard the establishment of this
large-scale source of power as a catalyst for the further expansion
of mineral processing at Gladstone. We stand ready to provide this
finance, so long as the conditions stipulated are met.
The third area of assistance has been in the decision to continue
the financial assistance provided under the industrial research and
development grants scheme for a further five year period from July.
It is estimated that expenditure on this scheme, which is designed to
encourage manufacturing and mining companies in Australia to increase
the-i research and development spending, will be $ 60 million for the
first five year VeriOd which began in 1967.
Our fourth recent initiative relating to the mining industry
concerned the Japanese requests for a cutback in iron and copper
deliveries which I have already mentioned. The Minister for Tnational
Development made representations to the Japanese Government tc ensure
that our companies were treated no less favourably than companies from
other countries in the negotiations over these requests. 
There are, of course, other recent Government decisions and
actions bearing directly on the mining industry. The Government is
looking at the development of our Uranium resources with a view to
achieving the maximum benefit from these resources to Australia. There
may well be benefits in co-ordinated development.
There have already been discussions between Commonwealth and
State officials and the industry on the production and marketing of
Uranium. We recently decided to provide a non-repayable capital grant
of $ 2.5 million to Western Australia for the provision of a new ship
which will help restrain the growth of transport costs in areas where
many major mining projects are located.
I notice that your council has this afternoon released a proposed
five-point mining and conservation plan for consideration by
Governments, both Federal and State. We are all aware of the growing
interest in conservation and environment protection and it is encouraging
to see a major industry group taking a lead to provide positive
proposals. It is a responsible way to approach this question.
Although, the States have the major responsibility in this area, I
know your proposals will be most carefully considered. We are, as
you know, in the process of forming a National Environment Council
The other questbn I would like to mention to you tonight
concerns our policy on overseas investment whichhas been the subject
of some comment recently. First, I must say that overseas capital
has had a great cal to do over the years with the expansion of our
economy and the technological advancement of our industry. It has
provided resources additional to those we have raised fromour domestic
capital markets, and in particular has been highly important in
sustaining our large-scale migration programme and, of course, it
brings with it not only capital resources but also advanced technology,
managerial skills and market connections. It is noteworthy that our
largest mining companies are managed by Australians, men who have a
close interest in the development of this nation.
The other side of this large contribution to our development
has been a significant measure of foreign ownership and control of
our company assets. It has long been the Government's aim to ensure
that Australians have the opportunity to participate in these foreign
operations and I am sure most foreign corporations respect this
attitude. Again, we have stood ready to prevent -specific takeovers
of Australian-controlled companies if such takeovers are seen as
against the national interest. Constraints under our guide lines have
been placed on foreign companies borrowing here, both to conserve
our domestic capital resources and to provide an additonal incentive
to overseas companies to offer equity participation to Australian
interests. There are, too, other causes of potential conflict arising out
of capital inflow. These will be thoroughly investigated in a
document being prepared by the Treasury, and nearing completion.
The very substantial level of inflow in the last two years or so
has created special problems for the successful pursuit of our
national monetary policies. THis issue is al. o being closely examined.
I have the personal belief that as time proceeds, Australians
should undertake more investment opportunities overseas, and particularly
in the Asian and Pacific region. Direct investment overseas,
which for most practical purposes is not restricted,'. has in fact
been increasing in recent years as Australian companies have been
establishing nterprises in many countries overseas, particularly in
/ 4. 
New Zealand, South-East Asia and the Pacific, but also in the United
Kingdom, the United States and elsewhere. We will be looking in
particular, at the sharp increase which has recently occurred in the
level of borrowing overseas and its impact on liquidity whether by
Australian-owned or foreign-owned companies in Australia, which has
contributed to the high level of capital inflow. It could be, for
example, that increased borrowings fromlocal sources would help ease ' hany
problems of excess liquidity arising from a level of inflow, and
contribute to greater stability of our domestic economy
In any review of this or other aspects of this important matter
the Government would, of course, take all factors into consideration,
including our over-riding wish to see the continued stable growth
and development of the Australian economy. Many Australian companies
have shown that they have the technical expertise and managerial
knowhow to set up successful ventures abroad. Although the trend has
been upwards in recent years the amounts involved have heen relatively
small. They hive averaged some $ 60 million annually over the past
years or so. I. sincerelyhope that the trends of recent years will
improve. The Treasury at present has in hand an in-depth study on the
whole subject of foreign investment in Australia. I dc not wish in
any way to forecast what, if any, 9hanges in the Government's policy
might eventuate as a result of its consideration of this study. I
can, however, say that one of the aspects we will be looking at will
be whether the very high level of capital inflow we have experienced
over the past couple of years poses difficulties for the domestic
management of the economy and, if so, whether there is need for a
change in policies to forestall any danger of that kind.
We believe the balance of the foreign contribution to our
development has, over the years, been very much in our favour.
Nevertheless, should it be demonstrated that in some measure the
volume and form of the inflow of capital are not, in fact, enhancing
the performance of the economy, we will, of course, review our policies
and announce them in clear and understandable terms. But we will do
so on the basis of fact and detailed analysis and against the philosophy
that what we do will be in the best interests of this country.
CANBERRA March 1972 



MACQUARIE~ NETWORK WTEEKLY BROADCASTS
BY THE PRI-T MINISTER, TIF RT. HON. WILLIAM
McMATION, CH. 12 ARIL, 1.972
Good Evening: Maccuarie Network has made available one night each
week so that I can speak to the A11ustralian people on matters of
great national interest. I welcome the opportunity they have
given to me to speak to you.
Naturally enough on an occasion like this, I think it
would be desirable if I spokr about the mini-Budget we introduced
into the House of Rex~ resentatives last night.
You will probably remember that when we introduced
the last Budget in the middle of last year, we made the statement
that if we felt the economy needed an additional stimulus, or that
a change in policy was necessary, w~ e would do so immediately.
Since then, we have confirmed the view that it is
better to make our policy decisions known as scon as we could, rather
than to wait for another Budget or to wait until an election
policy speech was made.
So throughout the year in accordaince with this
decision, we have gradually given increased stimuli to the economy.
We started off with monetary Do] Lcy early in the year. We then
had the Premiers' Conference %,, here we made large sums of money
available for works and housing and for other purposes.
We made sumns of money available for education,
particularly at the independent schools, and for buildings in
the public schools. And now we have made several very important
decisions that intimately affect you.
The first of these decisions relates to income tax.
During the Budget last year we increased income tax by 2 per
cent. We have now decided that this part of the tax will be
takpn off, and it will mean that you will have an extra $ 117 million
over the year in your own pockets rather than paving to the
Income Tax Commissioner. We have also decided to increase Pensions and
repatriation benefits. In the case of pensions, the base rate
will be ipcreased by $ 1 per week, -and in the case of married
couples, by 75 cents per week. And we have also decided that in
the case of people with incomes of their own, that we will
liberalise the tapered means test so that they can still receive
a part pension and have a total income, in the case of a single
individual of $ 6.50, and in the case of a married couple. of_ 4&amp; l
per week. Now there were three reasons why we carried out these
changes. 
= 2-
The first onc3 was so that we could increase
purchasing power in the corrnunity and give people a greater
opportunity to purchase in the retail stores.
The second was undoubtedly humanitarian,
in order to provide assistance to those whom we felt were in the
greatest need, and to whom we could give the greatest benefit.
Third, we wanted to increase confidence in the
community, because with increased confidence we feel that demand
would increase, and as demand increases, the economy will grow,
unemployment will reduce and we will have the kind of society and
the kind of economy that we want and I know that you people want
too. There is one other change that we will make.
We have decided to carry out a review of the total taxation
structure of the Cormmonwealth. This will cover not only your
personal taxation, but will also cover indirect and corporation
taxation as well. Uip till the moment we have been carrying out an
enquiry witkin Treasury itself. But we ca~ me to the conclusion
that the people of this country would not be satisfied if we relied
wholly upon Treasury advice. We thought it-would be much better,
therefore, if we had an open enquiry by a judge, or by a group of
individuals who could carry out a public examination and then could
make their recommendations to the Government. This course we will
follow. we hope it will be for your benefit.
So I want to sum up in this way. We have made
these changes because we wanted demand to increase, and particularly
consumption expenditure to improve, and wffe wanted retail sales
to improve as well. We had the humanitarian purpose of helping
those people in the greatest need, and we also wanted to assist the
growing confidence in the community because we wanted to improve
and to help in the obiectives the Government has set of full
employment and a continually growing economy.
I am confident that what we are doing is right,
and if you will join me in this confidence, I can assure you
that we will have the kind of economy the ' Government wants and
the kind of economy I am sure you want as vell. 



EMBORGO; 6PM. SUNDAY 16 APRIL, 1,72.
NATIONAL HEART WEEK
NATIONAL T. V. NETWORK
Speech by the Prime Minister, the 7t Hon. William McMahon, CH, MP.
16 April, 1972.
This is the second occasion I have been given the
privilege of opening up National Heart Week. The Foundation has
suggested to me that I emphasise as strongly as I can, the ways of
minimising the risk of heart disease. Research over the years has
clearly indicated the basic causes of heart attack, and I am informed
that if you take four precautions, you can reduce the risk considerably.
The precautions you can take are these:-
Keep Fit
Keep your weight down
Give up smoking and
Have a regular medical check
Now the Heart Foundation believes that these four remedies
are the basis of a long and healthy life and will undoubtedly help
us avoid some of the most prevalent of heart diseases.
Their view is, I think, pretty well accepted now. To drive
home the risks taken, the Foundation has asked me to mention these
points to you:-The average middleaged Australian has one chance in
twenty of getting coronary heart disease within five years.
If you are unfit, overweight and a heavy smoker, then you
have one chance in five.
But if you do as the Foundation recommends, the risk is
reduced to one in seventy-five.
Now these are telling figures and I want you to think
about them. In fact heart disease kills more of us than all other
diseases put together. This is why the Foundation has drawn your
attention to preventive action of a simple kind. And we want you
to do all you can to lower the risk of heart disease that affects
so many people. As the Heart Foundation puts it, " Give your heart
every chance". And I emphasise, give yourself every chance of a
happy successful and interesting life. 



2 r'APR1~ 97
AUSTRAJLI N-AMERICAN ASSOC IATIONt-UNCH-EON
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 17 APRIL 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. W. McMahon, CH, _ MP
May I formally express to you the admiration that
I have for all that the Association is doing. And I believe it
is doing it in the int-6. rests of our two countries that is our
continuing friendship with the United States, which I want to
stress, the United States being the acknowledged leader of the
free world, and our great Partner, as you all know, in the
Pacific. Today I want to talk about that friendship in a
very special kind of context. That context is -the changing
situation in Asia, with all its great potential for good, and
also, of course, its dangers.
And I think that I'm speaking here at an appropriate
time too. Because even though a few weeks ago people could have
felt that the dangers were remote, I think the days have come
-when we all realise that the unexpected can happen, and can
happen in an unfavourable way for us. Because who would have
thought three weeks ago that we could have had another offensive
from the North Vietnamese on the South Vietnamese, with all the
attending danger and all the potentialities that that could bring
in its wake. Now I'm sure you know the position of the super and
the great powers in the Asian area. Japan, for example, has become
a superpower economically. China now moves into new associations
with the rest of the world. The Soviet is showing an increasing
interest in Asia and as you know, the North Vietnamese are
increasing attacks on So" th Vietnam. The Nixon Doctrine is one
which calls on nations of the world, Particularly in the Asian
theatre, to do more in their own defence and to have greater
regional co-operation. And running through all this, is what they call the
bilateral relations or relationship between various countries.
The most of these happens to be the dramatic visit to Peking and
other parts of Continental China by the President of the United
States. Now, I think you know t1-hat we have been busy for a
long time ourselves, trying to establish what is called a dialogue
with the Peoples' Republic of China. We were successful, hut
immediately after the admission of the Peoples' Republic into the
United Nations, the di'alogue ceased.
But it has again been resumed. I think it is not
unfair to say that even some time before the US took an initiative,
we were taking one because it was our view that the PRO should
be brought into the international world that it should be able
to talk at the United Nations, to make its views known, and to
permit others to make their views known to China as well. ./ 2 
IThere
have been other developments, of course, but
I won't go into them to any great extent, oth -1; X-than to mention the
potentials of hostility between China and the6 USSR and America's
relations with Japan and the changing context in which these relations
are taking place. And also the visit soon to take place by President
Nixon to the Soviet Union, which we hope can lead to a greater detente,
disturbed a little, I must confess, by the events in North Vietnam
and South Vietnam over the last few weeks.
Now when I refer to the superpowers, I want you to
know that I refer to the United States and the USSR. These are superpowers
in strength of resources both -military and civil. W] hat I want
to point out to you is what the superpowers are doing, and consequently,
the way in which we must look at our problems. We must understand
what impact their influence can have upon us. Among the smaller
Asian countries and, I believe, in others in the region, including
Australia, tho idea of seeking Asian solutions to Asian problems is
growing. I remember when I went to the Djakarta Conference in
order to see what we could do about peace in Cambodia,' or a guarantee
of peace. That was the first time I heard the Asian peoples
themsel. ves say " Can't we create an Asian identity?-"-Not an identity of
disparate nations or independently pro-nations who weren't strong enough
to look after themselves, but couldn't we in fact create an Asian
identity that in terms of trade and mutual security will be able to
play our part in our constant growth and development, and would be
an impediment to aggressive or subversive action by others?"
But I did refer too, Mr President, to the necessity
or I should have referred to it under the Nixon Doctrine for each
country to be able to do more in the protection of its own interests.
Not that I believe that it means the Unitied States is likely to
leave them alone under all circumstances. But what I am sure about
i4 this. The more you do for yourselves within your own capacity,
the greater will be the desire and the wish of the United States to
make a contribution to the defence and to the freedom of those
countries as part and parcel of the defence and freedo-m of the free
world. But I want to emphasise that no country can go it alone
under all circumstances and conditions, and simultaneously make a
contribution to the peace and prosperity in this part of the world
in which we live. I emphasise, too, that this is not a wealthy part of the
world, leaving Japan and ouselves out of it. There are many parts
where for humanitarian reasons we all have to help, particularly,
Bangladesh. We've all got to try and make a contribution to see
that these people are able to have the good things of life in the
same way that our own people can enjoy them today.
So I want to turn to this question of co-operatn
co-oceration in order to cultivate a stable climate for neace and
development. This is what we are trying to do in the Asian context. ./ 3 
3
What we want is a climate to which the United States
will continue to make a-contribution. We want this trend to
continue this trend of co-operation not only with us, but with
Sall people, of all free people, particularly in the Asian theatre.
I can assure--you,.. as. the Head of Government, that we will do all
in our power, to be able to make our contribution in whatever way
we can. These are the reasons why Australia has welcomed the
development of ASEAN, and is taking an active part in such regional
organisations as SEATO, ASPAC, ECAFE and the Asian Development
Bank. This is the reason why we have established the Five Power
Defence arrangements with Malaysia, Singapore, New Zealand and the
United Kingdom. I can assure you that those arrangements are welcomed
by the Malaysians and the Singaporeans, no matter what you mght have
heard from other sources. I add that the Prime Minister of
Malaysia, Tun Razak, does not regard these arrangements as
incompatible with the ASEAN objective of regional neutralisation.
It is for this reason, too, that we have a programme
of defence co-operation with Indonesia. Recently we had President
Soeharto down here, and I think we realised more emphatically than
we've ever realied before how much they wanted to co-operate, and
how much we think it desirable that we should co-operate with them.
Recently we have been able to aoprove the gift of
a fairly large number of Sabre aircraft to Indonesia and of help
in the construction of the airfield at Iswahjudi, so that they will
have aircraft that will be able to make a contribution to their
deterrent effect in the Asian region.
I also want to mention that for the last five years,
our programme of what is called Government aid, but frankly
which I should call your aid because you make the contribution in
terms of financial assistance and taxation. We are third in the
world as a giver of Government or national aid to the developing
countries, and a large part of this aid does go to Indonesia.
Government aid is the financial and material assistance
we give expressed as a percentage of our gross national production.
You will be glad to know that we are pretty high up in world
affairs with the amount we give something like 1 per cent
of cur gross national production. That is the goal that is set by
international organisations when they ask other countries to be
of assistance. Now it is sometimes said and I've said this before,
particularly at the National Press Club in Washington, that we are
a satellite of the United States and that this might affect our
standing in Asia. I want to assure you this is nonsense. We are
free and independent and, I believe respected throughout the world,
not only for our growing maturity and independence of thought and
action, but because they know we are reliable friends. / 4 
-4
During my recent visit to the tUnjted States, I
said more than once that Australia is a-!_ artrfer with the United-
States in many areas. In my discussions with the Amxerican leadexs_,_.
they responded warmly to the concept of partnership between our'
two countries. And I think I can emphasise that the ones who
responded most warmly to the concept of partnership were those
members of the Admi'nistration under President Nixon who had an
intimate concern with Australia and wanted to make sure that
relationships between the two countries improved.
As an act of policy judged to be in our national
interest, we have decided
closer relationship between the two countries will be to our
mutual advantage. Now this choice does not foreclose differenqes
of opinion nor does it foreclose different policies on different
issues. It is happily reinforced by a genuine warmth of feeling
and mutual understanding which your Association has done-so much
to achieve. But the point I want toemphasise now is that our
partnership with the United States is based', in the first place,
on a hard-headed assessment of mutual national interest. And I
think you can take it for granted that in international political
affairs, naturally enough each country thinks first and foremost
of its own national interest, and then of the contribution it can
make to the solution of the problems of world affairs.
I have to emphasise to you that when we are looking
at our international relationships, of course, the first consideration
is national interest rather than that of other countries.
our formal pqrtnershi.-finds expression in the ANZUS Treaty. The
assurances which I received from President Nixon in Washington,
spontaneol4sly received, have been reinforced by what he said in
his recent state of the world address.
We in Australia, I can assure you, welcome this
confirmation. And we also regard ANZUS as central to our
Asian policies. It is a defence treaty, and something morq.
It must not be turned into a solely social welfare concept as some
of our opponents are trying to turn it.
It is the framework for a wide-ranging system of
co-operatin covering all fields of international relations. ' The
emphasis on self-reliance has long been basic to our foreign defence
policy, and I believe that it antedated the Nixon Doctrine.
I say this only because I want to emphasise the
independent kind of action we take and the way in which I think
the new Department of Foreign Affairs is constantly alert to the
need for new initiatives whenever we feel that it will be in our
own national interest. But what thi * s elf-relance is, is one within the
framework of our alliance with the United States. Inevitably,
and this ought to be stressed, we have followed parallel policies
to those of the United States in a number of what I shall call
ASEAN initiatives. We have done so when we have thought it would
be in Australia's best interests that we have those mutually
accomdating policies.
May I take one exam Pie, and that is our negotiations 
with China, which is now after years in the wilderpness a member of
the United Nations.' Iannounced that-Auatralia-was seeking--t6-...
normalise relations with the People's Republic of China shortly
after I became the Prime Minister..
I well remember that paper, prepared as it was by
the Department of Foreign Affairs and myself, because I think it
did start a new epoch for Australia, and drew attention in the
most forceful way to the changes that were occurring in the Pacific.
And I want to emphasise that it was taken at a fairly early date so
far as the Western countries are concerned. It is the nature of
things that a superpower, such as the United States, would have much
more scope for a dialogue and for a wider range of issues with
another great power, than one of the medium-sized countries like
ourselves, because it is not so exposed to a demand for making
important concessions on major issues.
Now Australia is, understandably, in a different
position to the United States. As I said following the Nixon
" isit, I hope that all nations would be treated alike by China. That
hope has not so far been realised. But we hope it will come. Now
I can assure you that the dialogue which did temporarily end
immediatel) after China entered the-United Nationg has now been
reopened, and I believe, is proceeding on a sensible and, I believe,
reasonable course. Now, Mr President, we have parallel policies on
many issues with America, so, too, do our policies diverge in other
areas. Let me give you an example from the past. During the
confrontagion in Indonesia a few years' ago, Australia maintained
its relations and contacts with that country. And we did so betause
we believed that if we weathered the storm, a firm foundation would
be prepored for better relations in the future with Indonesia.
And our wish and our intentions have-come true.
This policy has paid handsome dividends, and is
underlined by the recent visit of the President that I referred to
a few moments ago. Again, but not so Much on exactly the same scale,
but again during the recent crisis on the Indian sub-continent, our
policy again tempcrarily diverged from that of the United States.
Although we were, and remain, anxious to maintain
our friendly relations with Pakistan, we took the view that peace
and stability in the region were likely to be best served by our
immediate recognition of Bangladesh. So Australia did take the
initiative, not only in the Asian theatre, but in the United States
and amongst the continental countries in order to see if like-ipinded
countries could join, and join as quickly as they could in recognition
and in giving assistance to that country.
The fact therefore is this. I hope those two points
that I have mentioned make it clear that our policies are Australian,
and I believe recognised as such and respected as such in Asia.
Much as our opponents contest this view, our alliance
with the United States is understood and accepted in Asia azd in
many cases it enhances our standing and importance in the region.
So we do get the indirect benefit of the very friendly and worthwhile
relationships which we have with our great neighbour over to the East.
But of course we can't affQrd to let this be taken
for granted. We must continue to develop a distinctively Austra'lian
role in the Asian region. And we are. moving in the right direction
in demonstrating that we are helpful and we are cp-operative with
them. / 6 
I have spoken alroady of the hopeful signs of great
power accommodation, of growing confidence and co-operation within
the region itself. There remain problems in the region which
are cause for concern. I mention again the position in South
Vietnam. The invasion by the North in blatant defiance of the
Geneva Agreements is causing the South Vietnamese Government its
greatest test. This, I emphasise, is aggression, naked and.
unashamed, and is being increasingly accepted as such by most
people even those in the Western world who a few months ago were
critics. Now it's still too early to speak with confidenqe about
the outcome. But what we can say, and what we can emphasise, is
that because the Americans and their Allies, including Australia,
have done so much fighting and training and rehabilitating in the
South, the South Vietnamese Army and the South Vietnamese people
are now better trained, better armed and able to take this onslaught
in a way they would not have been capable of taking three or four
years ago. I can assure you, too, that it is giving a good
account of itself.
I do ask you all to note that the offensive now is almost
wholly by the North Vietnamese. The Communists have not launched
this offensive as ' they did at the time of the ' Pet offensive in
the mistaken belief that there would be a spontaneous uprising of
sympathisers throughout South Vietnam. The war in Indochina is
likely to remain with us for some time to come. We want to negotiate
a settlement. And we will continue to seek a peaceful one, but
the inflexibility of the Communists is against an early settlement
and we can see no prospect at the moment however much we and
America and our friends will try in the intervening period to get
one. In the meantime, the Oc~ ernment will continue to assist
the South Vietnamese in other~ ways, even though our troops are home
now. In particular, in economic development and other aid, we
will continue to play our part.
Now there are, of course, other areas of concern for
us in Asia, including the great humaitarizn tasks and development
problems facing the peopl. e of th( region.
This is the situation in Asia as we see it today. The. Ai
picture is a hopeful one. It is also a dynamic one. Recent Changd liv,
have bQen staggering compared with centuries and centuries of little
change. Change is everywhere and everything is changing. we must,
in Australia, be alive to these changes, flexible in our approach,
and we must be willing to take the initiative in meeting the
demands of this new situation, whether it might be in terms of
defence and security, whether it is in terms of aid or personal
visits, whether it is in terms of friendship and co-operation.
In each and every one of these areas, we and the United States must,
and I am sure will, be prepared to play our part.
The free world does hold many initiatives. Australia's
policies in Asia, based on our alliance with the United States,
are, I believe, one of the keys to a stable and prosperous future
for the world in which we have to live. 



AWA
PRIME MINISTER
MAfCQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST 4
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP. 19 APRIL 1972
D E FE NCE
I want to speak to you now about the defence and
security of Australia. Most of you know that not so many years ago we
relied for our defence on the might of the armed forces of Britain
and America. World War Two and other events, such as the large-scale
British withdrawal East of Suez, and a changed American approach to
its role as world policeman, have changed all that.
There has been another significant change. For
literally hundreds of years the Asian nations remnained unchanged and
unchangeable. In contrast, dramatic changes are now occurring in
Asia. China is becoming a world power. Make no mistake
about that. And there can be no doubt that, as part of her tpolicies,
she is continually promoting insurgency in other countries. For
example, in Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia. These are all close to
US. Even in these conditions, some people argue that we
should not spend so much money on defence because, they say, there
isn't much chance of a direct attack on Australia now.
My answer is that any person who is prepared to take a
risk with the defence of this country is acting in a way that is
completely intColerable. The unexpected can happen, and we have to
prepare for it. In defence you cannot preroare overnight. You cannot
rely on a crash programme. Highly-trained troops with good equipment
are essential. Let mc give you a couple of illustrations of how
quickly conditions can change.
You will remember confrontation between Indonesia and
Malaysia and the possibility that this could spill over into Papua
and New Guinea even closer to us than Indoncsia. You will remember
Communist-inspired insurgency in the North of Malaysia and in Thailand.
You will remember the recent border conflicts between India and Pakistan
and between China and India. And now we have the most serious
invasion of all the blatant and unprovoked attack by the North
Vietnamese against the South Vietnamese. 
-2-
We know,. too, of the growing presence of the-Russians
in the Indian Ocean,. and the-assistance'Russia has given to the North_
Vietnamese. We in the Government are not prepared to expose our
own country to similar unexpected attacks. Consequently we must
prepare to meet threats expected or unexpected as they emerge. And
we must be prepared to help our neighbours to the North who are a
shield against attack. There is a further point to be empDhasised. No country
can in all circumstances go it alone. No country can successfully
retreat into isolation. So we have the additional responsibility of
maintaining our treaties and our alliances.
of these the most imp-ortant is with the United States
under the ANZUS Treaty. This Treaty is crucia~ l to our long-term
defence planning because it could be our most important guarantee
in the most critical circumstances. Only a fool or a traitor would
want to throw it away.
It is true that in our defence preparations we must
increasingly strive for self-reliance and self-sufficiency. But we
have to be realists in a world in which no nation c-an stand alone.
The two, that is, our treaties and maximum self-reliance are linked
together. They go together.
Let us go back to ANZUS. Remember it is basically a
military treaty. It would be deadly dangerous to try and turn it into
a human rights declaration, as some people want to do.
ANZUS is also a two-way traffic. We can't expect
everything and give nothing. We must command respect for our own efforts
and willingness to help our friends. That is why we have agreed to have
defence installations at the North-W~ est Cape, at Pine Gap and at Woomera.
I assure you there is nothing sinister or "-nderhand about them. They
are part of our defence -partnership with America. And we are not doing
anything that would make Australia a target in another nation's cause.
We are thinking of our own security and our co-operation with the
United States in mutual defence.
Fina-lly, let me sr~ cak about National Service. This is
the only way at present to keep the Army up to the minimum strength
required to meet our defence needs. So thlis is the question we have
to ask. Whose judgment would you trust : I!--Out the size of our armed
forces? Our military advisers or those who are pledged to abolish
National Service in a bid for political popularity?
To abolish National Service now would upset the w-hole
balance of our forces and would reduce the nation's military strength
to a dangerous degree. We will have none of this.
We, in the Governm~ ent, are realist and national. We
are not adventurers. We have a duty to you and to our allies. So
defence must always be the primary concern of all loyal Australians.
And we in the Government are determined to keen it
that way. 



TWENTY-FOURTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE STATE OF ISRAEL MEETING
Melbourne 23 April 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William McMahon, M. P^
Mr President, Members of the Executivu of the Zionist Federation
of Australia and New Zealind, and all of you who have come to
commemorate the Twenty-fourth Anniversoryof the Proclamation of
the Independent State of Israel:
I am honoured to be your guest today. Some ? eople will say I
came here tonight to demonstrate clearly that there was no hint of
bigotry or discrimination associatea with me. There is a simple
answer. It is true and correct.
Australian Jewry has always treasured the absence of discrimination
and anti-semitism, and the traditions of freedom and democracy
in Australia. I have always treasured those principles and I always
will treasure them. I am here this evening to renew that commitment
on my own behalf, on behalf of our Government, on behalf of the
National Government and, I am absolutely certain, on behalf of the
great majority of all Australians.
All the world knows the story of the miracle of modern Israel.
Israel is a haven for the oppressed and unfortunate. It is th2
chanpion of Jewish rights and of the right of survival, wherever they
are threatened. And it preserves the historical identity of the
Jewish people, through its culivation of treir spiritual and cultural
heritage. So this is a proper occasion to remind ourselves of the
prophetic visions of justice and peace upon which the State of Israel
is founded, and by which it is guided. The story of Israel is unique
in our generation, which has seen the emergence of so many new nation
states. There is noather exayole of a people who, having lost their
independence and become widely dispersed in foreign lands, have been
able, twenty centuries later, to come together to form a nation state.
It is living testimony of faith, vitality, and determination. It is
a reminder that forbearance, courage, resolution and industry can
prevail during the darkest night. There is no bravernor prouder story
than the record of Jewish history. It is a story of sadness and of
unbelievable triumph. It is a story which is still unfolding in
Israel where a strong and independent modern state has been built by
Jews in the land of their fathers. ./ 2 
S2. Through sheer hard work and the clever application of scientific'
knowledge, an arid and exhausted land has been restored and made
productive... this was eloquently and felicitously expressed with
masterful understatement by Winston Churchill in Jerusalem more than
fifty years ago in speaking of the beginnings of the new Israel:
" It is making two blades of grass grow where one grew before". This
prophecy has been fulfilled. The grass is green in Israel today.
The desert is blooming.
Australians have not forgotten the evils that shamed humanity
which were revealed following the second world war. They have not
forgotten the victimisation, the persecution the massacres and the
injustices which would have broken and overcome a lesser people. It
is this imperishable spirit and this irresistible urge for freedom
and independence which we salute tonight from one young and free
nation to another. Our two countries have many links which hind
us closely. In two world wars, a warm relationship was built up
between the Jewish population of Palestine and our own fighting
men. This is a relationship forged in war that has continued
undiminished and which.. I know will endure and grow.
Through its active membership of the United Nations Palestine
Commission and the General Assembly, Australia helped the modern
state of Israel to take its place as a nation in 1948. Since then,
we have consistently supported Israel's right to exist, along with
all other states in the Middle East. We have -ackedI srael as a
sovereign independent state with a right to exist within secure and
recognised boundaries free from threats or acts of force. It is
one of the tragedies of our time that the issues which divide Israel
from its Arab neighbours still remain unresolved. The major
influences on events in the Middle East are exercised by countries
other than Australia. But we, in this country, have emphasised
both in the United Nations, and anywhere else where our voice is
heard, that Australia stands ready to support any constructive efforts
designed to further a negotiated settlement. We continue to hope that
good sense and moderation will prevail.
Mr President, it has also been put to me that you support an
immediate start to meaningful dialogue between the Arab States and
Israel. And, further, that such a dialogue should lead to a just
settlement of the Middle East conflict, based firstly on secure and
defendable borders, and on mutual recognition and dignity. It is
said that such a settlement would once and for all remove the dread
of war from the Middle East in the interests of world peace and the
co-operative development of this important region of the world. And
I might add, it would be a settlement of immeasurable benefits to men
and women of all nations in that area.
That is what has been put to me as your position. It is a
position with which I must say I agree add support as a constructive
attitude. Peace in the Middle East is not only in the interests of
those nations who live there. It is in the interests of the world,
and it is in the interests of Australia. I am proud to be Prime
Minister of a country where men accept each other for whlat they are
and where bigotry has no place. / 3 
0 3.
Over many years, this country has been sympathetical-ly
concerned with the plight of Jewisb pooplz in countries where they
have been subject to discriminattion and oppression. For some of
those who haue been aV'le to e; ni'grate, we have gladly provided a
new home. We believe others who wish to emigrate from countries
where they feel unwanted shogid be allowed to do so. And I mention
particularlythe struggle of Soviet Jewry to live in freedom with
thQ right to cherish their culture and tradition, and their struggle
for freedom to return to the land of their forefathers in Israel if
they wish to do so.
Australia has cause to be thankful to its Jewish community
for its significan contribution to our society and national life.
You have added the weight of your faith to the spiritual life of
this nation. You have given much to our own culture. You have
given your skills to businass and commerce. You have given us
notable leaders in war and peace.
I take three names only from our history; names that are
honoured for the diversity of their contributions to our natidial
life. There are, of course, many others. Firstly, the late Sir
Isaac Isaacs, our first Australian-horn Governor-General. He was
a man of the law and of letters and of politics who helped to draft
the Australian Constitution by which we live today; a Chief Justice
of the Commonwealth and before that a Cahinet Minister.
Then there was the late General Sir John Monash, a Jew hy
race and faith, who was one of our greatest Australian~ s. He led us
superbly in war; he was an innovator in peace; he was warrior,
acadamic, administrator and the first president of the Australian
Zionist Federation. And lastly, the late I. H. Boas, son of the first Rabbi for
the Jewish community in South Australia. A scientist who made a
dramatic contribution to Australian industry by pioneering the use
of our native gum tree and the eucalypt, in paper-making. He served
Israel, too, with his special genius. You honour him with the Boas
Institute of Forest Products in Israel. Part of a giant industry
is his monument in Australia today.
These men adorn the Australian story and there are many more
of Jewish faith, living and dead. Their lives are fine examples of
the way in which the Jewish community enriches the quality of
Australian life. We will continue to be enriched if we remain one
peoplc of several faiths certainly but united by a common
purpose and sharing the same dangers and the same opportunities.
And I say to you with all the sincerity of which I am capable: I
will repudiate and reject any hint of anti-semitism as disgraceful
and unworthy of any Australian. I have nothing but comtempt for
any Australian who would stoop to such statements or behaviour.
Mr President, as Israel stands on the threshold of its
year, I am most honoured that you have included me on this
occasion. Together we share in the pride of achievement by Israel.
It is the hope of all of us that a just and lasting peace will be
achieved before we next meet to commemorate this great anniversary. 



PRIME MINISTER
ANZAC OPEN AIR SERVICE
CONCORD, N. S. W. 23 April, 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon, CH, MI. -i
Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen,
O We are here to honor those who died in war and to
commenorate-Anzac Day, one of the notable anniversaries in our
history. Anzac has become a symbol of a nation's valor in war.
It has become a symbol.. of " mateship",-and it has become a symbol of
the bond which unites us with our New Zealand comrades across the
Tasman. All these thoughts are with us today.
Though the forms of observance have changed, the day itselfhas
an-immortal place in the Australian story. It is my hope that
the younger generation, as it grows to manhood, will not forget
what my generation so well remembers. For we remember that it was
on the beaches and hills of Gallipoli that our own created an image
and tradition that is imperishable. They made a name that every
civilian respects. We loathe war: Its brutality, its tragedy and
its waste. But we also cherish our inheritance, freedom and liberty.
Withou. t these freedoms we would not be here in these gardens today.
That is why the originals fought at Gallipoli. That is why
Australia has always been in the-fight for freedom through two
world wars,. in Korea, Malaysia and in Vietnam. We were born free;
not by the accident of history; but by the determined will of the
Australian people and the courage of its fighting forces. You may
say: " That experts tell us that there's no major threat to Australia
in sight in the next few years. " Why then" they ask " Do we
spend so much money on defence, why do we call-up some of our
young men?". " Why are soldiers and sailors and airmen in Malaysia
and Singapore?" The answer is simple; because we must be prepared.
We have to demonstrate to all, that like the Anzacs, we are ready
to stand with them, and if necessary, to fight with them. We have
to remind a would-be aggressor that like the Anzacs we are
ready to fight tooth and nail for freedom and the defence of our
own country: It is better to prevent wars.
The international bully will always think twice if he knows
the other fellow big or small is in fighting trim and packs a
pretty heavy punch. 
There was a phrase used during the first world war. " This is the
war to end all wars". Unhappily, it was not. But out of the
sacrifice of those dreadful years freedom was preserved for decent
people. Freedom was won; it was not guaranteed. It is up to us
and our allies to do all we can now to provide the guarantees.
Freedom was again challenged in the second world war-again the
challenge was beaten. It is being challenged again in South-East
Asia. That battle is still being fought; so the need for a
guarantee remains. That is why we must. be strong. That is why,
we must prepare for war in the years of peace. Never in our history
has an aggressor set foot on Australian-soil. But hostile aircraft
bombed us in the north and we had enemy submarines in Sydney Harbor.
It has been as close as that. Don't let us live in a " fool's
paradise": We must not take risks. We must keep-. faith with the
tradition of Anzac.
I am proud to say that the va st-majority of Australians are
keeping the faith. The young Australians who have served or are
serving under the National Service Scheme are Anzacs through and
through. There are no differences, nor distinction; between . them
and the regular soldier. They have bean decorated in battle in
Vietnam. They have served with courage.
Ladies and Gentlemenon this Anzac Sunday our memories are with those
who died on the land, on the sea, and in the air. We will never
forget them. Our thoughts, too, are for their families. It is
with humility and gratitude that we honor the Anzac today and we
pledge ourselves that so far as it is within our mortal power
to carry on in their tradition. " What they have left to us would
enrich the proudest nation on earth." I thank you. 



4. 0 PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP. 26 APRIL 1972
INDUSTRIAL LAWLESSNESS
This evening I want to talk to you . about industrial lawlessness
and stikes. Before I do-this I want to sketch in the background against which
the problem has to be considered. I assure you that our economy i-s
basically sound and that no other country has prospects quite as good.
For over twenty years our production and living standards have grown.
And today is only the. foundation of what we can do in the next twenrty
years. Let me return to the problem of industrial unrest and lawlessness
and its cost to the community in lost production and the uncertainties
it creates. I will also explain what my Government is doing about it.
For m-st of those twenty years Australia has had relative industrial
peace. The significant exception to this rule has been the last three
years. Until then, the conciliation and arbitration system worked well,
and it brought a wide range of benefits to wage and salary earners,
particularly those less able to look after themselves. But in the last
O tahrrbeiet rayetairosn hiansd usbtereina lw eapkeeanceed . h as Itbse eenf vfieoctliavtee d suanrdv ivtahle wihs olteh rseyastteenme d. o. f
During 1971 the number of working days lost in strikes. increased
by 28% compared with 1970. In money terms, the loss -of wages last
year was $ 45 million. Excessive wage increases and industrial trouble
undoubtedly push up prices and are the root cause of inflation. Theserising
prices affect everyone. They seriously worry you. This worry
is understandable because most people naturally expect continual
improvement in their standard of living. But they will not get it
through the destruction of the arbitration system or the failure of
some big unions to accept awards. This new industrial lawlessness
S coincidedvith the capture of the A. C. T. U. by a leftist coalition. As
Ssoon as they-secured the election. of Mr Hawke, the principles of
industrial unionism followed by Mr Albert Monk-were undermined. In
its-_ pJLace. we see more -political strikes and an attack on the
. disciplinary provisions of the Arbitration Act. / 2 
2.
At the same time there are moves towards collective bargaining
and more power to the big radical unions. No-one has yet invented
an effective means of enforcing collective bargaining. Overseas, it
has produced big and prolonged strikes. But let me explain what we
are doing to help solvo these problems. Some months ago my Government
ordared a thoroughgoing review of the arbitration system. We recognised
the need to modernise and strengthen a system which has served this
country so well for so long. We do not deny the right to strike.
We do think that under our arbitration system there should be very
few occasions when a strike can be justified. When disputes are
legitimately settled by arbitration, the award must be obeyed.
Discipline is essential to an effective arbitration system.
That is why we will strengthen the disciplinary powers of the
Arbitration Commission in the new legislation we introduced in the
Parliament only this afternoon. That is why we will have secret
S ballots. We have already strengthened the power of arbitrators in
Wthe Public Service.
You will remember the problems we had with postal workers and
their failure to satisfactorily maintain telephone services over
S the Christmas/ New Year period. Initially the union involved refused
Sto take its claim to arbitration and took Dart in a course of action
which disrupted telephonc services to an intolerable extent. So we
introduced a hill to give the Public Service arb trator power to
introduce into awards the principle cf " no work no pay". Until then
we had no real power to ensure that Governnent employees satisfactorily
carried out their jobs of providing you with services. We now
have the power and can use it.
To sum up. We reject industrial violence. We reject political
unionism. We stand for conciliation and arbitration as the foundation
of sound industrial relations. That's why we want conciliation and
arbitration to be successful. That's why we have acted. That's why
we have taken the major decisions I've mentioned; decisions made to
ensure that you are provided with the services you need and richly
deserve. 



PRIME MINISTER
OFFICIAL OPENING OF " CONSTRUCTION HOUSE
CANBERRA 27 APRIL 1971
Speech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William M~ c~ ahon, C. H. g, M. P.
I would also like to thank Mr. W-illiams and Mr. Box on your
behalf, and on behalf of my wife and myself as well, for inviting
us today. It i-s most appropriate that the building and construction
industry should decide to build this magnificent national head.-'
quarters building in Canberra. it's hard to imagine a more apt way
for the industry to display its presence in the national capital.
Thi~ s city which is as much a tribute to the construction industry
as'-' it is * oour own planners, architects and engineers. There are
three industry organisation partners here in Construction House.
Firstly, the Master Builders' Federation of Australia which is well
known and respected in Canberra. It has been submitting the views of
the industry to the Federal Government on a wide number of matters
of industry concern for a long time. And last year, my Government
was pleased to co-operate with your industry in sending an official
sur-vey mission to South East Asia to help Australian contractors try
to win competitive contracts in that developing region.
During the last three or four years, Australian consultatts
have been successful throughout the South East Asian region. It
would be natural for Australian building and construction companies
to be looking for a similar trend in the export of their skills.
This region is virtually on Australia's doorstep, and it is one
where Australian building could make an important contribution in
applying the world standard of competence it has reached.
I will be visiting Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore myself
soon, and my Government attaches very great importance to our
relations with these close neighbours to our north whether in
defence, in aid and development programmes in cultural relations,
or in the growth of trade. We would like nothing better than to see
private enterprise doing more in backing up and developing the
Government's efforts to strengthen our ties with these nations. ./ 2 
The Australian Institute of Building is a newcomer to
Canberra. But its vital role in establishing and maintaining
standards is wcll known in the building industry. The third
member of the triumvirate occupy" ing this buTIlding, the Master
Builders' Association of the A. C. T. deals with the day-to-day
industry problems in Australia's fastest growing city. And it
does that well, as the evidence of our eyes shows.
In a short ten years, building in Australia has grown from
a modest to a very large industry. It is now an industry which
helps significantly in setting this nation's growth pattern. And
much of the credit for Australia's development in the past twenty
years must go to it. its influence in Australia's growth,
development and standard of living are, of course, visible everywhere.
Let me elaborate Investment in physical capita. is one
of the mainsprings of economic progress: It has nlhyed a key role
in Australia's strong rate of economic and population growth.
The building and construction industry is responsible for
something over half of total fixed investment and about 14 per cent
of gross national expenditure in Australia: But its importance
does not end there. Through its demands for materials the industry
affects output and investment throughout many sect6rs of manufacturing
industry. It is also a very large employer of 430,000 people,
or 9 per cent of the national workforce, according to the last
census. But if you take account of related industries, building
and construction could be said to be responsible for employing
about 15 per cent of the workfcrce; you hIave rapid growth as well.
In those ten years, total spending on building and
construction has gone up by about 140 per cent. That compares with
an increase of 12o% in gross national spending generally, because
your industry is such a mass user of scarce resources, j. t has an.
important responsibility to make a maximum contribution to growth
by making the best and most efficient possible use of those
resources thus both your industry and our own economic-policymakers
have a strong interest in the soundly-based growth of
building and construction activity.
Continuity in building and construction operation raises
productivity, encourages technological innovation and facilitates
longer-term planning. Stability in your industry makes it easier
for us to maintain stable growth and full employment in the
economy as a whole. That's why we are very pleased to see the
development of, and increasing professionalism in organisations
1like the Master Builders' Federation.
The Federation and its affiliated bodies have also found
themselves increasingly involved in industrial relations, and
Master Builders' Associations have recently featured prominently
in major industrial disputes in the industry. I can recall some
recent disputes in New South Wales which have proved very costly
both to employers and individual employees# One particular
building union resorted to the use of physical violence and
caused damage to property in pursuing its demands. ./ 3 
But I am confident that under the guidance and co-ordination
of your Federal organisation now established in Canberra, industrial
relations in the building industry will bring increased employeremployee
harmony. I would not want to leave such a distinguished
audience as you are without some comments on how we in the Federal
Government see our role in relation to your industry, ? articularly
in relation to housing.
It has become almost a cliche of the political scene that in
Australia we enjoy the highest level of home ownership in the world
and one of the highest rates of housing construction. Put no matter
how well accepted and commonplace those statements may seem to some
observers, they show a solid record of achievement against which
current problems and criticism must beweighed. TVere will always be
problems to be overcome. But we are not resting on our record in
this vital area of housing which is so closely identified with the
everyday life and aspirations of Australians. On the contrary,
we are carrying on and improving the record of successive Liberal/
Country Party Governments, in the increasing involvement of the
Commonwealth in housing.
Housing is one of the few portfolios that I have not held
during my minlsterial career and that's mainly because it was
established in comparatively recent years. I seem to have had my
chance in just about all the others. The total is thirteen portfolios,
they tell me. Our position as a Government with respect to
housinq is that we believe every Australian family should be well
houseWdA nd housed in a fashion of its own choice. We recognise
that Government assistance is necessary to achieve this aim. But
we believe such assistance should be implemented in a co-operative
rather than in a domineering and bureaucratic way.
We take the approach that we can co-operative successfully
with private enterprise, and this new building and this national
caDital are testimony to the success of that approach. We also
believe we should co-operate with the state Governments in helping
them to fulfill the housing needs of the reople as speedily as
practicable. More recently, we have taken a number of decisions in the
housing area. For example, last December we made new arrangements
for Commonwealth financial assistance to the states for housing.
As a direct result ther ' havo been substantial reductions in the
interest rates charged by all state authorities. They represent
the greatest reduction in hcusing interest rates in a quarter of
a century. The interest charged on dwellings sold by the state
housing authorities and financed by co-oerative societies have
been reduced substantially, and the benefits of these reductions are
being passcd on to home buyers. We have also relieved the States of
the need to provide housing for members of the armed forces. This
has released additional funds for civilian and welfare housing.
We are also paying the States $ 1.25 million a year for the
next five years towards rental reductions for the really needy. 
Since the last Budget, the maximum advance under the war
service homes scheme has becn increased by $ 1000, and interest
charged by our housing loans insurance corporation has been reduced.
At the Premiers' Conference in February, we provided additional funds
for state works, and a number of states have stimulated their home
building programmes as a result.
These are all decisions taken to assist housing, but another
problem the industry faces is the rising costs of land. This
problem can only be solved by co-operation b tween all levels of
Government and private enterprise.
As for the future. You can be. . assured that we will.. continue
to improve and undate Government asistance in the housing area, as
we have dcne in the past: We are proud cf our record. But we
acknowledge that there are still many policy aspects of housing
which we should be looking at. Having said that I want to thank
you again for inviting us here today, and I have much pleasure in
declaring construction house officially 6pen. 



E M B A RGO NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 9.00 PM on 1 MAY 1972
PRIME MIN.
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
BENDIGO, VIC. M AY 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William IcMahon, C'E, PiP
Mr Mayor and Mrs Elliott, Ladies and Gentlemen
I am delighted to be back in Dendigo for one
vitally important reason. I am here to help and to make absolutely
certain that John Bourchier will take his place as the next Member
for Bendigo in the National Parliament.
I share your enthusiasm Fand confidence that
when the numbers go up he is going to be sitting in Canberra with
me on the Government benches. You can count on that.
To achieve this, we are going to need your help;
we are going to need your energies; we are going to need your
donations. But most of all, we are going to need what I call the
influence of key Liberals in this community and in every electorate
throughout this nation those men and women in every community,
large or small, whose opinions are worth having, and whose judgments
are respected and sought by others.
They are people like you. People who understand
the fundamental qualities of the Australian way of life. They
understand, just as we in the Parliamentary Liberal Party understand,
that today we are at a crossroads of our national life.
For many years, the Liberal and Country Party
coalition has governed this country steadily and effectively. It
has served the people well. Today there are elements in our
community who want not just change, not just an alternative, but a
complete upheaval of our whole pattern of living.
Until recently, it looked as thotghthis viewpoint
may have been gaining unthinking adherents. But now there are signs
that these elements are beginning to take a harder look at the changes
that might confront them under the regime of the Labor Party. / 2 
2
There are signs that many Australians are gdng
to think much more carefully before they throw away a whole and
wholesome way of life and before they vote to downgrade individual
freedom, and replace the rewards of individual initiative with a
stereotyped society. It is up to us as Liberals to get out into the
community in the coming months and make our opinions. felt. We have
had the support of the majority in. this State for many years. The
basic reasons for that.. support are simple and clear.
There was the appeal of our own policies and
people in creating the climate for the unprecedented growth and
development of this nation, and there-was the disunity-of the Labor
Party, especially in Victoria.
Mr Chairman, we all know that very little has
changed. There-are plenty of brave words and idle visions put before
you but-nothing has come of them. Remember the great reforms
that were going to take place in the Victorian Labor Party. All
Australians now know what a sham they were. That was shown the other
day in the cynical and coldblooded support of the North Vietnamese
invasion. Need I say more? In Victoria, our opponents condemn
themselves. I think it is also appropriate, here in Bendigo,
to say something about our educatbn policy and achievements. In that
context, I question the attitude of the Victorian Labor Party to
education policy an attitude that was exoressed so stridently in
recent weeks by the Labor Member for Bendigo. That is, until the
Leader of the Opposition had a talk to him. This was an episode
which I believe could justifiably be called a story of pride and
prejudice. We inthe Government are proud of the record of
the Commonwealth in education over the last ten years. Particularly,
we are proud of our unsha'eable commitment to freedom of choice, of
schools for individuals and groups within the community. I will
give you an outline of what we have done in education, and of our
guidelines for the future, in a moment. But before that, I want to
turn to the other side of the story.....
I am not sure whether or not the Member for
Bendigo regards himself as the Oppositbn's spokesman on education
matters. They have three or four people who seem to claim the
title. But at any rate, the Member for Bendigo is the one who
goes along with the Victorian Labor Party in its opposition to the
principle of aid to independent schools. This was shown by his
recent most intemperate and prejudiced statemeatson the subject of
aid to independent schools and the Governments actions in accordance
with that policy. I will give you a sample to indicate the feeling
of the honourable member on the subject. These are quotations
from his newspaper interviews: / 3 
3
He says the Government has " become crazed with
the madness of a mindless State aid system." That we were
" Drunk with the mania of State aid", and that a grant we made to a
school in Canberra was, and I quote " The last word in the insanity
of Liberal State aid". Here ends the quote.
I think people can be left to mrke their own
judgments about anyone who makes such absurd exaggerations as a
substitute for genuine political debate. Australians in general
and Victorians in particular have never had much time for extremism
and bigotry, the more particularly in this time on questions of
education policy. That has been shown by the results of elections
here for many years. These recent events give me confidence
that Victorians will continue to reject unrepresentative and
extreme views as well as the men who enunciate them.
But before I leave the honourable member
for Bendigo to his melancholy future, I want to complete the story
of his assault on the policy of Commonwealth aid to independent
schools as it operates in Canberra.
My own Minister for Education, Malcolm Fraser,
gave a very good answer in Parliament to his extreme allegations.
A few days later, a leading churchman described the honourable
member's approach as misleading and distasteful. He wanted to
know whether the Leader of he Opposition agreed with those statements.
We have not heard a peep out of the Labor Party since.
The honourable member did, of course, receive
a severe caucus rebuke from a very senior Labor man and is also
reputed to have been carpeted by his leader. In public, the
question has been hushed up.
I invite you to contrast that sorry story with
the record of Commonwealth involvement in education, which I
believe we can justifiably point to with pride. Later this week,
' e will be releasing a booklet which sets out with great clarity
the objectives of the Liberal Party's education policy and the
record of the Government's achievements. I recommend it to you
strongly. It will set straight these recent attempts to mislead
the public about what the Commonwealth is doing in education.
There is one central fact that is very hard for
anyone to ignore. It is this. The Liberal Country Party Government
was the first and only Federal Covernment to act on aid to
independent schools and to give extensive direct Commonwealth
assistance to all schools. We began with a policy of aid to independent
schools in the Australian Capital Territory many years ago.
Successive Liberal and Country Party Governments have carried on
and expanded the Commonwealth's involvement. We are the only
major political Party that has wholeheartedly accepted the challenge
of the plural society to help educate children outside the State
system. At the same time, it is grossly wrong to imply
that we do not have a significant and great concern for Government
schools. This is shown by the fact that our opponents have very
little on which to hang an education campaign. 
4
Of all the capital assistance going directly
to schools from the Commonwealth, 83.5 per cent goes to the
State schools which educate 78 per cent of the schoolchildren. On
that basis, our support is weighted in favour of the Government
schools. Our teacher training assistance is helping to
produce new teachers at a much faster rate than the growth of new
enrolments. In the past ten years, the Commonwealth's direct
spending on education has gone up more than six times, from
million to $ 357 million. Equally indicative of our growing interest are
the increasing numbers of new areas of education support which we
have moved into. I mention, particularly, programmes which are
helping migrant children with language problems. And the aboriginal
study grants schemes which are training some thousands of aborigines.
Then, of course, there have been our science facilities and our
libraries programmes. In providing this support, we do not arbitrarily
decide that one school shall receive some assistance and another
shall not. We have publicly stated the standards which are to
apply. And as we havc said, many many times, if a school exceeds
these standards, it will not get a cent out of the Commonwealth.
But we do not make these decisions ourselves.
In the case of independent schools, we have Advisory Committees
from outside the Government. And in the case of Government schools,
the States themselves decide their own priorities. So they should.
That is the system we operate for capital grants.
It is lump sums for the establishment of new facilities. In the
case of our help with day to day running costs, we apply a policy
of across-the-board payments without any means test. And this
is where we find the fundamental and vital difference between Labor
and Liberal policies. They want the power to say which school shall
grow and which shall wither, whether it be a Government or a non-
Government school. This is the essence of Labor's Schools
Commission Plan. They want the power to reach into any one or all
of Australia's 10,000 schools and determine each school' policies
by giving or withholding finance. They even want the power to act
from Canberra in the movement of teachers from one school to another.
Turn now to our own policies. From the
beginning of 1970, we provided per capita grants to independent
schools at the rate of $ 35 per primary pupil and $ 50 per secondary
pupil. If we had not done this, significant numbers of independent
schools would have closed down. And the State system would have
been compelled to take over the extra burdens.
From the beginning of this year, we increased
these grants to $ 50 per primary pupil and $ 58 per secondary pupil.
But the Labor Party moved a motion in the Senate which, if
successful, would have stopped those increases. 
5
It was a clear indication how some substantial
elements of the Labor Party interpret their policy. It is a policy
which is supported by the Member for Bendigo, by the Victorian
Labor Party, and by very significant sections of the Labor Party in
Canberra. It is a oolicy which will deny diversity and end experimentation.
It will inevitably lead to a centralised monolithic system of
enforced uniformity and conformity.
We repudiate it utterly. Labor's policies, based
on the South Australian model, would put a penalty on dedicated
parents. The harder they work for their child's school, the less
money that school will get from a Labor Government. They would
have a means test on education, but no means test on pensions.
This is comnletelY unacceptable. We will provide
the maximum Commonwealth support for both Government and non-Government
schools with the minimum of Comm-onwealth control.
Parents wh(-send their children tc non-Government
schools are saving the taxpayer hundreds of millions of dollars.
At the same time, they are exercising their right to freedom of choice
to which we as Liberals are dedicated.
We will fight to maintain that freedom of choice. 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASELWORE 5.30 PM ( EST)
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME M" INISTE R, THE RT. HON.
WILLIAM McMAHON, CH, MP' 3 MAY 1972
E D U C A T I 0 N
Most of you will agree that our greatest resources
as a nation are the talents and abilities of our young people.
It is therefore absolutely vital to our future as a nation that
education should have a high priority among our national goals.
Education has this high Priority in the policy
thinking of Liberal-Country Party Governments. That's why we
have seen a rapidly-growing Commonwealth involvement in many
areas of education. Our help to the States and thie non-Go. vernment school
system at an accelerating rate are quite specific.
Firstly, there is the need to increase the availability,
or quantity of education as the population grows, and to meet the
aspirations of children who wish to stay at school longer or to go
on to higher education. Secondly, we aim to improve the quality of
education. To achieve these two overriding objectives, we are
committed, firstly, and very importantly, to our very strong
belief, that people have a right to freedom of choice of schools
for individuals or groups within our community. We also want to
reduce inequalities of opportunity in education and we want to
instill in all families a wish to encourage their children to make
the most of their personal potential.. They are our major
objectives. Our methods, too, are simply stated. We want to work
in co-operation with State Governments and independent school
authorities. We want to encourage much greater local intrest in
the day-to-day running of schools. Above all, we want to avoid
centralised monolithic control and enforced uniformity and
conf ormrity. In a nutshell: The Liberal Party approach is aimed at
releasing energies, removing obstacles and encouraging innovation. / 2 
-2
Now you are entitled to ask: What have we done to
achieve this? Let us take the ten years up to 1971 as an example,
although we were already giving substantial help in educat ion before
then, with universities and scholarships. one significant move by
the Commonwealth was on aid to independent schools.
This policy began in a limited way in Canberra many years
ago, but the Liberal-Country Party coalitiomwas-tVe f irst Federal
Government to act nationally on aid to independent schools, as part
of programmes of direct Commonwealth assistance to all schools.
We were the only major party to wholeheartedly accept the
challenge of the plural society to help educate children outside
the State system. But it would be grossly wrong to take this to mean that
we do not have a significant and great concern for Government schools.
The figures for direct Commonwealth assistance to state schools
show that our support is weighted in favour of Government schools
on that basis. Teacher training assistance is helping produce new
teachers faster than new pupils. Average class sizes are coming
down. In 1961, only 28 per cent of the 15 to 18-year-olds stayed
at school. Last year, it was 42 per cent.
We are moving into new areas of education support by
helping migrant children to overcome the language barrier, and by
special grants we are deliberately discriminating in favour of
aboriginal students.
There were over 600,000 more children in Australian
schools last year than in 1961, many of them in the higher secondary
classes where costs are greatest.
Through our expanding general revenue grants to the
States, it can be shown that the Commonwealth provides more than
half of the total recurrent spending by Governments on education in
Australia.. Since 1961, direct Commonwealth spending on education
has gone up more than six times, and spending on universities has
almost tripled. In the last Budget, the increase for education was
14 per cent. In December, we deciced on a further $ 20 million
grant to the States. This was the first time that Federal grants
have been made specifically for primary and secondary school
classroom construction. Sorte of that money is already being spent to replace
and remodel old and outmoded schools in the cities.
From the beginning of this year, we also substantially
increased the grants to independent schools which we began in 1970.
o / 3 
3
You can see our record is a-good one.; And you can
count on us to improve-on it inr-the future.
We aim to provide the maximum Commonwealth support
to both Government and non-Government schools with the minimumof
centralised controls.
We do not want another bureaucratic apparatus in
Canberra with the power to reach down into schools across the
nation and dictate which shall grow and which shall wither by
giving or withholding finance. 



MVEETING OF CHAMBERS OF COMME RCE, MANUFACTURE RS, MINES
AND THE EMPLOYERS' FEDERATION
PERTH, W. A.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, C. H., M. P. MAY, 1972.
Mr. Britten, Mr. Brodie-Hall, Mr. Hammond, Mr. Pullan
Ladies and Gentlemen,
You will notice I kept those introductions very strictly inalphabetical
order because, in mentioning the distinguished
Presidents of the four very important groups which are sponsoring
this occasion, I would not want to attempt to differentiate between
them in the status, or importance that we in the Government attach
to them. They are all important organisations and provide a-good and
effective representation of the business spectrum here in Western
Australia. i want to assure you, as the members of these important
business groups that your views occupy a. n important priority in
our decision-making. I am also delighted to note that, to use a
common expression, " the place is packed out". If attendance is any
guide then I can say we are a very good bet indeed in Western
Australia when the election comes around. Thank you for coming.
During our generation of national government in Canberra with
our coalition partners, we in the Liberal Party have always seen our
role as having a central theme and a commitment to the concent of
individual rights, and support for free enterprise. I want to
emphasise these last five words. We have always believed in the
value and the real benefits of consultation with business groups in
considering economic policy measures. I will go further and assure
you that there is going to be no change in this attitude in this
very strong commitment of ours to private enterprise; or to our
continuing efforts to create and maintain the right type of climate
in which private enterprise can continue to make its magnificent
contribution to the growth and development of this country: An
effort which has resulted in our gross national product multiplying
by a factor in money terms of eight since we came to power in 1949,
from about 4,000 million dollars then to well over 30,000 million
dollars in the early seventies. / 2 
All the other indicators tell the same story of the fantastic
growth of this nation. Whether you look at public. investment,
private investment figures or the record of exports and international
trade which place us up near the top of the list of the world's
trading nations. No matter which way you look at it you must come
to the same inescapable conclusion that our generation of government
has been one in which the energies and initiative and dynamism of
private enterprise have been encouraged and released to make possible
the exciting story of Australia's postwar developnment.
I think our period in Government to date can fairly be called
the " growth generation".-Australia's great leap forward. Western
Australia has played a significant role in this development, thanks
to managers and entrepreneurs like yourselves: And thanks to men
like David Brand and Charles Court, and all those others at the
state level who have done so much. I pay my Government's tribute
to them all.
You have had the minerals boom and the great boost to
prosperity that went with it. You had your own local " population
explosion" and the great growth that came with it here in Perth,
a really attractive city. It is true that there has been a
temporary pause in the great growth of the mining industry here,
caused mainly as a consequence of the world currency crisis and the
slowing down of the Japanese economy in its very rapid rate of
growth, but the biggest part of the big projects are going on. I
refer to the Japanese economy. I am confident that these
characteristics of the Japanese people strong, vigorous and
efficient will be reflected before long in a resurgence of the
Japanese economic growth and n resumption of the hiah level demand
and of the kind of orders we previously enjoyed from them. In the
meantime, growth and development Jhere in Australia are going on.
Only this week you cpened the new alumina plant here at
Pinjara. This plant will lift Australia into number two position in
the world as a producer of alumina. That is something you in the
" west" and all Australians can be proud of. We have been and are
still facing something of an economic challenga, today. That is true.
But I wonder sometimes whether many Australians stop for a moment
to remember the stark economic challonges that faced us when Robert
Gordon Menzies led us so brilliantly into Government
In the late forties and early fifties the problems were
really renacing. We had a virulent form of inflation. The Labor
Government had just about given up in despair of doing anything
about it and was in its dying days. When we assumed the
responsibilities of Government, we diagnosed the situation quickly
as one of under-production, too much money chasing too few goods,
shortage of manpower, and a coal and power famine. In those days
of the " battle for prdcin as it was called, we had a three
pronged approach, against communist influence in the unions,
against inflation, and towards development.
In three to four years, we had transformed the situation: We
literally produced our way to prosperity. Many Australians would
hardly remember that time. ./ 3 
After all, half the population today is under 30 years of age: And
of course, our economy is far stronger, more complex, and more
diversified than in those days. We no longer face recurrent balance
of payments problems: And thanks for that are due in no small
measure to the great contribution of the mining industry, and we
all know of the West Australian contribution to this success story.
But as our economy and other western economies here become
more complex, the problems they can pose for economic mangers have
become the more difficult. This is true of ourselves as well as
other nations. We have found that new problems are not necessarily
amenable to the more traditional responses. And so we here had to
be prepared to be more flexible than we have ever been. We have
had to be ready to correct trends as they emerge and if necessary,
to frankly acknowledge where our predictions have not been borne out.
It is true too that we have been through a period of some pessimism,
but I think we passed through the trough over the Christmas and New
Year period. In the last couple of months there has been a
resurgence of business and community confidence.
I think you will find that is fairly readily acknowledged in
Canberra and the rest of Australia too. It reflects of course, the
realisation that our basic long term prospects for growth and rising
standards of living are aood. But it also reflects some favourable
short term developments w.-ich I want to mention to you today.
To illustrate my point let us have a look at the various
sectors of the economy. I first mention what we have done in
monetary policy. Financial conditions are very easy, with funds
readily available to the private sector. The reductions in interest
rates we induced have now spread fairly generally throughout the
financial system, and rates are well below those prevailing in the
early part of this financial year. The banks are very liquid, and
their new lending commitments are rising very strongly. The
normal winter rundown in liquidity will not put a strain on
financial markets this year. To sum up on the monetary side,
financial and credit conditions are very conducive to increased
activity in the economy. We believe we have helped significantly to
create the right climate in this way, for a return of business
confidence. Late last year, we removed restrictions on bank
lending. We followed this up later with a large release from the
statutory reserve deposits and lower interests rates.
That was only one part of our flexible response at the
Premiers' Conference in February and I believe it was the most
successful I have attended in all my time in politics. We
stimulated the economy further through the provision of extra funds
for the states, we approved a big lift in unemployment benefits,
and we stepped up the scheme of job creating grants for rural areas
which we had begun in February. But the major decision directed to
overcoming the lack of business confidence at that time was the
restoration of the investment allowance. We did this in response
to very strong representations that it would be the single most
important action by the Government in boosting business confidence.
I think this was a clear indication of my views and those of the
Government, in relation to our strong commitment to private
enterprise to which I referred earlier. / 4 
We also decided to continue for a. second five year-period the
industrial research grants scheme, and we have-reviewed the
conditions which apply to it, and we expect that the total--amountof
grants will show a significant increase in this-second.. stage of
the scheme which begins.. in July,
We have taken other decisions which will help in stimulating"
activity. In December for. example, I announced an emergency grant
of twenty million dollars over eighteen months to be used for
primary and secondary school class.. room construction. in the states.
About 6.7 million dollars of that amount will be used before June
Then there are our-recent decisions, which are known as " the mini-
Budget". These-decisions on taxation . and'pensions will stimulate
activity directly to the-extent of 180 million dollars, and in
indirect-terms we expect the total.. stimulus will be of the order of
350 million dollars. Public spending on goods and services i one
of the strong areas of demand at the moment. Between the first
halves of 1970/ 71. and this financial year, the increase in this. area
was 15%. Continued strong growth can be expected-here because of
the-extra money we gave to the states in February for their works
and housing programme and the continual pressure for many quarters
for increased commonwealth spending generally.
There are other reasons for optimism I want to mention to you:
Particularly the recovery in the rural economy. Our best judgement
is that farm output is going to go up by about 4% this financial year.
Farm prices, particularly for wool, have improved considerably and
the result is that farm incomes should rise by as much as 11% this
year. This is encouraging, and we believe it should help to stimulate
business conditions. The private housing sector is very strong.
Motor vehicle industry spokesmen are confident about improved export
prospects and a lift in domestic demand. Some of them have already
stepped up recruiting of labour. The steel industry has also gained
substantial export orders.
So you can see that we have been prepared to take action to
stimulate the economy and boost business confidence without delay
when we believed action was required. Actual unemployment have
fallen sharply from the peak of 130 thousand at the end of January
to less than 98 thousand at present. Under the scheme rural employment
grants, 12,600 jobs were created up till the end of .' arch.
We expect the employment position will continue to improve, but as I
said to the press when I arrived here yesterday, we stand ready to
take further action at any time we believe it is necessary tc
provide extra stimulation.
I think you will agree, even from this necessarily brief outline
of our actions in recent months that we have adopted a very
responsive and flexible stance. We have been on the job continuously
in keeping our finger on the economic pulse and we have at no stage
hesitated in deciding what should be done. To us, the way ahead is
one of steadily returning confidence in the short term, and the
resumption in the long term of the very strong growth and development
which this country has enjoyed for so long under Liberal and Country
Party governments. 
We havo-beon working hard on a num~ ber of fronts to overcome
the serious problem which havc been that of inflation. This is no
doubt that wage costs are clearly the prime element in the
inflationary process when you have average weekly-earnings rising
as they did by more than eleven per cent last year and productivity
rising by only 2 5 or 3 per cent then it is inevitable that you are
going to get a strong inflationary pressure. In the March quarters
the rate of increase moderated as was indicated by the rate of
increase in the consumer price index.
Amongst the steps we have taken are the amendments to the
arbitration act introduced to Parliament in Canberra only a few
days ago. These amendments are designed to curb the militant
use of union power to extort unreasonable wage increases and to
ensure that the community's interest is preserved in wage settlements.,
We have also made certain that there has been continued commonwealth
intervention in important wage cases to impress on wage tribunals
the economic consequences of their decisions. We have also acted
to stress the desirability of wage moderation in wage increases
wherever this has been practicable. And lastly, we are moving to
promote a more competitive environment in the business community
itself. we are doing this by our actions in deciding to strengthen
the restrictive trade practices legislation.
We are also moving to review the overall levol of tariff
protection. I think we can say with somo justification that our
efforts in trying to restrain wage cost inflation arez beginning
to bear fruit. This was shown in the recent Commonwealth Public
Service pay decision and it was also shown in the decision of the
arbitration commission announced this morning. The commission's
decision on the national wage case was for an increase of two
dollars in the total wage and an increase of four dollars 70 cents
in the minimum wage for adult -males. National wage case decisicons
always provide debate, but all round, I think this is a well balanced
decision. On the one hand it provides a sizeable lift in the wages
of those in the work force who have been left furthiest behind in
the race for ever higher and higher wages those on the minimum
wvage and, I might add, it conforms with the submissions the
Commonwealth mado to the commnission on their situation. On the other
hand, by exercising moderation in adding further to rapidly increasing
wages in general, the commission has given the economy a real chance
to make some headway against inflation. That is in the interest of
every wage earner and of the people generally.
Ladies and Gentlemen, it has been a Pleasure to be here
today and to outline to you how we in Canberra see cconomic
conditions moving at the moment. I can assure you that we are
determined to improve employment and contain inflation, and I hope
that my remarks today have shnwn you that we are winning the battle
to, achieve these objectives. Thank you. 



7L7
PRIME MINISTER
OPENING OF RICHARD CLEAVER LODGE
PERTH, W. A.
Speech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon. William
McMahon, M. P. MAY 7, 1972.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you for your welcome and for the opportunity to
be here today. This occasion is an important one for every one who
has the welfare of old and handicapped people close to their hearts.
But most of all it is important to those elderly people who will
move into this new lodge to live. This new building is to be their
home, and in it I know they will find security and care as well
as contentment and happiness. In it they will find friendships and
associations which will do much to remove fear and loneliness from
their lives. I do not believe that any nation . can be at ease with
its conscience while there are old, and frail, and handicapp~ d
people in our midst who are without proper care.
The problems of modern governments are many and complex,
but there must still be in the forefront of our policies, the
welfare of the people whose life's work is done., and who are without
the means to look nfter themselves. In one way or another,
every elderly person in our community played a part in making'
Australia a favoured country in the world.
Just think for a moment of the events in our history
through which a person of seventy years of age has lived. They
saw the foundation years of this commonwealth, and saw us grow and
mature from a rural to an industrialised society: Two world wars
and other conflicts7 droughts, depression, flood and fire; progress,
development, achievement and prosperity. All these things good
and bad have given Australians many reasons to be proud. They
have made us a nation. Let us not forget, then, that today's old
people were the young people of those yesterdays of our history.
They were part of the pioneering force in our community. They
worked hard and they rcarcd families and gave real m-aning to the
old song " Advance Australia Fair". Those of them who are in need
should not be forgotten now, and here at Swan Cottage Homes they
are not forgotten. 
This is one of the leading institutions of its kind in
Australia. Nearly twelve years ago, it was founded by my friend
Dick Cleaver to provide modern low cost housing for elderly people.
At that time he opened a bank account of ten dollars. Today the
Swan Cottage Homes organisation controls assets valued at two and
three quarter million dollars. There are now 401 units providing
accommodation for 531 people with a later potential for 617 people.
I think you will all agree that this is a magnificent result of the
dedication and inspiration of Dick Cleaver and Mrs. Cleaver, and I
pay my tribute to them now.
I think it is appropriate that this new block, which I will
officially name shortly, is called after him. One of its impressive
aspects is the effort made and one which is obviously succeeding
to treat elderly people as individuals and not as numbers in an
anonymous group. This is tremendously important because each one
of us, whatever our station in life, has pride and self-respect.
If our needy old people cannot have these things because of our
neglect then the nation will have a stain on its record which will
be to its eternal shame. This village protects the pride and selfrespect
of all who come under its roof. It offers constant care for
those who must have it. It offers a home for those who need one.
My Government regards its sgial welfare policies as among
our highest priorities. We have been actively reviewing, revising
and extending them and each year has seen some now assistance being
given or existing benefits increased. This will go on. The
business of looking after those in need is " unfinished business",
so far as my Government is concerned. It may be a task without end,
but we are determined that the Government will play its part and
play it in a significant way. Under the Aged Persons Homes Act
which I had the pleasure of introducing into Parliament the
Commonwealth government has given substantial assistance towards
this project. Much has also been provided by dedicated fund-raising
efforts. My Government does depend heavily on community effort and
interests: For the identification of the needs of old people and the
areas where help is most wanted.
Governments can act against p xe only with the guidance
and help of their own citizensand when help is given, it is the
personal touch of the local groups of welfare workers and the staffs
of the institutions themselves which makes the old and the frail and
infirm feel that human beings ar: helping them not an anonymous,
remote and impersonal government. Today marks the completion of
another project in the proud record of Swan Cottage Homes. They have
have served a noble purpose and have set an example to the nation
i: so many of their activities. The development of their resources
is not at an end by any means. We need to spend very substantial
sums to help our elderly citizens who cannot help themselves.
Since the Aged Persons Homes Act came into force in 1954,
Commonwealth grants have totalled about 131 million dollars and when
all subsidised projects have been completed, accommodation will have
been n-ovided for over 41,000 old people. / 3 
3.
This is a fine community effort, and I don't want to appear
to be suggesting that it is mostly the Government that has done
all this. The Government is a substantial contributor, it is true,
and will go on providing as much as it can, but this is, in fact,
a co-operative effort by Government, by people, by institutions and
companies. I want to see it continue throughout the whole range
of our social services. My Government is pledged to help and help
it will. Our record in the past is, I believe, a good one. But
we are not satisfied. We want to do better and we intend to do
better. We want to see our old and needy people all of them
secure, remembered, and at peace in the evening of their lives.
I believe this is a national duty for us all and one we must and
will fulfil. 



LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
CIVIC CENTRE
SOUTH PERTH
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William M4cMahon, CH, MP
May 7, 1972.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This is my second visit to the " W'est" in ten months and I
can assure you that both occasions have been rewarding. I have
been delighted by the warmth and strength of support for the
Liberal Party and the coalition government generally. I have found
this warm support everywhere I have gone during this five day visit
to Western Australia. There is undoubtedly a wave of enthusiasm
for liberalism running for us here. I think there are ' a number of
good reasons for this. There is the steadily rising tide of
business and economic confidence including the strong recovery of
the rural economy. There is a widespread and accurate impression
that the worst is well behind us economically. The economy " bottomed
out" in the first months of the year and the recovery is well and
truly underway. I think we are also getting some be nefit from
disillusionment at the state level.
West Australians are always prepared to give even a Labcr
Government a fair go. But I think-the resurgence of Liberal Party
membership and the great warmth I have encountered here indicate
very clearly which way the political tide is running now. I don't
think doctrinaire attempts to impose bureaucratic and cumbersome
controls do anything but downgrade individual freedom and interfere
with individual initiative. It's clear that West Australians
recognise this in relation to price control plans. At -the Foderal
level, there has been a fair amount ofl discussion about price control.
We have responded initially by commissioning a document which will
review the operation of price control attempts both in Australia
and overseas. When it is complete, we will present that document
to the Parliament and allow debate on it. In that way, people can
be fully informed about the consequences of prices control. We are
opposed to it, at this stage at least. We believe it leads to
distortions and economic bottlenecks and that real headway against
inflation is more likely to come through an attack on its root causes.
Here I refer to the ccmbination of industrial lawlessness and
excessive and unremitting wage demands that we have experienced. / 2 
During the year the end cf Decamber average weekly
earnings went up by 11 Per cent, and during the year up-to the end
of March, prices went up by 7 per cent. Productivity or the actual
increase in real production and income from the economy was around
2 or 3 per cent. The inescapable result of that situation is an
inflationary pressure which sooner or later breaks out in a.
of price increases. Rising prices affect evorybody especially do
they make life hardenfor fixed income earners and others who have
limited influence over the level of their own income. That aspect
of this problem is particularly on my mind today, as I have just
come from a ceremony where I openod a new section of a home for old
people, and I am also glad to see that in tho national wage decision
the Arbitration Commission placed the major emphasis on the increase
in the minimum wage. But of course, others have been doing quite
well through the exercise of industrial muscle by militant and
powerful unions groups, and this is the question that lies at the
heart of the inflationary problem. This is the issue which must be
dealt with before we can be confident of restoring price stability.
The time lost in strikes last year increased very strongly
over the previous year. The total increase in the time lost was
28 per cent and the total of wages lost was 45 million dollars. We
have not just been standing idly by in this situation. We have
made decisions on a whole package of measures to fight inflation.
They can -, mmarised unde,-r four major decision areas:-
There was our decision to make the most significant changes
to the industrial laws since 1947. We brought these amendments
into Parli&amp; ment only a few days ago, and they will be debated this
week. They will provide for secret ballots and they will strengthen
the arbitration system which has served this nation so well for so
long. Next, there was our decision. to-promote grecat competition
in business. We are going : Eo do this by strengthening the
restrictive trade practices laws and reviewing the level of tariff
protection. This wil~ l make it harder to pass on wage increases too
readily given, by simply raising prices. Next, there was cur
decision to exercise our influence before the wage tribunal to
exercise moderation in wage increases in the C.-omomqalth's Iwn
area of influence. Lastly, there was our decision for continuous
Commonwealth intervention in important wage cases oefore the
Arbitration Commission. tc-iiwnress on the arbitration tribunals
as strongly as we were capable of doing what the economic
consequences of their decisions would be.
For months until the carpenters case we had very indifferent
success in this. But in recent weeks, and in the national wage
decision only on Friday, our policy of wage restraint is starting to
bear fruit. We have a balanced and sensible decision in the
national wage case. It presents us with a nationai opportunity to
make further real headway against inflation. We need now a period
of industrial peace and Price stability. Union leaders should
realise that the best interests of their own members lie in
curbing inflation. Employers too, must not use this wage decision
as an excuse for further price rises. Let's have a bit of oi~ a
fashioned commonsense, moderation and restraint. 
aI
4 3.
I have outlined our major areas of decision in combating
inflation. There are many other areas of national life where we
have shown a willingness to act boldly and decisively in matters
calling for public decisions. We have implemented a whole string of
economic management decisions from action on interest rates and
bank lending in the secona nalf of last year through to the mini-
Budget", just a couple of weeks ago. Throughout that period we
have not hesitated to make a decision to further stimulate the
economy. We will not hesitate to do so in the future. We have
made many other decisions and taken initiatives right across the
spectrum of national policies; whether it be in land rights for
aboriginals in defence aid to Indonesia and Malaysia or in our
early recognition of, and support for, Bangla Desh: whether it be
in our initiative to establish the Australian Environment Council
of Commonwealth and State ministers. And I will be making a
further statement of national policy on environmental policy quite
soon. In the defence area we have recognised the importance of the
Indian Ocean to cur strategy. We have gone ahead with the: second
stage of Cockburn Sound. We are spending twelve and a half million
upgrading Learmonth Airfield as a base for long range reconnaissance.
Take education as another example. In December, we made a
decision that 20 million dollars would be given to the states for
classroom ccnstruction and some of that money is already being
used to replace or refurbish old schools in inner suburban areas.
We made a decision to increase the grants to independent schools
and we liberalised tax deduction provision for education. We
decided on an extensive programme of support for the arts. We are
nep ng the wool industry: We have a programme of rural
reconstruction. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have a list here which covers over
pages describing our nolicv decisions I will not list them
all, but I will say that as these aecisions work through the
community; as they become more widely known; as economic confidence
grows stronger; as Australians come to understand the serious
defects and consequences of the policies of our opponents, then I
have complete confidence that policies of the Liberal Party and the
decisions and actions of this coalition Government will ensure our
safe return as a Government. We are in a particularly strong
position here in the " West" and I ask you to do all you can to
help return the Liberal candidate in your electorate. 



OPENING OF THF 4TH ANNUAL CONFERENCE
OF
THE CONFEDERATION OF ASIAN
CHAMBERS OF COMM-ERCE AND INDUSTRY
A. C. C. I.)
PERTH, W. A. MAY 8, 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William. McMahon, CH, 14P
President Park of the Confederation of Asian Chambers of
Commerce, Delegates and Ladies and Gentlemen,
Welcome to Australia and in particular a welcome to Perth
one of our most attractive cities; and thank you, Mr. Blyton, for
your warm introduction, and your kind remarks; and thanks to
C. A. C. C. I. for holding its fourth conference here in Australia.
It is a source of pride to the Australian Government to have this
meeting here as a tangible demonstration of the importance of our
relations with Asia and of the role of Chambers of Commerce in
complementing the activities of Governments in the business and
communercial are
It is not really necessary to stress to you, as distinguished
Asian business leaders, the vital connection between trade and
development. All of our countries are linked together in the search
for greater growth and development, and for growing and worthwhile
mutual trade. But as you know these matters have to be seen against
the background of the world economy as it exists and as we expect
it to develop. In the last twelve months, international economic
relationships have been disorganised and distorted by the monetary
crises; established trade patterns have been distrubed.
As a result of the Smithsonian Agreement late last December,
the immediate threat relating to parity realignments has passed.
But, clearly, not all of our Problems have been resolved. There
remains the problem of whether, -and if so to what extent, longer term
reform of the international monetary system is necessary. There
remains the problem of maintaining a high rate of growth of output
in the major industrialised countries. There is also the related
world wide problem of the increase in the rate of inflation. Unless
the advanced countries succeed in resolving these problems of
stability and growth, they are not going to contribute in the most
effective way to helping the problems of the developing countries. / 2 
Not only could aid policies be nullified, hut advanced
nations would be oreoccupied by their own problems, rather than
those of the It is obvious that in some of the rich
countries there has been disenchantment with foreign aid, and there
has been a sense of weariness that the problems of development are
more intractable than had been widely supposed. I am happy to assure
you that this is not the case in Australia. I believe the
Australian people fully support the Government's view that we must
have a strong foreign aid programme, and evidence of our goodwill
is clearly established by the facts. The cumulative total of
Australia's bilateral economic aid to Asia now is close to 400
million dollars, But a sound and increasing aid programme does not
mean that we cannot learn from the exoerience of others. Part of
the disenchantment about aid has arisen from exaggerated expectations
about its effect. Some have seen foreign aid as a kind of magic
panacea to close the gap in living standards between countries.
In reality, the problems of growth are much more complex;
and foreign aid should properly be seen as a supplement to the
efforts of the less developed countries. There should be an element
not only of trust but also of modesty in our expectations for
foreign aid. As well, I hope, as being modest we must be practical
about what we can do. I do not want to exaggerate the role Australia
can play. Australia does not presume to tell Asian countries how
to run their economies. We leave such advice, if it is to be given
at all, to the international institutions, if and when Asian
countries ask them for it. Advice is much more easily taken from a
relatively anonymous multilateral institution than from an
individual country, however friedly and even indulgent. Here
and nQw I want to mention the Asian Development Bank, which is
growing steadily as an important influence in the region.
Australia is giving the bank full support and legislative
steps are now being taken to enable us to take up our share of the
increase in the bank's authorised capital. Associated with this is
another point I wish to emphasise strongly about our aid policy. It
is that we have long been conscious of the debt problems of less
developed countries in Asia, and so we have provided essentially
grant aid. We have not asked for the payment of interest and we
have not asked for our money back.
The basic problem confronting donors remains. It is to
adjust the terms of their aid to the repayment ca t. es of
individual recipients. I find it distrubing th:. nnu:'. average
growth rate of 10 per cent in debt service payl: ts is coni. erably
higher than the rate of growth of the export earnings of the less
developed countries. This means that debt repayments are mopping
up an increasing share of hard-earned export revenue. It is not an
irretrievable situation, but we have the impression that mnny
countries have not really faced up to it. In too many cases the
countries of the Asian and Pacific region face more inward looking
trading policies by the industrialised countries and they face
the development of trading blocs and the growth of tariff and
non-tariff barriers to traditional products. / 3 
3.
Turning to markets and trade, Asia offers an expanding
market for certain raw materials and capital equipment, essential
to the continued growth and diversification of its economies. Its
imports twenty years ago were 6,750 million dollars Australian.
In 1970 they were worth 40,700 million dollars Australian. This
growth in import demand has brought an increased interest by
Australian businessmen. Australian exporters once looked almost
exclusively to the United Kingdom and Europe. But since the early
1950' s there has been a pronounced trend towards increasing trade
between Australia and Asia. In 1948/ 49, total two-way trade was
only 310 million dollars Australian. Last year it was more than
nine times greater. We now sell over 43% of our exports to Asia
against only 15% in the late 1940' s.
Almost a quarter of Australia's total imports now come
from Asia, compared with less than a fifth in 1948/ 49. Japan is
Australia's major overseas customer. Whilst we recognise that
whilst aid has an important role to play in the development of the
region, in the final analysis trade is preferred to aid as a means
of attaining economic maturity. To help two-way trade, the
Australian Government has entered into some bilateral trade
agreements which recognise special features of trade between
signatories and provide for Government-to-Government trade.
Agreements are current with Japan, Malaysia, and the Republics of
China, Indonesia, Korea and The Philippines.
We have also supported realistic world commodity
arrangements for many products which provide the bulk of export
earnings for Asian countries. Within the total trade complex and
the desirability of world commodity arrangements, we recognise that
the nations of Asia are dependent on expanding exports of primary
products to developed countries, and we share the concern of many
Asian countries about the need for improved access to international
markets for them. But commodity agreements are not in themselves
enough . to solve the problems of the primary producing countries.
A greater liberalisation of trade in agricultural
products is required and this has been sadly lacking up t. ill now.
I add that Australia warmly welcomed the declarations in February
this year by the United States, the E. E, C. and Jctp.: n to work for
freer trade in agricultural as well as industrial podcts. We are
also aware that expanded trade with Asia will cpE. ldn i..-e.~ gly-upon
the ability of the region to export profitably. hve . n
prepared to back our beliefs and as early as we a system
of non-reciprocal tariff preferences for manufact;:" red End semimanufactured
goods and handicrafts from developing countries.
A review has recently been completed and my colleague,
the Minister for Trade and Industry, has recently announced at the
UNCTAD Confecsnce in Santiago that some 200 additional items are
to be added to the list of manufactures which benefit from this
system as well as a number of other handicrafts. Providentially the
countries of Asia have proved to be the major beneficiaries of this
system. Last year some 80% of the imports entering under the
preferential arrangements came from the region. 
4.
I emphasise, however, that the quotas are not being
filled and that you as businessmen ensure that maximum
advantage is taken of the system by the exporters of your countries.
Equally, you should be aware that the Australian Government is
willing to look at requests for existing quotas to be extended and
for additional products to be included in the system.
May I turn now to investment. I am pleased to note
that the conference is devoting some time to the question of
investment in Asia, which necessarily goes hand in hand with any
discussion of trade and development. From our own experience,
we in Australia, recognise the importance of foreign investment as
a means of promoting growth, and even though Australia is still a
net capital importer, we readily give approval for Australian firms
to make direct investments in developing countries, especially in
Asia, and I hope to see more firms doing so.
We believe that direct investment accompanied by exports
of technical know-how and managerial skills is a major means by
which we can contribute to the development of the region. We
recognise the natural preference of host countries for joint
ventures as distinct from wholly foreign owned investments, and we
must strengthen the transpcrt links and means of communication.
Like some of our northern neighbours, Australia is an island nation.
Our international commerce is carried almost entirely by sea. It is
appropriate therefore that delegates to this conference should be
examining this subject. Shipping technology has made tremendous
advances in recent years. Mew types of ships, improved methods of
Shandling cargoes and new concepts in transportation have been
developed. You will be reviewing these requirements, assessing
the role of both the Government and private sector in developing
these facilities. It is from the decisions of business that these
needs arise. I am sure we can expect a continued and accelerating
growth in trade within the region and increasing contact between
the businessme. of Asia and of Australia.
There are already business co-ooeration committees
involving Australian businessmen and those of Japan, Korea an3
Indonesia. Exchanges of ideas within these committees and at
conferences such as this will lead to a greater understanding of
the trading problems confronting us in the 1970' s. Thank you again
for inviting me and I have much pleasure in now declaring open the
4th annual' eonference of the Confederation of Asian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry. 



E: BARGO. NOT FOR RELEAS2 BEFO-RE 6. 3 " 1 m. ( EAS1')
PRIME MINISTER
MACQUARIE NETWORK WEEKLY BROADCAST
BY THE PRIME MINISTERr THE RT HON.
WILLIAM McPIAHON, CH, MP. MAY 1972
W A G E S, P R I C E S A N D INFLATION
Last week I spoke to you about our arbitration system.
Tonight i want to soeak, to you about a related problem.
We have now reached a crucial point in our campaign to
dampen down the inflationary pressures in the national economy. The
decisions of the Arbitration Commission in the National Wage Case
which was made public only last Friday, was a balanced and sensible
decision. On the one hand the National Wage decision gave a sizeable
increase in the wages of those members of the work force who have been
left furthest behind in the race for higher and higher wages. I am
referring to the increase for people on the minimum wage. The Arbitration
Commission gave this section of the community the greatest assistance.
The National Wage decision is consistent with the submissions
made by the Australian Govern-ent to the Arbitration Commission. I am
glad the Commission adopted the needs approach to these people on the
minimum wage. On the other hand, the Commission came down on the
side of moderation and restraint in its general wage decision. So the
Commission has set us a national example, and it has also given us the
chance to place some brake on inflationary forces.
Let me emphasise there can be absolutely no doubt whatsoever
that wage costs are the biggest factor in the inflationary process. In
the twelve months up till last Christmas, wages went up by an average
of about eleven per cent. We got the inevitable and inescapable result.
Inflationary pressures broke out in a rash of increased prices. In
the twelve months to the end of March this year, the official figures
show that prices went u by seven per cent. This was alright for the
big unions using industrial muscle and strikes to force big wage increases
at the expense of other ' people. And it was at the expense of people on
fixed incomes and people on low incomes who do not have a great influence
over the level of their wages. These sort of excessive and unremitting
demands for higher and higher wages are one of the root causes of.
inflation and in turn high prices. ./ 2 
The other root cause is closely linked to it. And I refer
to the industrial trouble that goes with itese wage demands. In the
last two or three years some trade unionists have got so involved in
their own power and political struggles that they seem to have
forgotten the main interests of their own nimbers lies in curbing
inflation. And in legitimately obtaining through arbitration,
improvements in : ages and conditions in proportion to the'actual and
real increase in production of the national economy. This is the
familiar story of trying to squeeze a quart out of a pint pot. It
just won't work.
In facing up to these causes of inflation, we in the
Government have been determined to put a stop to this sort of thing
in four ways. We have made the biggest changes in the industrial laws
since 1947 to blunt the militant use of union power and to democratise
the unions. The debate on these changes is going on in the National
Parliament today.
We will also promote more competition between businesses by
making the restrictive trade practices laws stronger and by overhauling
the levels of tariffs. The Attorney-General is now preparing
a statement for the Parliament on restrictive trade practices.
I have told you what the Government is doing in the fight
against inflation. I appeal to both union leaders and employers to
show restraint and comnionsense. Union leaders know that the best
interests of their members lie in curbing inflation. And employers,
too, must not use this National Wage decision as an excuse for
further price rises.
I can assure you that inflation works against your best
interests. That is why we in the Government are taking the leadership
to control it and are taking the decisive action to ensure sound
development and rogress in Australia. 



" PHILLIP EL7CTOPATE GARDEN Pl. RTY
ROSF BAY, N. S. W
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. WTJilliam McMahori
CH, 4MP
Thanks! Dr Derek Freeman for your very kind welcome, and
thanks Frank Theeman and your charming wife for your kindness and
generosity and for inviting us all to enjoy your hospitality this
afternoon. I am delighted to see so many of you here today. Like you,
my main purpose is to lend the strongest support I can to Bill
Aston and the Liberal Party in Phillip.
Bill has been an outstanding Liberal and has occupied the
high office of Speaker with distinction and authority for so long.
So we are all here this afternoon to make sure that when our
Speaker is returned, it will be with the kind of majority he richly
deserves. Amongst us today, there are representatives of the Liberal
Party as a whole Federal and State politicians, officials of the
Liberal Party organisations, "-nch officers, Party members and
strong supporters. I am glad, too, that this Garden Party is
being held in Leslie Bury's territory. Because this is teamwork
in operation and that is one of the great contrasts between the
Liberal Party and our opponents. Unity, loyalty and teamwork are
our insurance policy for success.
In the past few days, we have seen the confirmation of the
swing back of support to the Government. Our support is rising,
and it will be much higher later on in the year as confidence
srrgcs ahead. I ask you to redouble your efforts at the Branch and
organisational level in the coming months. Now is the time to
spread our campaigning and our support throughout the community.
Our policy positions are sound. We have a first--rate story
to tell. It is a story of constructive achievement and imaginative
action. I say let's get on with it as one team and with one voice.
Don't let us be diverted or distracted by side issues or irrelevancies.
We must fight and win on our grounds on the the-nes of our
choice with our timing and with complete unity of purpose.
By way of contrast, our opponents are uniquely vulnerable
this year on just about every main issue that Australiais are
concerned about.
On the other hand, we are strengthened by our policies and
accumulated practical experience of many years of proven record in
government. / 2 
-2
We-lal know there -ar. very real and unbridgeable differences
between our policies and the aressed-up impractical proposals of-..
Labor. Ours arc the practical-policies of a Government which
knows how to implement and finance them.
The Labor Party is completely confused, even on agreeing
what their own policies are, let alone on how they would implement,
administer and finance them.
Let me illustrate this today in three vital areas of
community and national life in our management of the nAtional
economy, in the vital area of education, and in CommonY4-lth/
State relations. First of all, the economy. In common with many nations,
we have in the rast few years, faced new types of economic
problems, problems which have not been as amenable to the traditional
responses and adjustments f previous years.
In the face of this, wc have been prepared to be more
flexible than we have ever been before. We had to frvoL!-
acknowledge where predictions wgere not being borne out, to be
ready to correct trends as they emerged and to adjust our
economic strategy accordingly. We adopted a flexible and very
responsive stance and T think it is now paying off.
We took a series of actions in the second half of last
year, starting with monetary pclicy. Most recently, there
was the mini-Budget which will 2rovide a big li: t in deas'. d, and
in confidence. This was active . nd positive decision-making
in the highest area of government.
Then there is education, and with it the desire to help
in a very substantial way both Government and independent
schools. Last December, I announced a special 120 million emergency
grant to the States. it was the first time the Commonwealth had
moved specifically to provide grants for classroom construction at
primary and secondary schools.
Then at the beginning of the year, we announced increases
in the per capita grants to indep'endent schools. Then a few
days ago, details were given to the Parliament of what I called
imaginative proposals to introduce certainty in planning as between
the Commonwealth, the States and the schools, and to make both
grants for capital construction and per capita assistance part of
permanent Commonwealth/ State education policy.
We announced a fivee-year programme of $ 215 million for
school building, and with it arrangements that are designed to
meet up to 40 per cent of independent school running costs.
This continued a policy our Government started in 1963, when
the Commonwealth first approved the science laboratory plan for
Government and non-Government schools. / 3 I 
-3-
I am p~ roud to s.-av that right frorr th-a beginning, I have
tae nv. part in tho-fo--ruation of1 this scheme. Our
obiective thcn was -~ 4gvio0-oa d and -adequato education
to all Austrailian ch6, ildren in all Australian scho-ols. It is
still my own and the Liberal Party's objective and I think We
are getting a great deal closer to our goals3.
Last, let me mention Cormonwealth/ State relationships.
We apnroached the most recent Premiers' Confercnce at three
levels 1. A very substantial increase in financial assistance
to thec State Governments and to local and sem. 4-
Government autho~ rities. New South Wales was particularly
Wol). treated.
2. Substantial inCreases in uncmpioymcnt benefits and
for unemployment in rural areas.
3. A71ssistanco to the free entcr-risc systom. We restored
thi( iLnvestmcnt -lol~~ anteer aonnd a nnounced a new
and better research a-nd investment sc~ ierne for industry.
These three illustratirins are -ocsitivo cxamoles of an
active Government a G3overnment -f decisi ) n in tho areas that
count, in tho are. as that meian much to us all.
This is the message we; c must get across. With teamleork
we can. Members arc not sitting in Canberra watching opinion
rolls. We are imnroving and introducing -practical policies,
policies designed to makc this a stronger, richer, more3 Australian
and exciting nation. 



EMBAR-O 8.00 p. m. 1S/ 5/ 72 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
PRIME MINISTER
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
DEAKIN ELECTORATE , Vic. M4AY 1972
Spee ch by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon.
William M~ ctahon, M. P.
Mr President, J-! r Alain Jarman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you for comning along tonight and for gi'ing me the
chance to talk to you for a few minut~ es, and to join forces with my
colleague, Alan Jarman, in getting the Liberal message across to the
people in this election year.
We depend Qfl you to heln us do that. You are closest to
the voting public and therefore in a good position to " sell" the
Government's policies, and also give us in Canberra a " feedback" on
what people are thinking.
I see the Labor Party has got a haberdiasher slogan called-
" It's Time" Well, true enough it is time time for the mask to
be ripped off Labor pretensions and policies. Time for Liberals to
be out in the market place telling the Australian pEiple what they
have been doing as the major party in Government in the last twelve
months or'so. If we all get down to this task and press on with it,
enthusiastically and energetically, then later in the year I have no
doubt it will be the Labor Party " for whom the bell tolls" 9
I am confident that the policies we are putting forward are
honest, open for all to see, and in the best interests of the people
of Australia. Now, Mr President, the-: re is one theme that I want to
give some time to tonight, because it is importanit to all Liberals,
important to the Government as the voice of the people, and imrnortant
to the people themselves as individuals in a free society. I refer
to " freedom within the law' in our community.
Most Australians are " fed up to the back teeth" with disorderly
demonstrations like those in Melbourne and other cities last
week. This isn't freedom of sneech and of assembly two ideals
Liberals hold dear. Those disorderly demonstrati. ons involve unbridled
licence by the few illegal in therrselves but dangerous to all. It
is anarchy by a militant, subversive few who inflame thoughtless
people and are encouraged too much by some sections of the L~ abor Party.
/ 2 
Last week's events were more than just another demonstration
that got out of hand. They were a symntod of a sickness in some parts of
our society which left wing elements and Labor politicians are promoting.
Naturally, I was delighted to see Henry Boltetaking a firm stand about
these events. As Liberals we have a duty to take our stand in support
of the law. Demonstrations in Melbourne were once promoted only by the
hard-core communists and a few fellow= travellers, but in the last year
or two the left-wing unions and Labor noliticians have added their weight.
This, now, is exploding into a serious challenge to the authority of the law
keener-+* h ~ viice-and the authority of Covernments-Gommonwealth and State
The clearest demonstration of this occurred during the recent Springboks
Tour when the A. C. T. U. President and certain Labor Politicians openly
inspired mass disruption. There was no industrial motive for their actions.
Indeed there was no really genuine nolitical . motive. It was attemoted.
anarchy for anarchy's sake.
We in the Liberal Party stand for the freedom of the individual
and for free enterprise. We believe it is the duty of the Government to
exercise the authority within the law I repeat within the law vested
in it by the Australian people.
That is why, for example, we have taken action against draft
dodgers We believe Australian citizens have the right to go about
their business. In Melbourne, or Blackburn or anywhere else in Australia
without being interfered with by dangerous demonstrations. Ordinary
decent people, the great majority of Australians have every right to
expect their Government to act in their interests.
I want to put this matter in perspective. I am sure that the
majority of people like my Government, respect absolutely the right of
dissenters to dissent, and the right of demonstrators to demonstate.
But it must be within the Law We support South Vietnam. Our soldiers
fought there with great courage. We are still helping with training
even though our troops are home. We support the latest action by the
United States. Why? because it is honourable and right, and because
we are opposed to aggression. Yet what do we see on the other side of
the political fence?
Support for North Vietnam has been given by the Labor Party
here in this state. Support for an aggressor, ecposed for all to see.
No longer can the Labor Party talk nonsense about the war being an
internal rebellion or civil war and therefore nobody's business.
Let's look at another exaxple of the false and dangerous values
of our opponents. They have declared themselves against compulsory
National Service. We, the Liberals are for it because there is no other
way of keeping our armed forces up to the strength required to meet our
defence obligations to the Australian people. The Labor Party has always
said it would scrap National Service. That would be mark you a
political not a defence decision. But in the last day or two they have
started to talk with two voices and adopt two standards. Perhaps they
wouldn't scrap it right away. Or perhaps they would. Who knows? And
perhaps they wouldn't pull out of the five-power defence arrangements in
Singapore-Malaysia; Or perhaps they would. They have always said so
until recently! Well, who knows? / 3 
I mention these matters because these are at the heart
of the demonstrations which have been bringing chaos to the streets
of our capital cities. The Australian people must judge for
themselves, the degree to whichi demonstration and violence would
grow worse with a Labor Government looking with a benevolent eye on
the law-breakers the draft resisters the violent demonstators
and the aggressors against friendly countries.
My Government wants to minimise the divisions within the
Australian community not to enlarge and inflame them. We want the
Australian people to know we stand for respect for the Law. In the
face of the challenge that is so clearly aimed at the Government by
militants and some Labor-inspired agitators.
We have had economic difficulties as a major preoccupation
in this past year. We have been quick to react to changing condition.
In the months ahead I am confident we will make steady, solid progress
which will prove to be the justification of everything we have done
in the past year. I ask you to join me now in nreparing apd working
for a handsome election win. You have your part to play in securing
that victory. Let us do it together. 



EV4BARGO: Not for RELEASE" UE70R17 9.10 rm on 19/ 5/ 7?
CHECK( AGAINST D2LIVFRY PRIME MINISTER
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
HjOLT EILECTORATE. Vic. 19 ~ 197 2
Speech by tY7 e Prime ! Minister, the at Hon.
William cI ahon, CH, MP.
Ladies anr2 Gentlemen,
To start with I think you woTculm like me to thank rr and M1. rs
Bill MontaguLe f or providinag us with thie opportunity to be here. It
is a real gathiering of the% la. t
We are here not only to meet and have a happy time; we are
here to heln in every way we can to ensure that L1EN REID, is going to
come back into the Government at the next election with the thumping
majority he deserves. This function is a tiut to him. I t is a
tribute to -tnie Libarals in the Division of Nolt who have helped make
it a success. Hiolt is rather uniaue and unusual. In a mi-nute I wdill tell1 you
why it has a rat-her uniaue and unusual membcr in Len Reid. MTh-i s
electoral division w-as namecd after a mar, who was an outstanding
Australian, an outstanding Victorian, ancl an outstanding Liberal Prime
Liinister. I refer of course. to the Lato IFarold Fio'] t.
I'm told tt~ sdivision is in fact one of the fastest growing
electorat3R in Australia, after Mitchell, on the Western. outskirts of
Sydney and Diamond Valloy.. which covers thgrowing N'orth-eastern
s uburban fringe of iMcrlbourne. The point about these t*. iree elactorateos
is that they arc, all in~ ra-nidly deveoi e suburban areas, anrd t-hey
are all held 1, y Liberals.
Ele-: ctora. tes; like this are truly a part of the suburban oxnlosion
t-hatinas been going on around the edges of Irga ciisfrsm
years now. :, anv of the peonlc who are moving into these areas aroe
young couples with young feirilies, who are zstablishing their first h1-ome.
They have particular needs in housing, in hatin education, in roads,
In power, sewerage and in othor conmunity facilitie-fmnykns ./ 2 
2.
So you find tocharacteristics neculiar to the7, e new areas3
growth and youth which pose speci al orobl. orr, to be solved, and these
need special remcdies anQ solutions. The effort to meetk. the problems
of community development is one for all c-1 us at all levels of gove--rnment
at the local govern~ ment level and I believe it is fundamental
to Persevere and co-opsrate wi-t1h local gc-verrment.
This afternoon, on the way here, I atte-nded a civic reception
at Springvale in this electorate. Springvale is one of the:, fastust
growing districts in Victoria, or in Australia for that matter, arnd it
is, I would say, a good example of tlle grow)., th explosion I have roferred
to. The second love], of government invinlvnd is ofE course, tho Statte
government with its multitude of specific rcs * nnsibilities. The third
link in the chain if3, of course, my own government in Canbcrra. Now the
problecms and needs oif this rapid urban grcwth rainge across th-e thrt-! r
lcvels of govcrnment and in soma places thay inelvita-bly overlao). Put
it should be remenmberced that thesce ara nroblems which are a-nnratad by
grow.-th and orogress thzi sel--ve9. Thoy occur cgzainst a backdrop) of a
developing, diversifying and continuousl! y xan:. gnationa. l economy.
Thc-y are nroblems whaich will not ba swernt av-ay-by finae nhrases or
fulsome promises in f~ loction year. Tile-' 11il. only lbeovrmey ain
and intelligent co-opra~~ tic'n between all of the thiree tiors of our*
Australian systrem of go'verniment.
Our opponents think it is fashionablo thc--se days to claim we have
a crisis" in our cites imilar to--th ose srome comnoar-11. la cities
overseas. That, cf course, is wi,-ldly inaccurat--. IkovrtheLe-ss we in
thea Commonwealth Goverrnnt know).. you are corncoried, cand righ-tly so. We
know,-you want actiJon now to imprfove today's living conditions and to
avoid the greater nrnolems of tomorrow. No ono. c,-n nretend taat the
citiescb not have oroblems such as high lani costs,' atmospheric
pollution, traffic ccongeton, long distance commuting, recreational
congestion, * Lack rf coirxiinity centres in the outer suburbs, and an
increased crime ratze, violence and other srcial prob,-, lems.
Basically, these are tasks for the tiers of our government
structure which arc closest to them, and they are-the local and state
governments. But this d -os not any means indicate that we in Canberra
do not * h-ave, a very strong indirect interost, nor does it mean we ara
not 3ympathetic. Let meolan
Ile i n Canberra sc-, onen of our vitally important dutie(-s as the
management of the national economy. Success in national economic areas
is fun-famental to the growth wh7' 1ich the suburban explosion iimn.. lies. It
is fundamo-ntal that. national ceconomny be kapt h:! althy and . crntiniuo-usly
expanding. I hope I say this modestly.
I h-ave had a good deal of di-rect exnerienca in financial and
economic management as Treaourcr and now% in my nresent portfolio. On
that score I think th-. at we can faiirlv claim that our own flexible and
sensitive approach to the difficult economic nroblems we have be'en
confronted with, and our willingnl. s-7 to act boldy and without delay to
take positive decisions in stimulating the-ieconorny arc now, paying off
4n the return of business confir,! nce, and the continuing improvement in
the employment situation. 
Only on Tuesday, my colleague, the Minister for Labour and
National Service, announced the April figures for employment. They
showed unemployment . was down by nearly another 5,000 to about 93,400.
This was a far cry from the anguished cries and the fear predictions
of the Leader of the Opposition and his Lieutenants. It is no thanks
to him, or his industrial snokesman, tr. Cylde Cameron, or to Mr. Hawke
for that matter. They saw unemployment as a fear issue, as something
to be exploited. The more unemployed, the more votes.
Well, that one has blown up in their faces. So have others
where they have sought to pull the wool over the eyes of the electorate.
Remember the " reform" and I have that word in inverted commas of the
Victorian Labor Party? That exnloded when the " reformed" Victorian
Labor Party broke out in cheers for the North Vietnamese aggression
against South Vietnam. The support of the Labor movement for
demonstrators and even violence, has grown in strength. That blew up as
well. I am glad to hear that some Labor politicians are now adding
their voices to the call to observe the law in the streets, even if it
is belated. I look forward to them extending their call to observe
the law on draft dodging as well.
But to return to my main theme here tonight on the question of
urban development: The second area of our involvement this is interconnected
with our overall role of economic management is in our
continually increasing financial allocations to the states. Before
people become too carried away with labels like urbanisation, or urban
affairs, or phrases like the challenge of the cities, they should stop
to consider the billions of dollars for housing, for roads, for water,
for sewerage, for hospitals, and for many, many other facilities that
have resulted from the long years of practical co-operation between
Commonwealth and State Governments under Liberal and Country Party
Governments. For the current financial year, the states works and housing
allocation alone is 92 million dollars. It is left to state
Governments tc decide how they spend those allocations and most other
capital and revenue assistance from us. We believe it is right that
they should have this right. They are closer to these problems than we
are. They have the administrative experience.
Lastly there are the ways in which the Commonwealth directly
assists in coping with the snrecial needs and nroblems of the new, urban
areas. Health and education are two areas where we have made specific
decisions within the nast few days and weeks. Example the most common
fee has been increased in Victoria and accepted by doctors here without
further cost to fund contributors. We have in education moved directly
and for the first time into providing money to build school classrooms.
Previously, we wre ::. elping with science blocks and libraries.
Now we will be building the schools themselves, for both government and
independent schools for all Australian children in all Australian schools.
/ 4 
We will also shortly he making an imnr-ortant * policy statement on
the Commonwealth's apnroach to,. enviro~ nmental questions, and of course,
there is the other large area of dire--ct commonwealtii assistance. That
is social wefr. This is an aro. a in which Led Raid hais shown himself
to bc a man of great compassion and &amp;--termination in both-',* a national
and international sense. His concern knows no borders and no limitationo.
That is why he was such a strong advocate of our help for Bangladesh.
Lilco him, I am proud that Australia was one of thea first to go
to the aid of Dangladosh and one of the first to recognise that new
nation and new member of the Commonwealth. On the home scene hc has been
a determine~ d advocate of certain important reforms in our non7, ions and
social welfare structure.
Well Chairman, I do not want to int(*_ rrot the proceedings
and furthicr, But I did want to indicato to you and those who are Iicre
this evoning how we in Canberra and w,, e in the Liberal Party are thinking
on these problems: How' we aro ore'pared to heir) co-oneratively axvi
constructively in urban develcomont; and' hnow we do not favour an
impractical and unworkable rystem of long-. range bureaucracy to C'.&amp; al with
essentially local problems such as that favoured by the Labor Party. 



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBA. RGO: Not for release before
6.30 p. m. 19 May 1972
PRIME MINISTER
CIVIC RECEPTION
SPRINGVALE TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE, VIC._ 19 May 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon.
William McMahon, CF., MP.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you Councillor Marriott ( Mayor), Mrs Marriott
and all Councillors. There are two fac-ts about your municipality that
have attracted my attention. Yours is a growth area which can
match any other part of Victoria and probably any other part
of Australia. You are truly a part of the suburban explosion
that is going on around the edges cf Australia's great cities.
The second is that Springvale is a young area, Where there
were farms a few years ago, you now have over 60,000 people in
Springvale municipality alone. Many of them are young couples
with their young families. M4any of them are new settlers
taking advantage of the very large migrant hostel in this area.
These two features growth and youth pose special
poroblems to be solved and special needis to be met by
government at all levels whether it be here with you at the
local government level and I believe it is fundamental to
preserve and co-operate with local government, or whether it
be at the State Government lev,: AL, or w*,. ether it be a problem
that may be placed in my " In T. ray" in the Federal Government
in Canberra. When I mention the importance -e attach to local
government in the Australian system, I am not just being
complimentary. only last month, the Cabinet decided as a
matter of principle that local government ought to be
involved in " the convention" which has been proposed to
review the Australian constitution. That demonstrates our
serious intent when we speak about the role of local government.
./ 2 
These special needs and problems I have mentioned
involve all three levels of government. And inevitably there
will be areas where they overlap. But it should be remembered
that these are problems of growth which occur against the
background of a developing, diversifying and expanding national
economy. These are problems which will not be swept away by
words and promises. They will be overcome only by patient and
intelligent co-operation between the three-tiers of our
Australian system of government. There are some people in
public life who find it fashionable these days to say that we
have a " crisis" in our cities, and that our problems are
similar to those of comparable cities overseas. Such claims
are, of course, wildly inaccurate. Nevertheless, we in the
Federal Government think there is a good reason for concern
that action should be taken now to improve current living
conditions, and to avoid greater problems in the future.
No one would try to pretend that the cities do not
have their problems: such matters as high land costs,
atmospheric pollution, traffic congasion, long distance
commuting, recreational congestion, lack of community centres
in outer suburbs and the increased crime rate, violence and
other similar problems. These matters are basically the
direct responsibility of the two tiers of our government
structure closest to the people, that is, the state and local
governments. The Commonwealth Government sees as one of its
first duties the management of the national economy. On that
score I think I can claim here and now that our very flexible
and responsive stance, and our willingness to act boldly and
decide positively in stimulating the economy, is now paying
off in the return of business confidence and the continuing
improvement in employment.
Secondly, we have, within this area of national
economic policy, continually increased and improved our
allocations to state and local governments. Before people
become carried away with labels like " urbanisation" or
" urban affairs" or the " challenge of the cities", they should
stop for a moment to consider the billions for schools, for
housing, for roads, for sewerage, for hospitals that has coyr. e
out of the many years of practical co-operation between
Commonwealth and State Governments under a Liberal Country
Party Government. Thirdly, there are the ways in which we are giving
direct assistance. Health and education are two areas where
we have just made further improvements.
But, Mr Mayor, I don't want to speak for too long
as I want to meet personally as many of those who are here
today. But I did want to tell you that we in Canberra and we
in the Liberal Party see these matters in a sympathetic way,
and how we are prepared to help co-operatively and constructively
and without imposing long distance bureaucracy from local
problems. 



k
EMBARGO : Not for Release until 8.30 p. m.
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY_ PRIME MINISTER
LIBERAL PARTY FEDERAL COUNCIL MEETING
CANBERRA 29 May 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister,
The Rt lion. William McMahon, M. P.
INTRODUCTION
Just 12 months ago, I addressed you for the
first time as your Federal Parliamentary Leader and
Prime Minister. It was then a troubled party. Not only
were we going through the fires, ( if I can put it that
way), but there were great, complex and difficult questions
facing the People of Australia and particularly the people
of our own Party.
As I interpreted that situation, there was
nothing else to do but to get straight down to work,
producing new ideas, new approaches and new policies which
would be to thc Nation's benefit and rejuvenate our
political fortunes. This was urgent. Not because we
lacked ideas and approaches attuned to the times but because,
for understandable reasons, we were not getting action
quickly enough. We had to adjust, deliberately and rapidly, our
political life style and identity to the challenges and
choices of social and political change in Australian
society. My job was to see that this was done.
As Le~ ader of the Government, it is my dut to
translate Liberal policy into effective action. And to
make each and every decision subject to one single overriding
consideration. That consideration was the national
interest, the welfare, the security and the progress of
Australia and all Australians. 
THE SPECIAL COMMITTEES
As you will know, new policies of lasting value cannot be
produced overnight. Individual effort was not enough. There had to
be a co-operative effort. And so, as the Federal Parliamentary Leader
and as Chairman of our Joint Standing Committee on Federal Policy, I
set the Party as a whole to work. They got down to it and did
the job. Quietly, with teamwork and patient determination the Liberal
Party set out to adapt its policy-thinking to the changing oattern of
attitudes and values, which were, and are, pervading Australian society.
We set a premium on new ideas. We set up fourteen specialised
sub-committees to review, renew and develop the whole range of our
policies. Mr 9octhey has already referred to these committees. The
Joint Standing Committee of our Party has now considered final reports
from the Party Committees on nine nolicy issues on education, on
health, the rule of law, urban notblems, the rural sector, defence,
national. goals, immigration, and laour and industrial law.
Reports and recommendations from the Standing Committee will
also be presented soon on the quality of life, on social services,
and on foreign affairs, as well as on nolitical matters such as
who runs the Labor Party ( You can be sure the answer will not be
Mr Whitlam), and the socialist alternative.
What are the results of the Committee's decisions to date
A number of Committee recommendations have already become Government
policy because we decided they should not be hoarded. The nature of
the policy-thinking that has gone on, and the results that are now
flowing through, reflecting, as they do, Party thinking and ideas,
show that the Liberal Party is a Party of the seventies. I think an
important result is that the Liberal Party of Australia today is at
least as productive of ideas and policy-thinking as at any time in the
Party's history probably more so.
Mr President, I turn now to three and only three of the
many important subjects that I mentioned before which have been through
the refining process of these policy committees.
First, let me speak about Education. We are a literate society
and education is crucially important in Liberal policy reviews and in
Government actions. Education is a world where the humanities vie with
the sciences and where technology, for the present, tends to dominate
the scene. We accent this, but we must not let technology overwhelm us.
We must so research and manage our educatinnal systems, that men and
women are adequately equiopcd to fuitili ' themselves in their chosen
spheres in a balanced society. We. must increase the opportunities for
education, and we must improve its quality. Our testament on this
philosophy was recently published in pamphlet form. And since then we
have announced new and stimulating policies designed to help all
Australian children in all Australian schools, Government and
independent. I am sure the action we have taken opens up a new era
in education in Australia. I know all Liberals will agree with me. / 3 
THE ECONOMIC BASE
Mr President, before going further, I want to mention one
essential precondition to the success of this strategy of new nolicy
innovation, new xolicy formulation, and new policy presentation. And
that precondition is, of course, a strong, diversified and structurally
sound economy. This is fundamental to our success and to the realisation of
our vision of the future. I don't need to tell you that we have had
extremely difficult economic, industrial, and social problems to
wrestle with. Our troubles have been aggravated by the end of the
mining boom, problems with the primary industries, excessive rises in
income and difficulties with international currency management and
with world trade.
The difficulties were compounded by the fact that today's
economic problems are not necessarily as amenable to traditional
analysis and resnonse as before. We were one of the leaders in the
new thinking that has developed about changing and more complex
economic conditions. As a consequence we have been deliberately more
flexible in national economic management than ever before. Above all,
we had to acknowledge frankly where predictions were wrong and act
quickly to apply remedial action.
Sir, with some experience in economic management, may t say
I know that the flexible and resnonsive economic stance we t6ok un
as early as last September is paying off. These measures all taken
in very recent months have included
Reductions in interest rates, public and private
Increased grants to the States
Increases in nensions and in aid for persons in nursing homes
Special assistance to the wool industry
Restoration of the investment allowance
A mini-budget which included a reduction in personal taxation
Increased grants for education, and
A reduction in excise duty on wine.
This is an impressive list.
All these measures were directed towards reducing unemployment,
encouraging sensible consumer spending, assisting needy sectors in
industry, and securing a balanced growth economy. And we have never
let up in our fight against inflation.
I also want to refer to other matters bearing on the economy
and the industrial scene in which the zovernment has made tremendous
progress in less than a year. I mention
1) The review of the arbitration and conciliation system ard the
changes in the public service acts to enable the rule of no
work no pay to apply amongst nostal workers.
2) The decisions on trade nractices and the intention to establish
a monopolies commission.
3j The Treasury paner on foreign investment recently presented to
Parliament. / 4 
4) The wide-ranging taxation review which is to be held.
The white paper on defence.
6) The impending survey of prices and incomes policies.
I am sure that all this is contributing to a resurgence of
confidence in Australia today in business, in industry and in
Government. Next, let me refer to Health.
The national health scheme is voluntary and therefore differs
fundamentally fran Labor's p~ roposed compulsory scheme. It is based on
one fundamental principle and that is -the interests of the patient
must come first at all times. We have estbalished the principle that
the amount insured patients pay to their doctors will be lim-ited. The
amounts are small indeed compared with the normal cost of medical
treatment. We want to keep it that way. That is -why we accepted the
recommendations in the Mason Rep~ ort and why we are negotiating at present
with the Australian Medical Association about the common fee.
I would also remind you that under the existing health scheme
the burden of large hospital bills has been lifted from the patient.
Cabinet is now giving special attention to the problem of the chronically
ill in nursing homes and nursing attention in Drivate homes. And we
hope to be able to make known our decision soon.
So too, with child care. There is a shortage of child care
centres in Australia, and we are now considering what we can do about
that problem. As well, we have been active over a wide range of public health
We have taken warning action relating to the hazards to
health of smoking by our requirements for TV advertising.
We have made substantially increased grants for heart and cancer
research, and we are prepared to support more extensively the work of
the National Health and medical Research Council. 
THE EIT, 7IRONVENT
Now, let me turn to the environment.
For each individual we seek a quality of life which must
satisfy his needs in material, cultural and spiritual terms. A basic
essential i3 to secure his environment so that the things necessary
to fulfil those needs can germinate and flourish.
The scientist and the sociologist have sounded their warnings
around the world. Their voice is clearly heard here in Australia.
They remind us that the destructive nolltion of our physical environment
flows from the very successes of our industrial civilisation.
A few days ago my Government outlined to the nation the measures
it has in hand to protect the Australian environment. We stressed that
this was a beginning. And it is just that. There is still much to be
done. The challenge to free our society from the strangling grip
of overcrowded cities is being taken up.
So is the challenge of the changing balance of life in our
rural areas.
For an effective solution in a federation like ours, of course,
this problem has to be dealt with on the basis of the most intimate
co-operation with the Australian States.
Urban renewal, the elimination of slums, the reduction of
congestion, the planning of new cities and towns are at the heart of
Liberal policy for the seventies.
This is the basis of our approach to the future Australian
environment and we will say much more about it as the year goes by. 
6-
Mr President, nay I turn to the domestic and international
principles on which our policies are based.
I am sure I don't need to emphasise to you that at home
we are committed to sustaining the growth and development of this
country. Believe me, we are succeeding, despite the temporary
dI fficulties of the last year or two.
We see national development as directed to growth, in
the people's interest, in a climate of free enterprise and with
incentives to individual initiatives.
A full-scale examination is now being made to see whether
any action is desirable in the national interest in circumstances
where international corporations propose the takeover of Australian
companies. We will not allow monopolies to destroy the healthy
competition which Liberals believe is part of a free society and
wholly beneficial to that society. We have already announced our
intention to legislate for a Monopolies Commnission which among other
things will examine proposed takeovers by other Australian or overseas
companies which could result in monopolies or monopoly condition.
Now, Mr President, let me say something about foreign
investment in Australia. We have recently received the latest
assessment of the impact such investment has made and is making in
Australia. Shortly, several submissions will be made to Cabinet
relating to the problems associated with cap~ ital inflows and the
wisdom or otherwise of the need for regulation and control.
But lot me strike one note ofl caution here. Foreign
investment in Atralian industry has become an emotional issue as
well as a matter for serious examination and some regulation. I ask
you to all look at this matter in a commonsense way.
The criterion which must determine our actions is what
is in the best national interests of this country. And actions must
be based on a hardheaded appreciation of benefits and costs. That
is the attitude we, as Liberals, will take.
The other great responsibility we bear is in our
international relations. There is much of this that needs no
emphasis. Lot me summrarise : We have become a moderately-sized
power; we have become an industrialised nation; we are a good ally;
we are respected and trusted; other nations want us to join them in
co-operative efforts.
So far so good, but what does the future hold?
We have ties with Britain, and a crucial alliance with America. We
have mutual ties and arrangements with our friends in Asia, in
trade and aid, in cultural exchange, and in do-fence. We have mature
relationships with the old world and the new world. We are deeply
involved and deeply committed in Asia.
As liberals, you will recognise the commonsense and
value of such outward-looking and multilateral policies. They have 
4 0. -7
been, in large part, the product of liberal initiative. We must
sustain these principles in the national interest. We must increase
our own capability in both '~ ecivil and defence spheres.
Shortly, I will visit three of our friends in the
South-East Asian region in Indonesia, in Singapore and in Malaysia.
It will be a goodwill visit to neighbours, a return of courtesies and
the refreshment of old friendships.
These visits will be made in the midst of momentous
changes in the contemporary world. The journeys of President Nixon
bear witness to this. Britain will soon be in the Common Market;
Japan has become our best customer; the pattern of world trade is
changing, and we are pursuing genuine efforts to develop a dialogue
with China, and at the same time we remain unwilling to abandon our
friends in Taiwan. These approaches demonstrate both the will anO the
willingness to play our part in a world of interdependence, and to
play it in a healthy, vigorous independent Liberal and Australian
way. THE LABOR ALTERNATIVE
Mr President, I come now to the alternative being
presented to the Australian people in this election year. It is
absolutely essential that we must take the mask off Labor policy
as often as we can. it is time the people know the dangers of
a Labor alternative. Let me make these points crf comparison and difference.
1) On liberty.
We stand for the individual for his freedom, his initiatives
and his opportunities.
Labcr stands for socialism, for the all-powerful state,
bureaucratic, anonymous, unfeeling.
2) On the law.
We believe in freedom of speech and assembly, and of dissent
within the law.
Labor tolerates disrespect for, and oven breaches of, the law.
3) On Australia's security.
We beieve that treaties involve responsibilities and we stand
ready to h'rnour them. The ANZUS Treaty is the cornerstone
of our security.
The Labor Party stands for isolation in defence it scorns
meaningful treaties and arrangements with friendly powers.
It gives lip service only to an ANZUS Treaty with the
heart and soul torn out of it. 
4) On responsibility. We arc~ free to act and interuret our Policies and
platform without duress or interference.
The Labor Party in the Parliament is dictated
to by the Party outside. It is a Party in chains.
We have great responsibilities to Protect the
nation from being locked in a straitjacket of socialism. We
must safeguard the future of this great nation.
Post-war progress of the Australian nation is
our inheritance and its future safety and prosperity is
our destiny. It is our job as Liberals to fulfil these
responsibilities with vigour, with honestY and with imagination.
I know we are equipped to do it and to do it in
a manner and with a purpose that matches the times in which
we live. I thank you. 8 



VISION VALLEY OPENING
N. S W.
Speech by the Prime tUinister, The Rt Hon. William McMahon, C. H. rM. P.
3 June, 1972.
The Reverend Alan Walker, Ladies and Gentlemen,
When Alan Walker asks me to do something for one of the
many projects which spring from his fertile mind, it isn't easy to say
no'. I have known him for a long time and I admire him in the work
he is doing in the name of his church for people in all walks of life.
So whien he asked me to open " The Vision Valley Project"
this afternoon, I could'nt say ' no' It is a great personal pleasure,
Alan, for my wife and me to be here and for me to say a few words about
this project. You have " reached for the stars", and here in this valley
you and your colleagues have built a " Country Club" with a difference.
This Centre will bring relief to young and old from the stifling life
of the crowded city of Sydney. And in this way it will help to refresh
the moral and spiritual values of our own community. In many ways I
believe we can look upon it as a pathfinder for others. Its conception
alone is inspiring and its practical value will be unlimited. It will
give direct expression to some of the things my Government wants to secure
for the Australian people. Among these is the development of a quality
of life in Australia which has as its symbol and slandard, excellence in
all things, and an end to oovcrty so far as it is within the power of
mortal men, to achieve.
There are tasks ahead in the seventies for all of us
tasks which require us to share in a concerted national effort to protect
the Australian environment not only from the man-made pollution of the
air and the water, and the desecration of our great and unique natural
assets, but from the diseascs of s) ciety which flow from crowded living
and the tensions and pressures of contemporary life. Vision Valley will
make a notable contribution to thlat effort.
I sooke the other day Df Government plans to expand the work
of the National Health and Mledi.: a2 Research Council, and of our wish to
do something more in the nursing home and home care fields. 
These are examples of a strong and continuing desire on the
part of my Government to join with others in dealing with the social
problems of the day, and to do our best to give to every man, woman
and child in the Australian community the security and dignity that is
theirs by right as citizens of this wonderful country.
We will not rest in this task. Some of what we do can be
measured in money terms and in the shape of buildings against the sky.
But a lot, too, depends on the research we make possible; on the
guidance we can give, and on the goodwill of the Central Missions of
many faiths which we can foster.
I think it is one of the remarkable aspects of Australian
life that so much is being achieved by voluntary effort and by the
gift of time and ideas and enthusiasms by a great legion of Australians
who are insnired to do things in humanity's name. I hope it will
always go on for it is one of the ennobling characteristics of any
nation. Alan, I congratulate you and your fellow workers of the
' ethodist Central Mission on the example you set and the leadership
you give. Some of you may ask " What is the Government giving in hard
cash to this project The honest answer is that it is not giving
anything directly, because under the acts of Parliament as they stand
we cannot spend the taxpayers' money in this way. But indirectly I
want to tell you that we are helping, and I believe, helping significantly.
We are doing this by tax deductability for donations of $ 2 and over to
the project, and our contributions to projects run by the Methodist
Central Mission which do qualify under existing acts of Parliament.
This, of course, does allow the Mission to divert more of its
own funds to exciting and original new projects like Vision Valley. And
so many of you will know the Central Methodist Mission supports many
socially significant and essential projects. There is its famous
Lifeline Service, its homes for the aged and chronically ill and its aid
to the physically and mentally handicapped so that they can be helped
to find a useful nlace with dignity in our society. Homes for the aged
and chronically ill and the handicapped do come under the acts I have
referred to. And over the years the Commonwealth Government has given
just over half a million dollars $ 574,000 to be precise to the
' lathodist Central Mission for its nursing homes, hostels and home units
for the aged. Now, under another act of Parliament under the Sheltered
Employment Assistance Act we propose to give another substantial sum
to the 1Methodist Central Mission.
Mr Chairman, I have pleasure in announcing that my Government
will grant the sum of $ 137,000 for the Mission's Sheltered Workshop at
the Lifeline Centre in Rydalmere. This will be for the direct assistance
of dibibled people. It will, as I explained before, also help to improve
the development of Vision Valley by freeing other funds for this project. / 3 
3.
M. r Chairman, many people who are sorely troubled will come
to this Valley and find comfort and hope. Others will find it a place
to rest from their labours, and others, too: will find it a olace to
refresh their spirit and body in healthy surroundings.
All of them, I am sure, will find a new communion in life
which will make them hapoier people.
It is for these reasons I feel privileged to be here today,
and to officially declare this Centre open. 



STATE DINNER
DJAKARTA
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon.
William McMahon,' CH, MP JUU7E 5, 1972.
Your Excellencies, President Soeharto and MAadamne Soeharto,
Distinguished Guest1-s:
I am honoured and personally delighted to be here with you
tonight among friends. My delight is, however, tinged. with regret
at the unavoidable absence of my wife. But I sDeak for her, too,
when I express our personal friendship for you, Mr. President and
for Madame Soeharto. Your visit to Australia is still fresh in our
memories and I want to convey to you the warmest greetings from her
and from the mnany friends you met in Australia as well as from the
Australian people themselves. 1972 was the year in which you,
Mr. President, by your visit to Australia, gave a powerful stimulus
to enlightened co-operation between our two countries.
Mr. President, I believe our friendship now has firm foundations.
Increasing numbers of Australians share my interest and desire for
closer and direct contact with your large and fascinating country.
Part of this interest arises from our proximity. But much of the
interest arises from a sense of fresh discovery of something
different something that has ancient foundations but-which is, to
many ofr us, refreshingly new. I am sure, too, that in the last few
years you have become increasingly awara of us as a country with
another kind of economy and society.
So we are of interest to each other not just because we are
neighbours, but because we are different and have commonly shared
goals and commonly shared interests. These commonly-shared goals
and interests, I believe, and concerned with
security, stability and peace,
national development,
economic and cultural co-operation and
trade
41r. President I think you will agree that our private
conversations this morning have reinforced this. ./ 2 
From the very first days of your independence we sympathised with,
and supported you struggle. We were among the first to establish
diplomatic relations with your newly independent country: And even
when our relations were at a low point we maintained our embassies
in each other's capitals and continued a dialogue.
Mr. President, I am well aware that you have created stability
and maintained growth in your own country, and have contributed to
the stability and development of the South-East Asian region. I
now assure you that I, along with many other Australians, share a
deep and abiding interest in. your country, its culture and its
future. If two countries with such different cultural, ethnic
geographical and religious backgrounds can build the bridges of
co-operation and goodwill as we have, then Sir, we have a unique,
intimate and mutually rewarding relationship which is an example
that other countries troubled by conflict and tension can follow.
We are both members of a region composed, in a political sense, of
many newly-independent nations. We are both devoted to regional
development and to the concept of which you, Sir, are one of the
architects of national resilience. I speak of national resilience
as the will and the ability of each of us, so far as it is within
our capability, to defend our independence by our own efforts.
I believe, too, 1tr. President, that the Asian theatre will be
profoundly influenced by the changes now occurring in the
relationships among the major powers. President Nixon's visits to
Peking and Moscow have altered the balance away from confrontation,
and towards conciliation and detente. If these trends continue, and
we hope they will, the peoples of South-East Asia can look forward
with some hope to greater prospects of peace, stability and progress
This does not mean that we can relax our efforts to build up our
capability, regional co-operation and, in your own words, regional
resilience. Nor does it mean that in all circumstances we can go
it alone'. The conflict is still raging in Indo-China, and at a
higher level of violence. Other nations in the region are still
confronted with problems of subversion and, in some instances, armed
insurgency. These disturbances make it all the more imperative
that we should work actively and effectively together. As I have
already said, Mr. President, 1972 has been the year of enlightened
co-operation in many fields, including trade, development, cultural
and defence co-operation.
Our trade is growing but we want to ensure that it grows to
our mutual advantage, and we believe it is important to do more to
encourage your exports to Australia. You may recall that we
introduced in 1966 a system of preferential tariff quotas on
manufactured goods imported from developing countries. We were the
first to do so. These quotas have been expanded both in size and
numbers over the years. In fact at the recent UNCTAD conference in
Santiago, we announced that a further 200 items would be added to
the system. I feel that Indonesia has not yet taken up its fair
share of these quotas which are designed to help all developing
countries. / 2 
We are prepared to do whatever possible to provide your
traders with information on market proposals in Australia. I have
asked my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Trade and Industry, to visit Indonesia for trade talks on these
and other matters, including a review of our trade agreement which
was negotiated initially in 1959. I also expect Mr. Anthony to
discuss investment issues of mutual concern with your ministers.
Then there is economic development. This is a subject to
which your Government attaches the highest priority, and my
Government has been happy to assist in providing technical skills,
know-how and equipment. We have a common interest in the
development of the port of Tjilatjap, and we have been discussing a
new project in animal husbandry of which I will be saying more later
in this visit. This as you know, is a large project indeed.
As I have informed you, Mr. President, my Government plans a
substantial increase in Australian aid over the next three years.
Mr. President, we are also involved in cultural co-operation.
Our two governments signed a cultural agreement four years ago and
there has been a welcome increase in cultural contacts since then:
But more needs to be done. I have proposed, with the agreement
of your Government, to establish a cultural and language centre in
Djakarta. This centre will promote two-way cultural and language
exchanges. And, finally, in the field of defence co-operation, our armed
services are working closely together in a number of projects.
Neither of us wants a military pack of alliance. But there is much
e can do by giving assistance in a practical way and by sharing
experiences and knowledge and co-operating to our joint advantage.
We have arranged to provide sabre jet fighters and accompanying
equipment and technology and flight training, and very substantial
help in equipping an important military airfield at Iswahjudi.
Already your airmen including pilots and technicians are now being
trained in Australia: And we are willing to respond positively to
your wish to strengthen your coastal surveillance capacilities.
There are several other such projects under discussion between us
that I hope to see brought to fruition.
I am now able to say that my Government last week approved
increased financial provision for technical and military
co-operation with Indonesia to enable us to assist in these and
other ways.
Mr. President, I, and the vast majority of Australians, highly
esteem the wise, courageous and unifying leadership you have given
to Indonesia and the energetic role you have played in your
country's development. We are both fortunate that you assumed the
leadership of Indonesia at a moment in its history when your
qualities as a leader were most needed. Since then you have
continued to provide inspiration for your people. You have guided
your country through many difficult years, and have opened up
prospects for a better a much better future.
Mr. President, I now propose the toast to you and to the
continuing friendship of our two countries and our co-operation in
the pursuit of peace and progress for Indonesia Australia and
our friendly neighbours.
L 



VISIT TOINDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA
Speech by the Prime M4inister, the RPt Hion.
William McMahon, CHI, HP.
AT DINNER GIVEN IN HIS HONOUR BY THE PRIM'E 1INISTER OF SINGAPORE,
LFE KUAN YFW. 9 JUNE 1972
Prime Minister, Excellencies, and Distinguished Guests:
It is a privilege to be the guest of the Singapore Covernment
and to return once more to a city I have visited many times, but not
until now as Prime &gt; ninister of Australia.
As you said, Mr Lee, I was last here as Foreign Minister in
1971 for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. On that
occasion, I was impressed by the admirable way Singapore rlayed host
to our Commonwealth colleagues and if you will permit me to say so,
Mr Lee, I admired your masterly handling of the proceedings as Chairman.
When Australians come to Singapore, Prime M~ inister, they do not
feel they walk among strangers. -They know they are among friends.
It is in that spirit I am he~ re tonight.
There arc bonds between our countries which I value and some
are the subject of ? olitical differences in Australia. But, as I said
this morning when we snoke together in private, it is not my intention
to export domestic ' olitical controversy.
The matters that concern us both, are, I bolieve, fundamental
in the social sense as thay affect relations between people and of
practical importance in our common effort to advance the fortunes of
our countries and do all-we can to secure peace and orogress in the
region. I speak for -a country that haz great natural resources but
which for a large part is a harsh, dry land which wo have tamed and
learnt to live with, and developed a society, getting on now to be
some two hundred years old. 
You, Sir, load n cou. 1, tr, 1 t-: Lat has not the natural re-, sources9
we posscss. But you,. too, . heve.-t ump'v 1 and : 11, vc &gt;-uilt up a
progressiv: e cnv. rornent,. w.-iose1 Uaorn_-e Iave culture: s cgoinq back to
ancienttis Th: sre are differences of magnitude of our haistories. But
thari-are also forco which . believe bring us togather -tnd which
today fund us with commofl intere, ts in South-East Psia at a time of
challenge and chalige.
You, Mr Primrt ? iinister. lavc spokan of the momentous nolitical
changes in the world in l.-: 3t eighteen Tronths, and I agree -oith
vou that we must not rush to firm conclusions as a result cf whlat has
take -n place, or as you so aptly said, to ' start changing our friends'.
It is about our frieridshin, Mr_ Le*, that I want to say something
tonig.' ht, becauso both know that all is not politics in lift, and
there are meeting poin-ts for our peopic in many ways w-hichl can lead
to rarc fulfilimonts in human relations.
1 ither counitry can iive aloñ p in th. I-o * latc y-aar3 of thetwantit
-th century. For our nart, the twin determinants of goograony
and hi: 5tory are involving us increasingly in South1--East ASiaC.
Geogranhy-l -ias nlacced us on the-southeorn rirm of that area.
As to hi-stor6tihe fall of Singapore in 1942 was a dramatic
catalyst for the future dovcelonrient of Singapore and for Australia
also. For your part, in the past 30 yzars, and more rapidly in tho
nast sevcn years, you have moved wita ' vigour and rnurnose to a
prosD2. rous, ordarlyi, 1,! ell-deav--_ 1:) red and indopendlent State in Asia,
with links to our rEuroncarn civiLlisation of e: nduring strength. You
have displaycd ruggod self-disciLpline, a vitality and an enthusiasm
of a remarkable order.
Teisonc thing ' iThi , cl. i irhprossos itself on me iwhene-ver your
cofu nSriy qarre cmesto ttention whether in the news or in
our minds. It i~ the w% Tcltho f goodw-. ill which auto-maetically extends
to i~-as if by nature.
I wonder whether, assit hzro tonight, ralise tha full
lengthA. ; 1-p-th and breadLth of th-at goodwill, or of the-optortunities
for co-omnration between us whicii -flow fro. it.
Wo k now, you cis an illluminating clemr: m-t in t. he. . society of Asia.
We know you also for* your en--tiusi. asm and -, uccess in youir dcevelooment
in many important directions. For instanco, in your exciting urban
ronew-al and in the tall buildings, I saw. reaching for the Sky as I
drove in from the air-Dort yetra. In all this the-re is a quality
in your country for ave,: ryone to se
A, i f I may, I would like to nnalyse-thie quality I speak of
a littl-a further. i't comr7s nartly, of courzse-, from your noople. Blut
there_ is ano-th1er sourcz! Icadc. er9hip.
In this your own innatc ca-pacity and instinct stand out. They
hFav,--1had very much to do '' ihthe: succcs: 3 of your country. You seck
quality in your society, as w.: do in ours. And in pursuit of -this
you havc bucen practical and far--eig You have bcen innovators and
pragrm:,.'
Singaqorc:. 
havo comov here on t'iis viit consciou3 that alreadyawbo
mutual in'r~; and cozn: tacts has broi: ght our ocetvstogetier. In
termns of rsc-_ curi;-! y : k p: art-or in t'i, ri _ vL!-owcr Dcf'encc Arran geiftcnts
with Singapoere, Falaysia, N" w ealarnd and Britain.
Under the arrangemonts, Austrealia hnas Uni1 -ts of it s thr-aC
services in Singapore. One Purpose of my visit has boen to sec
un11its of thcse: serviccs on thc ground ' or th. 2 first time.
As my tnl7.: s h(-ere today c-rnfiraod, thi--' ower De-fencO
Arranqernents, includinq the comoosition and disposition of ur forces,
continu..-to be r-garded as irrnortant by both our oenels hey
ar working l.
Y:-et me illustrato cur contacts a li~ ttle further in other ways.
I lh_-orvc in mind the relationshin that is now w e2. l -estab . sm-lod in
educatio~ ral mattar3 by thi facilitie _ s vue hav_ 130-o % ot e offer your
studcrits, and t. e incrca-3ing interchlange. o' ur University
administrators ardl scholars.
Wa have too j oi4 hancs pca 1rp rojec-3 being develonad
unde-r t'uhe; 7. ustr; 7l1ian--Asian Ti: riisCo-on'orratior Scheme. I am
conficnt, Primc 1-inist: c-r, tl the-,-futuro--7iils1 the veo I lt
of incrcasing links botwerc'n oi.-! Universitie. s, and mrorn-. go no(, rally
among the,-Universiti-as of ther rc7rf. nn.
! wI oul-3 al17o mentlon.. in the o tcx f'nwh each other
bettc-r t: ne growth in touri-, M ctio our -two com: itrics. We are
cro th-e t. h-resh; Iold new : Ln-. to Wha,. t T bealievc will br~ anweao
lowc-r farcs for air travzel. Thio il opoan " moagic casements" on naew
lands for thousands of our eien. This, too, will_ w7ork] its
ministry on our socictics.
No man, it is said, tav,',! s eith imopunity. A~ nd in, this
env~ ironmznt of South -East Aitravel communmLcatas ao'xtdill, creates
understanding, and has, of nccssity becausc! we live a riractical
wo~ l~, significant commercial ~ is
Prim X-inister, -oe in TAu7t1ralia-res-. c) ct Siliqalore as a trader.
We value your market '. and xxa r glad to s&amp; e, it grow. st thy: same
tiim. 7 cCf, l eIdwgee~ t"-a-t tl-balan-0e runs3 h~ aviiv in our favour.
Liko yoA. we support and follow a pclicy of libzeral, multilat-ral
trarlc. But we7k h., ooe it will 5epossible th; f. utura for yo-u to
hav morz opportunities0 in our mnurk,_: t.
Finally, Prime M~ in-Lt r, I must refer tk. o wh-at I believe was a
most su,_ ccessful export to ; Au--ra. lia. I have h. iad enthus-. astic reports
of the1-great success at t hd. e, laidca Festival in lrhof the Singapore
Cultural Trc'uno. The, Trounc was acclaimcti in Autaibecause it
was exciting, colourful and original. 7tL was good for cultural
relations. PAnd it--uas F. r-,. Tiin -Ior that in cultural exchanges, which
wo must encourage, we havc-. a rilch fertilisation of our friendship.
Prime Ministaor, I lndc my% T, .. arty arxe glad to bna here. I h-Ave
had an istructiva and, I constructive day wijth you and your
Senior 1-+ L. nisters. I havc! 1hcl a fasci. natIri afternoon at Jurong. And
in my dis: cussion_-s and in my '. ravols, I 1have seen examples of thos,
mnany qualitios in Sinqenorie to ~~ ac erwitnos:; to-night'.&amp; 
I I salute the " Lion City" of the twentieth century. And I say
to you, Sir, and all assembled here that Australia values Singapore's
friendship. We extend to each other our friendship and trust in full
measure. And we believe that our friendship and trust will have a
long life and be a rewarding one for all of us, and to the region
where cur destinies belong.
I thank you. 



VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MAPLAYSIA
By the Prime Minister of Australia, the
Rt. Hon. William McMahon, M. P.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF SINGAPORE
MR. LEE KUAN YEW
AT STATE DINNER 9 JUNE, 1972.
Mr. Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Gentlemen,
My colleagues and I extend you a warm welcome on this your first
visit to Singapore since you became Prime Minister. You are no
stranger to us, and we recall with pleasure your presence here during
the 1971 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
In the eighteen months since then, there have been momentous
political changes in the world. President Nixon's visits to Peking
in February, and to Moscow in May, made most countries re-examine
their positions, to assess what changes the future will now have in
store for them. The easy assumptions of cold war politics are no
longer valid. But it does not necessarily follow that there will be
any immediate or precipitate change in the political and security
climate which has so far kept South-East A-Isia, outside of Indo-China,
an area of relative tranquility.
Change there must be. For my own part, I would prefer the dust
stirred up by all these dramatic events to settle, before coming to
firm conclusions on which to base any changes in policies. Certainly
it is not necessary to start changing our friends, though nothing
is lost by making new friends of old adversaries of cold war days.
The recent series of accords between America and Russia reinforces
the trend towards the acceptance by the super powers of their desire
and now their declared policy to avoid confrontation against each
other. They have accepted the division in Europe, since the second
world war, as a fact of life for the foreseeable future. By the
recent series of agreements between the West Garmans and the Russians,
West Germans and the Poles, the agreements in Moscow and Berlin
Four Power Agreement, the Europeans have substantially cut down the
dangers of conflict in Europe itself. ./ 2 
Unfortunately, there have been no such accords over Asia. One
probable result of President Nixon's earlier discussions in Peking
is to lessen the likelihood of a collision between America and
China. There are other major powers with long term interests in Asia
and in the Indian and Pacific Ocean. They were not present at the
Peking discussions. Further, they have not yet reconciled their
different views of the shape of things to come. America, China, Japan
and Russia may take some time to agree what are the limits of their
respective capacities to influence events in the different countries
of Asia. Nor is it clear how much naval power can add to their
economic and political influence on the littoral states of Asia
adjoining the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and on the island nations
lying off the Asian continent..
Meanwhile, the war in Indo-China grinds on. We must hope there
can be a negotiated settlement that will enable American forces to
withdraw and not in disgrace, that the South Vietnam these forces
leave behind can be allowed to sort their future out by themselves
without external interference by forces. If this could happen, then
a confident Thailand will act as a buffer for Malaysia and Singaeore.
Then we can have more time to adjust ourselves to the changing forces
acting on Asia, the Pacif c and Indian Oceans.
Your visit, Mr. Prime Minister, comes at a time when this whole
region is preparing to adjust to the altered situations consequent
upon the dramatic changes in policy of the great powers. It is still
not altogether certain what these changes will be. There is nothing
alarming about uncertainty, provided the future is not placed in
jeopardy by hasty reaction.
Amidst all these uncertainties, it was a source of satisfaction
that we were able to maintain steady co-operation between Australia
and Singapore. They contributed to the climate of confidence which
helped us ride through some difficult times in the last few years.
Such progress as we have made, despite the adverse turn of events in
1965 and 1968 was due, in part, to the quiet understanding and
support of our friends, of which Australia was one. And the defence
arrangements of the Commonwealth Five have provided continuing
stability to an area important to us, the people who live in it,
and perhaps to you, in Australaqia. And there is no reason why we
should not make further progress in regional co-operation, to
consolidate the present stability of the region. With a little luck,
South-East Asia should be able to withstand drastic changes in the
Indo-Chinese situation. In these matters, we have common interests.
And now, Your Excellencies, Gentlemen, I ask you to rise and drink
a toast to the health of Her Majesty The Queen. 



PRIME MINISTER
VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA
SINGAPCRE PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON
Soeech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon.
' illCiam Mchon, CH, MP. JUNE 1972
SMr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen of the Press and Guets
I am honoured to address the Singapore Press Club today. I am
your guest in opulent surroundings and I now believe what I have often
suspected that at least here pressmen live better than politicians
in Australia. Thank you for your welcome. It is good to be here. I do not
need to tell an audience of your experience that the world is moving
pretty fast under the impulso of technological, economic, social and
political changes. These changes are grist to the mills of the oress.
And through your craft, you mirror the times ir which we live.
The changes are new-. s for you. They are basic problems for the
politician. The factors external to one's country are among the most
difficult for a Prime Minister to contend with, so foreign affairs
and defence policies tend to be high on the list of my preoccupations.
And for that reason I have welcomed the talks I have had with
Mr Lee and his Ministers on these matters. They were frank and
free, and I found them tremendously helpful and informative. So, today,
I want to put to you some thoughts about recent international developments.
I want to define Australia's policies in the light of some df
these developments. It is a truism that the -ctions and policies of the larger
powers have, since the last ,. orld war, and particularly in the past
few years, brought about an extremely fluid political situation in
Asia. The European countries, and the military strength with which
they protected their colonial assets, have in large measure withdrawn.
China, consolidated under communist rule, and for long intent upon
internal problems, has rightly taken its place in the United Nations.
Peking has been visited by the Presi. e'nt of the United States. And
this has been followed by a visit by President Nixon to Moscow. / 2 
Japan is developing rapidly and has become a major industrial
and economic power. The Indian Sub-Continent remains beset with
unique problems, and a new member of the community of nations,
Bangladesh, has been born. Australia gave early recognition to
this new nation. The Soviet Union has shown increasing interest in
the Sub-Continent, in South-East Asia and the Indian Ocean.
The United States, beginning with the Guam Doctrine, and its
progressive withdrawal of ground forces from Vietnam, has given
clear notice to countries of the region that there is a limit to
the burden that American will carry alone. So we have to ask how
these developments affect Australia, where do we stand, and what
initiatives have we taken and what we will do.
Mr Chairman, it is hardly necessary for me to say that we encourage
and welcome the independence and freedom of countries of Asia and the
Pacific. That is a cardinal principle with us in our foreign relations.
I digress here, if I may, to emphasise two matters of special
importance to us.
One is that Australia has recently joined with several newly-
Sindependent South Pacific countries and New Zealand in the Pacific
Forum. Here, at the highest political level, the many problems of
the South Pacific area will h. regularly discussed and mutual solutions
devised. The other matter is that, in accordance with the wishes of its
people, Papua New Guinea ( which embraces an Australian Territory and
a United Nations Trust Territory will very shortly become internally
self-governed and, perhaps not much later, independent.
We hope that other countries will recognise the needs of this
emerging country and will be nreDared to assist the products of Papua
New Guinea to enter international markets more freely.
To return to my main theme, Australia has welcomed the signs of
some thaw in the relationship between China and the United States and
Sof China's readiness to play a fuller part in international affairs.
While Foreign Minister of Australia, and well before President
Nixon's significant and praiseworthy visit to Peking, I had made a
critical re-examination of Australia's China policy, and had announced
our objective of starting on the road to normalise our relations.
We welcomed the seating of China in the United Nations and supported
its accession to permanent membership of the Security Council. At
the same time, we made it clear we were not prepared to abandon our
friendship with Taiwan. l
We are, through various contacts, seeking to establish a dialogue
with China designed to load eventually to the normalisation of relations.
We are also active in the development of two-way trade. In
all this, of course, Australia's national interest is paramount.
We are watching closely China's actions and policy statements,
especially relation to tts declared support for so-called " Wars of
National Liberation". But if we could be convinced by actions as well
as words that China is willing to live at peace with countries with
different social systems, then the uncertainty and anxiety of Australia
and other countries of the region would undoubtedly be reduced. / 3 
The recent visit of President Nixon to Mosco and the results which
so far have been made known also give support to the idea that the
great powers are moving away from confrontation to negotiation and
detente. It is too early, however, to predict with any confidence the
effects of " The Summit" on the various trouble spots in the world
like Vietnam and the Middle East.
Perhaps the most important conclusion is that both sides appeared
to recognise the over-riding importance of not allowing commitments
to third parties to prejudice the vital national interests of both
sides. I
So far as our relations with Russia are concerned, the Australian
Government wants to develop a more normal relationship with thd Soviet
Union. We want to expand mutually beneficial areas of co-operation
such as trade and scientific and cultural exchanges, and the interchange
of visits with Soviet officials. So far the trends have been
somewhat favourable.
Despite these trends, and recognising the legitimate interests of
the Soviet as a world power, we have watched with some concern the
increasing Soviet interest and influence in the Indian Ocean. We do
not think that 1eir oresence constitutes -an immediate and hostile
threat from their naval ships in that ocean. But the increasing
Russian presence is a fact of growing importance to Australia.
Strategically, the Indian Ocean links us to our nearest neighbours
to the North, the coutnries of South-East Asia. We do not want to
see naval or any other form of military competition develop between
the great powers in the area. But we think the Russian activity in
the Indian Ocean is sufficiently significant for us to consult with
the United States and Britain. We believe these two countries share
our concern.
This brings me to Australia's relationship-with the United States
of America. We continue to enjoy what I believe to be a very cordial
and beneficial relationship. The United States has given powerful
leadership in the free world. It has shown courage and determination
in Vietnam, and it has shown clearly that it will not desert its
friends, S
We regard -our own relationship with America as of crucial importance.
This is in no way incompatible with our pursuit of an independent
policy in this region or elsewhere. In fact I believe it is
heloful to the stability of the region that we have this close relationship.
The ANZUS Treaty, as you know, joins us with the United States and
New Zealand in an intimate defence relationship. It is one enduring
expression of the mutual trust and goodwill between us.
Our experience in two world wars, and the events of the 1930' s
and 1960' s brought home to us, as a medium-sized power, the concept
that countries, like people, have a right to security, and that
people and nations are stronger through collective action taken
under and in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We have, since World War II, demonstrated, through
collective security arrangements under the Charter of the United
Nations, our beliefin this concept. / 4 
I believe also that we should be flexible in pursuing defence
assistance and co-operation under the arrangements we have made with
Singapore, Malaysia, Britain and New Zealand. The five Governments
agreed on measures appropriate to their respective needs and interests
in 1971. It was understood then, and is understood, now, that the forces of
the three external countries will remain in Singapore and Malaysia
for so long as the Governments concerned see this as in their interests.
Australia will at all times honor its obligations. My Government
believes that the Five Power Arrnaements will contribute to stability
here, and fill a vacuum. I would stress the continuing relevance and
importance of these Arrangmenets and the significance of the physical
presence of our forces in Singapore and Malaysia.
It goes without saying that Indonesia, Singapore and Malysia and
other countries of South-East Asia to our immediate north are of great
strategic and security interest to Australia. Our concerns are related
less to the immediate security situation than to the fact that the
long-term peace and security of the South-East Asian region is important
to Australia. It is imortant, too, that 7ustralia should maintain an individual
and constructive interest in the politico-economic development of these
countries, and especially to develop relationships with them which
Swill promote economic growth and increased opportunities for mutual
dev-lopment.
My Government accepts and, within the limits of our resources, has
for a number of years been oursuing policies d. signud to achieve these
objectives. I think I can fairly say that we have, as a result,
developed a particularly close bilateral relationship with each of
the Governments of Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia, a relationship
which encompasses a web of mutual concerns and interests across a
wide range of official and non-governmental activities.
ASu stralia has since 1950 provided many millions in aid to development
countries. This has been not loan aid but grant aid, and aid
without strings. We do not ask for debt payments. Let me say frankly
that we have developed such aid programmes not solely for humanitarian
reasons nor through a fear of communism.
I Our basic motivation has been our belief that Australia's stability
and prosperity are closely tied to the stability and prosperity of our
neighbours, and that this in turn depends to a large extent on economic
development and the satisfaction of the needs and wants of the peoples
concerned. Looking at the general field of international trade and economic
development, we have closely watched the evolution of the ' European
Economic Community. With the development of that Community and the
entry of Britain into that Community, Australia has, in its own
interest been seeking for some years to diversify its export trade
and particularly to build up markets in Asia.
We have been successful. Now about 42 per cent of our exports go to
Asia. As part of this orocess, there has been a steady expansion of
mutual trade with countries of South-East Asia, as well as agreement
on joint projects and Australian investment. 
In the reverse direction, there has been some investment in Australia,
and I am sure that these reci~ rocal trends w,-ill intensify during the
coming years. A11s a t%. rFding natioin, Piustralin has traditionally followed
policies designed to encourage liberal multilateral trade, but we have
also recognised the speci al problems of the develoning countries in
seeking tro gain markets for theii products, and hava acted to give
prefor--ntial access in tho 1Au-tralian market to a '&amp; road range of
thoso products.
T'Aere: are othar areas of mutual interost I could discuss such as
civil aviation, telecommunications nnd tourism, education, cultural
and sporting exchanges. In rill of these, Australia is becoming more
closol:&gt; involved in the affairs of South-East Asia.
MyIcnldei hswy I want to stress the imoortance
Austr '. JAa attach-es to the growth of regional co-operation. Coopiaration
on the basis of goodwill and mutual understanding.
We ar. members of several rgiona-l organisrati., r') s, all of which in
their own way are d~ signed to contribute to economic progress and
stability in the region. They include the Colon'bo Plan, theAsa
Develonment Bank and the Economic Commission for hAsia and the Far
East. ( ECA2FE).
1, Caiirman, while I have2 bh'n here, I have se~ en thie impressive
building . which houfao the Regional English Lanquage Centre, and also
Othoe Jurong Vocational Instituta. These arre the result-of the
practical and far-sighted schomo e volved by the South-East A-' Sian
Ministorsof Education, to whlich 17ustralia has lent cffoctive support.
More broadly, we will -ritch with interest and will do what we can
to encourage the activitie s of countries of Sout-East P. sia in seeking
to bu~ ld1 new and more effectiv-: forms of co-operation.
Win Australia, havoe also tzaklen an interest in prooosals being
discus : cd by the ASFAN countries.:-F teo evolve arrangements which might
leaed to the South-East Asian area being declardd a zone of peace and
neutrality. T" ime will show the 1. est way, to-_ se. curPe stability and peace, and
Lustrali~ i stands ready at all time-_ s to discuss . n-ea sures to help achieve
thcsE! obje-ctives.
0In conclusion, Gentlemen, I would repeoat thlat Australia is and
must rnmaln involved in the ouh-as Asia~ ri area. Your security and
stability affect our own security and ztability your prosperity
affects our Prosperity.
I hone and oxncct that we ccontinue to build and develop the mutual
ancd1 friendly relationshins bet-we: n our Governments and between our
neo-, Ies.
The results can Le really rewarding. The conse-quences dramaitic;
the int' erests of the peonle dIevotedly served, and our joint contribution
made to tho neace and s; ecurity of the people of S. utiv-ast Asia 
QUESTIONIS ANJD ANSTWJ2:; S
SINGIAPORE PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON-10 JUNE 1972
Q. You have spoken of Australia's role in South-East Asia and
of your interest in ASEAN. Do you think it is practical for
Australia to seek members hip o~ f 1\ SEan or at least more closely
associated with it C.
PM'~ So far the~ intentions and obj e-ct'vus. of the ASEAN nations
are to keep it clearly within the bounds of the South-East A7, sian
countries themselves. They 4 ve not sought to invite us to
beacome a membar, and althouglh we have taken a very definite
interest in the activities of the ASEAN countries, and of ASEAN
itself as an institution, we have not positively sought to
berome a member and whon wyc h,-) ve asked various countries for
thne reasons -% hy they blvethey should ? eon thcoir pre3sent
meibershirn, we have boon nrenared to accept th~ kt. I believe
it is Proper that tho~ countries thl-emselves sho-uld make up their
own minds and I do not think it would bE prudent in our own
interests if we tried, as it were, to exert on influence on them
tI-o permit us to become a member.
Q. The ALP immigration policy now is that 7people who migrato
to Lustralia they do sc on a ba! is free of consideration of
race, creed or colour. Do you agree with :. this principle
PM only yesterday, talking to the Prime Minister of Singapore,
I informed ' him that I had not come h-3re to take nart in Pa--rty
politics in his country. That I hbelieve is a policy that ought
to be ado'nted not only -by myself but by members of the
Oppcsition as well. I have no intention of becoming embroiled
in this sort of ;,' olitical struggle in Singapore. I like the
place too much and I woant to comae back again.
Q. If understand correctly, you consider your first line of
defence is South-East Asia. Yo-u referred to what you called
11ou generous offer" of military aid to Indonesia is this
part of it
PM I think31 there are many miore influences Involv,; ed in our
relationshipT-with South-FstA, and aruicularly withi
Singanore, Indones: LiI an tCnh ay~ dae fence ones. Because
there is not only defence and security that are important I
believe the relationshins therc are mutual and that our
security is inextricably bound up, the one with the other, so
we want the South-East 7I. sian countries, and narticularly those
witil which 1we have co--onerated very closely in the ' past, to
remain. -rec_ and inde. p-,-ndent. of course, security is one of
the prirmary considerations. But equally, too, based on an
araof peace, we want the whole of South-East Asia to develop.
We wa-nt Indonesia 1we-waant the other countri es that I have
mentiotibd !;-tha'Filininnes, the Thais, the Malays, we want
them to be able to rnrovide decent standards of living, to be
able to have a just and, I believe, a truly humanitarian society.
We have tradD, and becaiusc with trade will also flow great
wealth, so we want our trade relationshiPs to be improved. 12 
6 0 8 L
And it, too, is a better means of being able to understand one
another, and a better means of being able to understand the
psyches and the motivating forces that move the various countries
of South-East Asia, we want the cultural relations between our
two countries to be improved as well. So, looking at this
subject, I can't isolate any one element. I have to look at
it in the most general way and then to be able to decide where
our best interests lie. l1y colleague, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, said only yesterday " Our destiny is inextricably
bound up with yours, and yours with ours", and I think in those
words you will find a crystallisation of all that I think and
all that I feel. And as my feelings in these matters are just
as important on many occasions as the thinking process, could
I say this to you again that there is one thing that I have
found in the few days I have been out of Australia, in Indonesia
and in Singapore, and that is the respect that is held mutually
and the confidence that there is between the two groups of
countries. I believe I go back _ refreshed and I use that word
deliberately and I use it again I go back refreshed with
the discussions I have had here because they have given me a
great deal of confidence in the future security of this area
and its destiny in terms of development and the future I hope
it will offer to the neoples of the various countries I nave
had the good fortune to sea.
I have been based here for a couple of years, living in
this region, and during those two years, the auestion that
has been raised is the question that Asians always put to
Australians about Australia's immiaration policy. I have been
in some very embarrassing situations trying to explain our
immigration policy. LToaving aside the party politics side
of it, I am sure there are a lot of people here who would like
to hear the Prime Minister of Australia say a word or two
about the present immigration policy with regards to Asians.
This is a subject that requires very sensitive handling, and
I hope I will be able to handle it in precisely that way. I
believe, first of all, in terms of conitutional principles,
that every country has the right to determine its own policy
whether it be us, whether it be India, whether it be France,
Germany or any other country. Secondly, I have got to make
it abundantly clear tha. t what we want in Australia is not
only a big immigration programrme, because we have absorbed, well,
certainly well over a million migrants in the course of the
last few years I don't like to specify the exact number of
years but it has takan place. And, consequently therefore,
migrants from other countries have been welcomed in Australia.
But we welcome them on t: is basis, and we want to be sure that
migrants who come to us European, non-European or of partially
non-European stock are capable of being integrated into our
society and of becoming true Australians within a period of one
generation. That is our policy. We have certain....
Jwe try to determine the oace of ncn-Euroreans..... we have
certain conditions we apply. I can't go any further than the
statements I have made, not only in Australia but I made in
Indonesia a few days ago. They are set out vely fully in a
document that has been prepared by my I'inister for Immigration. / 3 
And if you want any further explanation of that policy, I will
get copies of the document as many as you want sent to you
so that there can be a full explanation given to the people
of Singapore. We have our policy. We think it is humanitarian.
We regard it as selective, but it is certainly not racist
because la. st year we did nermit non-Eurooeans and part non-
Europeans to come to Australia to the order of about 9 ,000
people, clearly showing that it is a liberal policy and one
designed to achieve the purpose I have mentioned and that is
to ensure that those who come fit into our community, are
good Australians and play ". their part along with the people
who are there today in ensuring we move along steadily, progressively
towards developments and towards policies that we
regard as not only right and sensible but in the long term
destined to help our own people and are humanitarian in
content. In your discussions here and in Djakarta, what role have you
and the representatives of both Governments been assuming that
Japan will be playing in South-East Asia over the next decade
Australia's attitude and I don't think it is up to me to
be recording the attitudes of other c~ vernments that is for
their Presidents Or Prime Ministers to do so you will forgive
me for not entering into any controversy about this other than
to say that I believe their attitudes on a wide variety of
international affairs are much th; e same as my own and my
Government's. Japan, undoubtedly, is a great power, a great
eo-nnom. c power, and must in time assert increasingly powerful
political influence throughout the Asian theatre, but I do not
believe, at least in the foreseeable future or as far ahead as
we can see that Japnn will become a military power. Second,
we believe that is in the deen interests of Japan, the fundamental
interests of Japan, that it must increasingly take its place
as one of the agencies for develoment in the Asian theatre.
And, consequently, not only must it increase trade in that area,
but lend its material and its financial resources towards
develonment projects there. We feel, too, that due to the Nixon
initiatives not only in Peking, in the People's Republic, but
also in Moscow that the whole of this area becomes as it were
in the cauldron again. But I w-uld liTk to use-the words of
Mr Lee Kuan Yew when he said " It is far too early at this
moment to work out . what the impact of the rapprochement and
detente between these three countries might mean in the Asian
theatre. W'it until the winds have died down. Wait until the
storms and tempests have abated a little bit.." and, particularly
when the dust has abated, we can then have a look around
and find out where it lies in our best interests. Of this I
can assure you that in both cases, we have looked very carefully
to think what the consequences might be, but as yet we look at
various areas where we feel that progress might . be made and
none of us is orepared to make a forecast at the moment of what
the future is likely to hold, certainly in the immediate
future in front of us.
You said in your sneech you believed in collective security
arrangements under the Charter of the United Nations. At the
same time, you say you would like to have the South-East Asian
area declared a zone of peace. Do you mean in the Asian
context, Sir .4 ( C 63
PC,-, x Z_ 
to
a-tL Z_
PM Q. PM Q PM Yes. If the people of the ASEAN countries want peace and
neutrality, yes we would give them whatever support we were
capable of giving. But I , ant to emphasise that our attitude
here is therefore directed towards the ASEAN countries seeking
peace and neutrality. From my own point of view, I have to make
this statement that when we are looking at this problem, of
neutrality or zone of neutrality and peace, we would also beconsidering
in which direction our vital interests lay. And
under no circumstances would we be considering the renegotiating
or the termination of such treaties as the ANZUS Treaty on
which our future depends. But of course if it became a
historical fact that we were asked to give direct support to
the ASEAN countries in order to try and ensure that they were
able to obtain a satisfactory and effective guarantee, international
guarantees of security and integrity and right to live
in peace and freedom, of course we would be willing to consider
what kind of support we could provide in helping to achieve
their objectives.
Sir, you described your Government's immigration policy as
being one based on humanitarian and non-racism. Can you tell
me, Sir, why your Goverrnment discriminates against non-Europeans
in its assisted passage programme.
I don't like to use the word " discrimination", and frankly
I think it is not a term that exactly defines our attitude at
all. The second noint that I want to make about the policy of
assisted nassages is thir. It is designed to ensure that we
get people with the right type of technical background for the
development of our own country. And it was designed at a stage
when it would be critically imnortant that we try and encourage
people with special skills to come there. That is the basis f
of it, and it is in no sense discriminatory in terms of race,
creed or colour. The second noint that I would have to say to
you is this, that having put that as the basic policy of it,
I am not the Minister for Immigration. While I can enunciate
to you what general policy is, I am not an authority on details
associate dwith that our assisted passage programme. What
I do know is that while Biritain will be somewhat reducing,
perhaps in time her contribution to assisted passages, we at
least will be keeping up cur contribution at least as far as
. it happens to be at the moment.
What are your views on the current situation in Vietnamr
please I do keen a pretty careful look at the cables that come
through on Vietnam, and my mood changes between unadulterated
pessimism and then slight optimism. I believe that the North
Vietnamese have carried out an attack which at least in terms
of intensity and severity is as great as the Tot Offensive.
And they have had successes in Phuoc Tuy Province and in Kontum
and An Loc, and makes it extremely serious and doubtful whether
the northern provinces can be held and whether these territories
could be retained by the South Vietnamese. But with the massive
help of Americans supported by the strength of the American
Administration under President Nixon, the South Vietnamese look as
though they are turning the tide back. The centre of Kontum has
now been cleared and is free of North Vietnamese troops. 
Supplies are continuing to be given to them. The.. third
division which was the source of all their trouble in Kontum
and the approaches to Hue, has now been re-established and at
least we can think this way. The South Vietnamese are now
doing pretty well, much better than we cruld have expected a
month ago. All I can do is t: o join with your own Prima
Minister when he said he hoped the day would come when there
could be a negotiated settlement. I hope that, too. When
America could withdraw and withdraw without dishonour, and
particularly those that remain in South Vietnam will be able
to carry out our most precious ideal to determine their own
future free from interference from outside and able to conduct
their lives internally in the way the people themselves choose.
Q The Straits of Malacca has become of late a fairly hot topic.
The countries in the region, particularly Indonesia and
Malaysia would like some form of control of the Straits to
naval vessels. Some major maritime powers notably Japan and
the Soviet Union, have ixpressed strong opposition to such
restrictions. What, if any, is Australia's position on this
issue
PM I did have some very useful discussions with President
Soeharto about the Indonesian's attitude to the Straits of
Malacca and I think I know their attitude very well, so I
understand the attitude of the Singaporeans, not only with
regard to the limit of the territorial sea and the extension
of jurisdiction from three to twelve miles, but also associated
with the problems of nollution. Our attitude is a clear one.
As yet, we have not made up our minds definitively as to what
our policy should be but we are watching the problem very
carefully and we think it is a matter when the United Nations
Conference reconvenes on the law of the sea, that that is the
annrooriate nlace for this nroblem to be discussed and where
the final resolution sho. uld be made.
Q Your Foreign Minister is saying that you have to see that
in the Indian Ocean if the Russians do have a presence there,
you would like to see the Americans have a counterbalance.
Would you care to comment on that Ovr ~ c. R
PM I would have to start off with this preface to you that the
Indian Ocean, of course, is vital to us as it is vital to the
United Kingdom and is of major importance to the United States
as one of the two superpowers in the world. And what we want
to ensure is that the Indian Ocean can remain an area where
people can ply their trade and carry on their rights to a
peaceful passage through that Ocean in accordance with their
own national interests.
We have, it is true, a feeling that we would like to see
therefore, competition reduced to a minimum, knowing always that
the great powers would never be prepared to give up their rights
to move their navies into those oceans Ywhen they felt that
their political interests were involved or their trading had
to be supported. So what do we think We do not believe at
the moment the presence of the Soviet fleets at any given moment
of time present an immediate threat to the security of my own
country. 
PM ( cont'd) But we do know that they are capable of rapid mobilisation
and think they could increase the strength of their merchantgoing
fleets pretty rapidly and can support them by a float
suonort and can let them carry on for a considorable period
of time. So what can I say about this I, of course, would
like to see the area in which neople can move freely without
a great deal of worry or inconvenience from anyone else. I
can't go any further than that at the moment. We are
anxiously watching the position. We cannot see a position
immediatley arising where this idea of the neutrality of the
Indian Ocean is a likelihood, but nonetheless we will keep
this under pretty careful control and will see whether in time
we can't co-ordinate some efforts towards a greater degree of
or a greater reduction of tension and uncertainty than we have
at the moment. 



I PRIME MINISTER
VISIT TO INDONESIA, SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA
STATE DINNER
KUALA LUMPUR
Speech by the Prime Minister, The Rt Hon.
William McMahon, M. P. 12 JUNE 1972
Mr Prime Minister, Mr Deputy Prime Minister, Honourable Ministers,
Distinguished Guests
I want, immediately, to say how pleased I am to be here again.
And to express my appreciation of the welcome you have given me. I
have been here before and I have a vivid recollection of my visit
during the emergency in the early fifties. It is good to be back.
And thank you, Sir, for your generous hosnitality tonight.
In such an atmosphere we find a happy combination of dignity
and informality, and that kind of onen-hearted friendship we associate
with Malaysia and its peonle.
Prime Minsiter, Australia and Malaysia are old friends. You
mentioned this as the basis of our close and continuing co-Aperation
in important fields of activity. I endorse most strongly what you
have said. We have had many years of shared experience in both war and peace,
and our association has solid foundations because of our membership
of the Commonwealth, the similarity of our institutions, and our common
security, economic and social interests.
But there is more to our relations than past history. It is
commonplace to say that we are facing an uncertain world. The future
is always unpredictable not the least in South-East Asia, in the
centre of which Malaysia lives and to which Australia is so closely
bound. I belive we have the same objectives as we face these uncertainties
We are indeoendent countries, each following policies which seem to us
best adapted to securing our national objectives. Both of us want
the countries of the region to be free and independent, sturdily based,
stable and self= reliant, and socially nrogressive. Both of us wish
to see them free from external threat and interference. We want them
to live in harmony, and to grow in prosperity. 
Against this background, Prime Minister, I am glad the opportunity
has been presented to discuss these matters of common interest with you.
I valued our private talks this morning, which I found refreshing,
informative and helpful.
For Australia, Sir, our national interest is clear and 3asily
understood. We are not a great nower, though not a small one We
pose no threat to our neighbours and have neither the aspiration nor
the capacity to impose our views on them.
We in Australia believe, Sir, that peace in Asia is indivisible.
We look to a negotiated settlement in Vietnam which will permit the
people of the South to determine their own future. Beyond that we
look towards an accommodation with China based on mutual resnect and
without preconditions.
And we look to the day when internal subversion and insurgency
will not be supported by external powers a situation in which a
stable, tolerant, outward-looking Australia can continue to play a
co-operative and helpful role in the South-East Asian region.
Our desire, our logical and permanent interest is to have stable,
reliable and prosperous neighbours with whom we may maintain close
relations of mutual understanding, respect and friendship. We want
our association with each other to reflect the deen community of
interest between ourselves and our friends.
In seeking these things I believe we can build an even closer
relationshin between Australia and Aalaysia. It is also well recognised
that, to achieve freedom, security, social justice and sustained
progress in the region, will be a long and difficult task.
The first requirement will be national strength in all its
forms for that is the best deterrent to external interference.
The second requirement willbe to develop co-operation between regional
states. Malaysia has made a significant contribution to regional
co-operation especially through its initiative in launching ASEAN,
It has shown leadership in working for closer contacts between
South-East Asian countries, and helping to develop an enlightened
community of interest. We in Australia welcome these developments and
wish your success.
t this point, Prime Minister, I want to pay tribute to your own
personal leadership in the imaginative policies which Malaysia has
been pursuing, not only inthe international field, but also in
domestic affairs, notably through the Second Malaysia Plan.
Among statesmen your name stands high. We respect you, Sir,
and Malaysia for the vigorous independent spirit you show.
Your country is master of its own house and destiny, progressive
in its ideas and resolute in its performance.
Your proposal forthe neutralisation of South-East Asia under
effective international guarantees is an important initiative. We
see this proposal as clear evidence of your desire to work towards
a free and indeoendent South-East Asia, undeterred by the complexities
which inevitably are involved in such an understaking. / 3 
Time will show the best way to secure stability and peace,
and Australia is always ready to discuss measures to help achieve
those objectives.
I am gratified that in our talks this morning we agreed that
there are no * problems between us. Defence co-operation between
Australia and Malaysia is on a sound footing. We agreed that the
Five Power Defence Arrangments are the framework within which we
co-operate closely and are of value to us both.
I was delighted to have your assurance, Prime Minister, that
the presence of Australian forces, both land and air is welcome. The
arrangements are working smoothly and we are happy about them. We
also agreed that the presence of Australian air force units continues
to be of value to us both.
It goes without saying that Australia will at all times honour
its obligations. Prime Minister, there are other significant links between
Australia and Malaysia which are forged by mutual national interests.
The trade between our two countries has grown over recent years
and we look forward to steady progress in the future, and Australian
companies are learning more about Malaysia as a field of investment
especially through joint ventures.
You said, Prime Minister, that Malaysia would " welcome
Australia as partners in your development efforts This idea of
partnership is very close to our hearts in our won development Where
foreign investment is concerned. And so, Sir, we hope to see
increased activity in Malaysia by Australian companies in partnership
with yours. There is, I know, considerable and growing interest by
Australian companies in this prospect.
In the area of Government-to-Government economic co-operation
we have, of course, longstanding and active programmes through the
Colombo Plan. and through direct bilateral arrangements.
We are ready to contribute, ac'cording to your own wishes, and
our own capacity, towards the success of the Second Malaysia Plan.
We have always been willing to do what we can to assist Malaysia in
technical expertise.
To these specific links we add other associations, which may
in time p~ rove to be the most imnortant of all. I refer to the education
of the young people -both countries on the ways, history and culture
of each other's homeland, and to the development of cultural relations.
This reflects the great interest Australians are now showing
in their neighbours There are many facets of this interest.
But certainly a strong and stimulating influence has been the
large number, now over 5,000 of Malaysians students in Australia.
To this I add the increasing number of businessmen and tourists
moving between our countries. Thisj helps to promote understanding
' between our people and yours in human terms and has, of course, direct
-Dractical benefit. ./ 4 
4.
For it is 7* hen the friendships of Government are backed by
friendships among the people that we get a relationship of enduring
value, and rich in the-benefits it conveys to all.
I believe, Sir, Malaysia and Australia should always walk the
ways f Deace together.
I believe that the ideals we share are those that unite. And
that in giving them free expression, each according to our national
responsibilities and resources, we can help to build a better world.
I thank you, Prime Minister, for the honour you do my country
tonight. TAnd now I should like to propose a toast to your health
and to the friendship of our two countries. 



CHECK AGAINST DrLIVF. RY-BEFOE 11 A ( EST)
PRIME MINISTER
OFFICIAL OPEHIN~ G OF THE CRITICAL FACILITY AT THE
ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION,
LUCAS HEIGHTS, SYDNEY
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Pt. Hon. William McMahon,
CH, T-P 19 JU11E 1972
Twelve years ago, my distinguished friend and
colleague, Sir Robert Menzies, spoke here on a similar occasion.
And he said he helieved Lucas H~ eights was a significant event in
our national development. And he went on to forecast that this
establishment would produce many practical results for Australia.
Sir Robert was, of course, referring particularly to the role of
Lucas Heights in developing the technical experience we will need
when the time comes for Australia to embark on a commercial
nuclear power nrrrumm.
It is pretty well accepted now that by the end of
the seventies, one or more of our State generating authorities
will be building a nuclear power plant. Thereafter, more will
follow. It is not too much to say that if events develop as
predicted, Australia could be involved in a ver * y large capital
investment in nuclear power plants before the end of the century.
DHany of you are well aware of how essential it will
be that we go into such a programme equipped with sound technical
advice about the efficiency and safety of reactors and other
nuclear facilities. This critical facility is, I am told, a powerful tool
for making studies directly related to this objective. The machine
was built by a French engineering~ firm, , working with Australian
industry and the Commission's scientists and engineers.
Our recent agreemaent with Japan will also be important
to our understanding of the future application of atomic energy
for peaceful purooses. We also co-operate with the United Kingdom,
the United States and Canada.
It will be seen, therefore, that the leading nations
of the world in the extraordinarily complex field of nuclear
energy have been willing to share the benefits of their work with
US. ./ 2 
We occupy a seat on the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic E~ nergy Agency as the nation most advanced in
atomic energy in the South-East Asia and the Pacific region. But
we do not have the technical nor financial resources even to attempt
to take a place in the forefront of nuclear reactor development,
and if I may be allowed to emphasise it here, today, there is no
reason why we should seek to dIO so.
But we do make our contribution to the pool of
atomic energy knowledgre, and we do help our Asian and Pacific
neighbours through the loan of technical ex ' perts and equipment. We
also receive Agency and Colomnbo Plan fellows for training and
experience in nuclear matters.
This new facility will both contribute to our
objectives and extend our ability to collaborate with other
countries. For these reasons I am glad to have the opportunity
to open it today. My colleague, Sir Reginald Swartz, has already
reminded us of the benefits which are flowing to the community from
this centre. In the years to come, nuclear energy will help ease
our power problems. Most industrially advanced countries are now
either building nuclear power stations, or preparing to do so.
More than 100 plants are already in service and about twice as
many are being built or are on order.
We can expect nuclear Dower in the 1980' s'and
to account for an increasing proportion of Australia's new
generating capacity. On a per capita basis, we have one of the
fastest rising power demands in the world. one estimate that has
been given to me is that by the end of this century, one-third of
our electricity could come from nuclear stations. It is claimed
that by that time more than 50 per cent of the world's electricity
could Le so supplied. Such predictions have major implications in such
diverse fields as foreign affairs, finance, industry and commerce.
Within the Atomic Energy Comrmission, we have the experts to advise
on all technical aspects of nuclear power. They have done wideranging
research into all aspects of the control of radiation from
nuclear installations. And over a long period, they have made
close and careful investigations of possible effects on the environment,
including on marine life, and on flora and fauna.
But uranium is not only an industrial material. It
is a strategic material of high importance that involves the Commonwealth
in certain obligations. Every country in the world which
produces or uses fissile material imposes Government control for
considerations of national security, and to honour international
obligations, Australia must do likewise. / 3 
-3
Before our first uower station is built, there
must be a necessary framework of regulations and administrative
practices to provide such controls. We arc working constructively
with the States to achieve thes~ e objectives. Thcre can be no
better means of ensuring thait nuclear power will be introduced to
Australia on a safe, economic and responsible basis.
it is clear from what I have said that Australia's
role in nuclear energy is concerned with its peaceful uses. The
harnessing of this great force of energy for the benefit of mankind
is one of the areatest challenges of this generation.
The task is twofold: We must learn to use the
technology in peaceful pursuits, and we must contain and eventually
dissuaqe its potential uses for warfare and destruction.
it is difficult for some people to accept that in
the modern world even in cases where there arise differences on
certain major issues there can still be co-operation on others.
For example, the United States and the Soviet Union hold basic
differences on many great international issues. Yet President
Nixon and Mr Brezhnev were able last month to make a major step
forward in the vital field of world disarmament.
They have slowed down the nuclear arms race, and
they have done it in the cnntext-%. of maintaining a balance of
strategic interests. I sent a message of warm congratulation to
Mr Nixon for this achievement.
I would like to go back a little on Australia's
record in these matters, because this is an area in which I very
sincerely regret to say that France has failed to respond, despite
our co-operation in other areas.
Many years ago, in 1963, a partial nuclear test
ban treaty was concluded. Australia took its stand when it ratified
that treaty. It specifically bans tests in the atmosphere, outer
space and under water. It is unmistakeably clear that our present
attitude is not a nev, one.
Our attitude at the Plenary Session at Stockholm
was in accordance with long-existing policy. When the Australian
Government ratified the partial test ban treaty, it was strongly
opposed to the conduct of tests of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere,
wherever they occurred. This remains our strong policy. It is
therefore completely wrong to say that a new policy was developed
at Stockholm. In line with our long-standing policy, we have
repeatedly conveyed to the French Government, as you, Your
Excellency, have repeated and confirmed, through the proper channels
and in the most unequivocal terms the firm opposition of the
Australian Government and peonple to the French nuclear tests in
the Pacific. / 4 
Australia was the first country to protest against
these tests in 1972. AMnd we have repeated those protests. We
will continue to do so, by whatever means are properly avajable to
us to exert whatever pressures we can to bring about a cessation
of these tests and all atmospheric nuclear tests for all time.
The Austialian Government is dedicated to upholding
the partial nuclear test ban treaty. That is our policy; it has
not changed. We will continue to work within the framework of
international negotiation and consultation with the United States
and others so vitally concerned with the difficult technical issues
underlying questions of world peace, including a more comprehensive
treaty. But central to our policy is a clear and frank
unqualified opposition to atmospheric testing. Let there be no
misunderstanding on this score. I and my Government want the
present tests abandoned. Further, we have taken every reasonable step we
can to persuade our French friends to cease them. You will be
aware, Mr Ambassador, that I have already conveyed personally to
the President of France the views that I have now expressed.
And I want to confirm to yo~ u that none of the
explanations you have given would in any way, in any shape at
all, change my, or my Government's attitude, or the Australian
people's attitude, to the atmospheric testing by any country.
And I say this, notwithdranding the comments you have made about
the protests that have been made by my Government to your
Government itself. This Facility I am opening today is, I emphasise,
designed for peaceful purposes. It will assist our researchers
to develo in co-operation with the States, our capacity to use
nuclear energy for the generation of electric power.
So I am glad to have the opportunity of officially
opening this Facility, and at the same time to be able to set out
the Government's reasons for building it. It will undoubtedly be
an essential tool for our research workers, and I have now much
pleasure in declaring it open. 



SAUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER
FOURTH NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 21 JUNE 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon,
CH, MP.
Mr Chairman, Gentlemen It is a pleasure to be the guest of the Institute tonight,
to have the opportunity of talking to so many distinguished visitors,
and to such a representative gathering of leaders of Australian
business and industry.
I would have liked to have sp. okn to you in a freewheeling
fashion about the recent visit I have made overseas, because not only
was it a memorable one for me, but I do believe in the presence of
some of those people whose Governments were good enough to look after
me whilst I was away that they did show their great liking for
this country and and spoke of what they saw to be the wonderful
prospects in front of us.
But I think you can take it for granted that wherever
I went they showed a disosition to look to Austraa for assistance,
they looked to Australia for comradeship and for friendship and they
had implicit trust in the belief that this country will, in their
time of need, come to their help and come to their assistance.
So for that reason, I wanted to speak to you in the
presence of so many : istinguished guests, and say something to you.
Instead not in a freewheeling. because as Prime Minister that is
impossible under certain circumstances and so therefore I will
keep pretty closely to a text I have already prepared.
I think most of you will know that I have been visiting
three of our near neighbours in South-East Asia first of all
Djakarta, then Singapore and later on Kuala Lumpur. Naturally
the events of that journey are very much in my mind, particularly
as I have here on my left-hand side a colleague whom I have learnt
to respect and who I think is just as interested in not only the
South Pacific countries but also in the countries to the countries
to the North, and who realises that the our destinies of New
Zealand and ourselves our greatest friend is New Zealand
and these other countries are inextricably bound up and that their
destinies will inevitably affect what happens in our own countries.
And, too, it was an appropriate time for me to be there
because only recently President Nixon had completed his visits to
Peking and to Moscow. Also, there is no doubt at all of the changes
that are occurring, economically, socially and politically not only
in the countries that I visited but indeed in the whole of South
East Asia and the Western Pacific as well. 
2
Japan and I say this, Mr Saito in your presence
as you know, has emerged as a very great power and I think in the not
too distant future, you will see its political influence ex pnding,
and particularly will see a greater attempt at rapprochement with
its nearest and big nighbour immediately to the West.
Britain, of course, will be going into the Common
Market quite soon and that must have an impact on us of the size and
of the duration that for the moment we cannot foretell.
And, of course, there are also problems of our own
stability and growth. rhu QOD
These all give us, I believe, a very significant role to
play in the South East Asian and Pacific region. I hope therefore
you will bear with me if I mention some points of importance as they
affect Australia and our relations with our Asian friends. And then
I would like to refer more particularly to trade and investment
and in truth, this is exactly what I want to speak to you about tonight.
I went to Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia as Prime
Minister of Australia because our relationships there have a direct
bearing on our defence and security arrangements and on our economic
activities. I had no domestic arguments to export, and I think this
is one of the reasons that wherever I went and it was learnt that I
was not going to engage in political activities whilst I was overseas,
that we were able to talk so frankly and so freely together while our
relationships not only improved but I doubt whether they could have
been very much better.
I wanted simply to do what I could to strengthen our
friendships and increase our understandings on these vital matters,
and I believe the mission did exactly that. This came across very
strongly in my talks with the Heads of Government in the three countries,
with their administrations, and I believe with the people themselves.
Because you do get an impression and I speak of only
one capital and that was Djakarta.... it was unbelievable for a person
like myself who hadn't been a Prime Minister for very long, to drive
through throngs of children, probably as many as twenty or thirty
thousand, they knowing you are Australian and ready to cheer for the
fact that you have come from this wonderful country of ours.
The official and private talks just could not have been
freer and friendlier, nor more outspoken or have taken us more into
their confidence. Wherever we went, the press, radio and television
gave us a fair go, and I can impress that upon you.
I had what I felt was a good meeting of minds with
President Soeharto of Indonesia, Pr we Minister Lee Kuan Yew of
Singapore and Prime Minister Tun Razak of Malaysia. They, too and I 
64 i1
3
can confirm this they expressed appreciation of what we were
doing and of our great interest in their countries. They wanted
that interest to develop and they kept impressing on me their
desirability that Australian businessmen should go there and should
take part in the development of their own companies and of the
companies to which they were going.
I believe that te visit has helped to strengthen the
security of Australia and generally opened up new prospects for
closer relationships in the future in all manner of ways. It was a
most encouraging and stimulating experience for me and all the members
of my party. There was between Indonesia and us a complete
understanding of how each is contributing to better security and
to better prospects for economic growth in South-East Asia. We
are co-operating very closely.
In Singapore and Malaysia we again found a complete
accord at the highest levels and in their own words, there were
no issues between us because we are of the same mind. And that,
too, was a worthwhile contribution to our own security and the
security of the region.
0 Now, Mr Chairman, may I elaborate a little on my
discussions in South-East Asia on trade and investment. I had a
senior member of the Department of Trade and Industry with me, and
we had most constructive discussions in all three countries we
visited. They ranged over a wide area finance and banking,
trade and development, aid, particularly economic aid and defence
aid as well. And what struck me most in all these discussions was
the differences that there were in the various stages of development.
What they are concerned to do in each of the countries is to create
new employment opportunities for their people. This means they seek
to raise living standards progressively in the years ahead.
Unfortunately, and I say this with deep feeling, their
resources of investment capital and foreign exchange particularly
in Indonesia and Malaysia are far too limited, and they look to
us, not only for support, but understanding as well.
Increasingly, they regard Australia as a growing market
for their exports and as a source of capital funds. Trade between
the countries in thn region has been growing over recent years and
undoubtedly will continue to expand in the future. t
Many Australian firms have already taken advantage of
the special incentives provided by these countries for foreign
investment and have established operations in the South-East Asian
area. I believe that Australia has reached a stage in its economic
development which allows us to adopt a much more liberal attitude
towards overseas investment by Australian firms. This was the
subject of a statement by my colleague, the Treasurer, in the
Parliament in February. / 4 
4
At that time, Mr Snedden said
" Direct investment accompanied by exports of technical
know-how and managerial skills which give the Australian
enterprise a role in the conduct of an overseas venture,
is an important means by which Australia can contribute
to development and growth of other countries. This is
particularly true of countries in the Pacific and South-
East Asian region."
I fully endorse his view. And I can assure you from
my personal contacts how much Australian investment is welcomed
in the region. In Indonesia, I unveiled the foundation stone for a
new factory which will produce glass containers, probably between
to 25 per cent of their total requirements. The major partner
was an Australian company, Australian Consolidated Industries.
And if I can say this, one of the disappointing moments
I had going through Djakarta was to see branch banking systems of
the great American banks such as Chase Manhattan and First National
City and banks from the Continent and other olaces. But to my
surprise, even to my anguish, I found there wasn't a single
Australian branch bank there. Butnow we are moving to
establish representative banks, and Indonesia has closed off the
prospect of further branch bankincg systems being estabished there.
In Singapore, I visited a very successful Australian
factory Besley Pike at the Jurong Industrial Estate.
These factories are tangible examples of the role of
private Australian capital in the economic development of the area.
Arrangements have already bceen put in hand which I
believe will lead to even better trade relations and economic
co-operation. The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade
and Industry, Doug Anthony, will visit Indonesia early in July for
important trade talks including the review of our bilateral trade
agreement. Similarly, we have advised the Malaysian authorities
of our readiness to review our trade agreement with that country
when they are ready to do so. In both cases, the reviews would be
aimed at ensuring that the trade agreements reflect the current
nature of our trading relationships and cater for the high level of
interest in trade with, and investment in, Indonesia and Malaysia. 
5
I have also said that we are prepared to consider
additions to the list of itcms already covered by our system of
tariff preferences for developing countries.
Itis now generally recognised that it is essential to
establish a closer relationship between our respective business
leaders. An Austraian/ Indonesian Business Co-operation Committee
has already been established. It is very encouraging to note the
large number of senior Australian businessmen who have joined together
to promote this organisation.
I have suggested, in conversation with iTn Razak, that a
similar arrangement be made with Malaysia, and I hope that Australian
businessmen will become interested in it. When I raised this question
with the Malaysian Finance Minister, he mentioned they were so
anxious to get our investment and the possibility of getting a far
greater degree of investment there, that they would use their Capital
Dsvelopment Council as the vehicle for developing links with
Australian manufacturers, And whilst I am not in a position where I would be able
tc commit either the Malaysian Government or the Capital Investment
Council itself, I do believe that if Australian business interests
were prepared to have discussions with that Investment Council or
the management of that Investment Council, they would see they are
willing to provide incentives for investment opportunities there.
The private sector advisory panel of the Council might, as
Tun Razak and the Minister for finance thought, be an appropriate
mechanism by which you could, if you wished to, make contact and try
and ensure that that contact was successful.
Now, gentlemen: it is one thing for governments to
express a desire for closer economic relationships. However, at
the end of the day, the ultimate decisions on individual investment
projects or commercial transactions must be taken by the businessmen
themselves. The main purpose of these Committees will be to enable
business leaders in our respective countries to meet and review
problems and prospects relating to mutual trade and investment.
There were a number of other matters raised in the course
of our discussions. These will be pursued further through normal
diplomatic channels. 
6
I am wholly satisfied of the scope and need for greater
Australian participation in economic development in South-East
Asia. I think I can assure you that there is sincere goodwill
towards Australia and also that the regard for individual Australians
is very high. I have, too, taken this problem up with both the Treasury
itself and the Reserve Bank and we will shortly be as we have
recently produced a paper on international investment we will
very shortly be putting down a paper in the House that will deal
with this problem of investment by Australians overseas.
Now, Mr Chairman, these activities, of course, have to be
locked at in the context of our overall trade and investment
position, and I will conclude with some general observations about
that. In all external economic transactions, the balance of
payments is maintaining a very strong position with record performances
developing in a number of areas in the current year. In the first
nine months of 1971/ 72; exports rose more than $ 403 million above
S the level in the corresponding neriod of 1970/ 71. The more recent
figuces for May indicate that this trend has been accelerating.
For 1971/ 72 as a whole, exports could well be about $ 4,800 million.
I remember when I was Treasurer and we got to a figure
of somewhere about $ 2,400 million, we thought it was an occasion
for celebration, Now this was achieved despite some slowdown in the growth
of exports of mining products ( turning to Mr Saito)... I won't
continue because he knows the answer and you know the answer too.
I believe myself it is only a temporary slowdown in our exports to
one of the great countries to our north.
Firmer prices overseas for a number of rural products have
led to a substantial growth of rural exports, and exports of
S manufacturers have grown very rapidly this year. In contrast,
imports, reflecting the slower rate of growth in the level of domestic
activity, have risen much less than exports.
In consequence, the balance of trade surplus ie currently
running at more than double the level at this time last year, and
looks like achieving a record level around $ 100 million for 1971/ 72.
On the invisibles transactions, the net deficit has continued to
increase, but at a slower rate than in recent years. This improvement,
combined with the arger trade surplus, has made a significant reduction
in the current account deficit, which may be less than $ 400 million
in 1971/ 72 as a whole. This is the smallest current account deficit
for almost a decade. / 7 
7
If I can go back a little, I can well remember in the
time of the Menzies Government, when we used to think of having
current account deficits not of $ 400 million but we would talk
of them in the thousands and probably the two thousands.
So what it does indicate to me is the ability of the
Australian, not only to produce, but to got out and sell, and to
get out and compete and to win in international company.
But I believe when I read of recent exploits of the
Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd., in winning the contracts it did in the
Eurcpean markets, again it confirmed my belief in the Australian
manufacturer and the Australian producer, and their ability to do
the job when they have the opportunity and the will to do so.
We have also had a very strong increase in caoital inflow.
This brings with it certain problems which we are examining. The
overall balance of payments outcome in 1971/ 72 will thus be one of
substantial surplus, perhaps of the order of $ 1,500 million. This
surplus on external account places us well to meet the various
challenges and uncertainties which lie ahead.
In particular, the international monetary situation,
although it has settled down in recent months from the turmoil of the
second half of 1971, still has some way to go before we can have
Scomplete confidence in its viability. Discussions on possible long
term changes in the system could begin later this year.
If I can now say this. In some of the visits we have
had in recent weeks, particularly by Governor Connally, and some
of the talks I have had with my colleagues, as for example, with
my colleagues, the New Zealanders, have all indicated to me how
desirable it is that the sooner we can come to grips with this
problem of foreign exchanges to try and get them more stable, the
better it will be for us. And I do hope, Mr Prime Minister, and
I express this in your presence, that you will be thinking of
entering the OECD and Working Party No. 3, and when that happens,
if there has to be a group of 20, that you will join with us in
seeing that multilateral exchanges and multilateral trade are for
the benefit of our two countries.
So discussions on possible long-term changes in the
system will go on and I hope we can start very soon. As well,
a very important round of multilateral trade negotiations is scheduled
to begin in 1973, equivalent to the Kennedy Round negotiations which
are so beneficial to world trade. On the domestic front a review of
the tariff is in progress.
These developments in the monetary and trade fields could
have important implications for our external economic position.
I / 8 
8-
In the shorter term, the Government h * as in recent
months acted to stimulate the level of demand and economic
activity. Nevertheless, on present indications we can expect the
balance of payments to continuc in strong surplus in 1972/ 73.
These large and continuing balance of payments surpluses
can bring their own problems, just6 as balance of payments deficits
can. The Government will therefore be watching closely developments
on the external account in the months ahead.
If I can just make an interpolation to what I have
just said, fortunately for us now as the development of the work
of the Government Statistician, and the private and Commonwealth
banking system, we can now identify in a way that we have never
been able to do not only the source but the first use of the funds
that are coming to Australia. And this I can to you, . the
very largest proportion of the money that is coming in is for
direct investment, and is therefore making its contribution to the
growth and development of this community.
I am confident, therefore, that by maintaining the
flexibility which has been a characteristic of our economic
management, we can deal with new situations as they arise, and
justify the confidence which I believe is now beginning to flow
quite strongly from the business community.
Our neighbours in South-East Asia made it clear to me
that they regard Australia as a country making a considerable
contribution to stability in the region. We must continue to
justify that confidence by our performance at home and by our
readiness to explore new prospects abroad.
I hope everyone of you as a businessman here will
have the opportunity to visit each of the countries I visited.
You will get a reception of a kind that you will find unexpected
but generous and warm. But above all things I believe that if
you do go, end you go with enthusiasm, you will find that not only
can you do much to get expansion of trade on behalf of your
own companies, but also you will be able to make your contribution
to inter-country development prospects, inter-country trade
developments, and by this means, you can make the four of us
much more wealthy, and our prospects much brighter that I gather,
Sir Robert, was conveyed to you by some of the speakers this
morning, and later on this afternoon.. 



Premiers' Conference and Loan Council Meetin!)-
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
William Mcahion, C. li iP
22 June 1972
This has been my fourth meeting with the Premiers in
this forum since I became Prime Minister.
The three previous meetings were all characterized
by a genuine effort by all parties to reach accommodations
which took account of the problems of all of us. I am
delighted to be able to say that the same atmosphere of
warm and friendly co-operation has once again characterized
this meeting. Our discussions on the States' fi1nancial. positions and
requirements were greatly assisted by the States making
available to us in advance of'the meeting extensive information
on their financial positions and prospeCts. We appreciate
their cc-operation in this.
The discussions today have been conducted with great
freedom and frankness. As a result I feel that we all have a
greater understanding of the problems each of us faces.
The Commonwealth, for its part, entered the discussions
anxious to do what it could to assist the States in meetin5T theirheavy
responsibilities. We know that they have great pressures
upon them. All sections of the community have their ox'm
requests to make. Each, naturally enough, sees its own
problems as being of greatest moment. The State governments are
therefore faced with a great variety of competing demands, which
they have to deal with in some order of priority. 
-2
The Commonwealth is in a similar situation. One of
its highest priorities, however, is the need to enable the
States to meet their responsibilities. The allocation of
funds for this purpose is the greatest single element in the
Commonwealth Budget.
Against this background we approached this meeting
with the firm reso" lve that we had to reac~ h a fair and equitable
agreement with the Premiers, having in mind both their
responsibilities and the other responsibilities facing the
Commonwealth. I am glad to be able to say that we have
succeeded in reaching such an agreement.
The elements of this agreement are as follows:-
Revenue Assistance Additional assistance in the form of a permanent
increase of $ 112 million to the financial assistance grants
will be provided by the Commonwealth in 1972-73.~ This amount
will be built into the formula grants for the purpose of
calculating the grants for subsequent years, and will be
distributed in proportion to the 1971-72 formula grants as
escalated in 1972-73 under the formula.
In addition to this extra $ 112 million, the
Commonwealth will provide further amounts of approximately
$ 7.1 million to New South Wales and $ 5.4 million to Victoria
in 1972-73 by increasing the per capita payments over ' and above
their formula grants by $ 1.50 from the present $ 2 to $ 3.. 50.
The per capita payments, as increased, will be added to the
formula grants for the purpose of calculating the grants in
future years. A further amount of $ 3.5 million will, be paid to
Western Australia in 1972 -73 as a special temporary addition to that 
3.
State's financial assistance grant in that year.
Borrowing Pro rammes
Works and housing programme
The borrowing programme for State governments will
total $ 982 million, an increase of $ 90 million or 10.1 per cent
over 1971-72. Of the total, $ 248.5 million will be in the
form of a grant, and ', 733.5 million will represent borrowings
to be arranged by the Commonwealth.
Larger authorities programme
The borrowing programme for the larger (" semi-government")
authorities will be $ 488 million, an increase of $ 49 million or
11.2 per cent over 1971-72. The basic programme will total
$ 466 million, and to this will be added a permanent addition
of $ 10 million to New South Wales' share of the programme, and
special temporary allocations of $ 3 million for Queensland
and $ 9 million for Western Australia.
Smaller authorities programme
The practice of recent years of not imposing any
limit on the over-all amount to be borrowed by smaller
authorities will be continued. The limit on borrowings by
individual authorities in this category will be raised from
$ 300,000 to S400,000, thereby adding an amount conservatively
estimated at 310 million to their total borrowings in 1972-73.
Non-Metronolitan Unemplo rment Relief Grants
The amount being provided by the Commonwealth for the
relief of non-metropolitan unemployment will be increased from
million to 6 million monthly. This increase will operate to
the end of 1972, before which date the scheme will again be reviewed.
Details of these decisions, and the distribution of the
various amounts between the States, are shown in the tables attached. 
SUIMIARY OF AIDDITIONAL FINANTCE FOR STATES, 1972-73*
S million
( i)( 2)( 3)
Additional Revenue Grants Increase in
Works and
Housing Programmes Total ( 11) and ( 2) Increase in
" Larger"
Authorities Pro gramnme s
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Total 44.3 33.1 17.6 12.0 15.9 5.1
128.0 28.6 23.0 11.4 12.3 8.4 6.3
90.0 72.9 56.1 29.0 24.3 24 .3
11.4
218.0 21.4 11.6 7.5 1.7 7.7
-0.7
49.2
* It must be emphasised that the revenue grants figures shown are not comparable with those shown
for the increases in the borrowing programmes. The former represent the additional assistance
to be granted in 1972-73 over and above that which would be paid under existing legislation,
whereas the latter represent increases over last year's levels. ( 4) Total 94.3
67.7 36.5 26.0 32.0 10.7
267.2 
1. Revenue Grants to States in 1972-73
million)
Estimated
Financial Assistance
Grants under
existing legislation
479.1 362.1 252.1 169.1 182.5 75.9
1,518.8 $ 124.5 million
addition to
F. A. Gs
33.1 17.6 12.0 12.4 5.1
124.5 Temporary
revenue assistance
3.5 3.5
2. Loan Council Borrowing Programmes
million)
Works and Housing
New South Wales
Victoria Queer. sland
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Grant 79.0
63.4 51.4 34.0
23.2 17.4
248.5
Authorities borrowing Borrowing 25533.3 187.1 92.8
100.6 68.5 Total 312.53
250.5 124.2 134.6 91.7 Larger authorit
159.5 91.7 25.7 32.8
51.2 68.6 14.4
753.5 982.0 488.0
over $ 400,000 individually during ; ies Total
478.2 410.0 215.9 158.3 124.5 85.0
1,470.0
the year
3. Local Authority Programme
The limit on individual borrowings by the smaller authorities
was raised from $ 300,000 to $ 400,000. It is conservatively estimated
that, as a result of this increase, the smaller authorities might borrow
some $ 10 million in excess of the amount they might otherwise have
raised. The practice of imposing no over-all limit on borrowings by these
authorities has been continued.
4. Non-metropolitan UnemDloyment Relief Grants
( 000ooo)
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Total New monthly grant
2,510 1,350 1,200 360
450 330
6,000
N. S. W.
Tas. Total 523.4 395.2 269.7 181 .1
198.4 79.0
1,646.8 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER R
22 JUNE 1972
A large number of items have been listed for
consideration at this Conference, and there is also a
full quota of Loan Council business to be transacted.
It is our hope and I presume that it would also
be the hope of the Premiers that, while giving the
matters before us the attention their importance warrants,
we will be able to conduct our discussions on them
expeditiously, and with mutually satisfactory results.
The central object of our attention will, of
course, be the general financial position and prospects
of the States.
The extensive information which your Treasuries
have provided to the Commonwealth Treasury has helped
considerably towards our understanding of your position,
both as regards your revenue budgets and as regards
borrowing programmes, and the problems confronting you.
We appreciate that co-operation. For our part, we want
to do what we can within the limits that our own budgetary
requirements impose upon us to help you with your problems.
I suggest that we should move straight to discussion
on the States' finances generally, and that this discussion
be carried forward in private session where you could tell
us anything you might wish to say in confidence to
supplement the information and advice already available
to us. By approaching the main matters before us in this
way and first reaching general understandings on them, we
would then be well placed to make good progress with the
many other particular items listed for consideration both
in Premiers' Conference and Loan Council. 



OPENING OF SEVENTEENTH SEATO COUNCIL MEETING
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William McMahon
M. P. 27 June, 1972.
Gentlemen: I welcome you as distinguished delegates to the 17th meeting
of the Council of the South East Asia Treaty Organisation.
Although we are in the depths of winter here in Canberra, I assure
you that our welcome to delegates and their wives, and staff, is
a warm and sincere one. I particularly want to welcome General
Vargas, the retiring Secretary-General. We have known him as a
dynamic and energetic personality. I know, as a former delegate
and so does anyone else who has been connected with SEATO that in
the rugged tenacity and strength of purpose of General Vargas, SEATO
has no greater champion.
The South East Asian Treaty Organisation has occupied an
important position in the affairs of the South East Asian region
since its formation in 1954. Notwithstanding the many changes since
that time, it still has a meaningful role to play so long as
external threats remain to the peace and security of member and
protocol states, the continuing importance of the Manila Treaty
remains self-evident.
That Treaty has contributed to the stability of the region
for almost eighteen years and the Organisation has provided the
machinery for co-operation between member countries. Neither should
we forget that because of its obvious security value to regional
members and protocol states SEATO also contributes to regional
confidence. While the Trcaty and the organisation retain their
value and relevance and they do, despite the critics my
Government will continue to support and sustain the Organisation.
The presence here of the distinguished regional representatives
of Thailand, The Philippines and the Popublic of Vietnam and of the
distinquished representative of Britain, New Zealand, and the
United States, is also clear evidence of the importance these
Governments continue to attach to SEATO.
One has only to recall, that as recently as February of this
year, President Nixon reported to the United States Congress that
the Manila Treaty had made " a valued contribution to peace", and
that the Treaty had been and *'-4, ill be honoured". 
W 3.
During my visit, I was very much heartened by the trend towards
closer co-operation among these countries. I was very heartened
by the goodwill and friendliness I found there towards my own
country, and I can assure you they know we are anxious to assist
them with their very real problems. It is interesting to recall that
the Manila Treaty represented one of the earliest examples of
regional co-operation.
It is a sign of the times that the links which bind the
countries of South East Asia are being progressively strengthened,
by increased contacts and exchanges, and through co-operation in an
increasing variety of regional organisations and arrangements.
It is my wish that your deliberations at this Council meeting
should be successful, and that they will contribute further to
regional co-operation, progress and security. 



OFFICI2'. L OP.' ui OF THE DRIWI RIVER
DARWIN, N. T.
S2eech by the Pripic Minister,. thze Rt. Hion. William
Mci-Iahon, M-I. P. 29 June, 1972.
May I apologise to you for the delay in getting hare th~ is
afternoon. I am not any good at arithmetic, but I am -told that
we had a headwind of betw., een 100 and 22* 0 milas ner hour, ane2 that
delayed us for an hour.
I ho-e your rcmarks about your own P1. rc-mier turn out to be
wrong. I you havc your new Lcader and your new Statehood, not
at the time you get your next damff, b. ut at the time you get your next
power station,
This is trw first visit to the Torrit-ory sincz. I becacr Prime
Minister and I ca loo: i-ng forwar2! to it even though it migh1t only
be a few days. Bccausc it is mary vurnosed visit to sec the
mining dOVelOnn~ ents at Gove, to visit Darwin agaix. after a lcrng
absence, to have talks with the, aboriginos at the Yirrkala ' M'is: sion,
and to open tlia ne w Ab-original Transitional College in rnhemn Land.
First, mav i talk to yo-u butthe 7orritory and its future.
I and my Govarnment have faith in ! Iustralia andd in tho futuro of the
north. This dam 11r. eierhas said to cost $ Y! 9 million and the
largest ever build in the:. Territory -is unmistakable proof of that
f aith. Bu'_ let me put this project in the context of the total. volume
of new public works being providzed by the Conmnonwealth.
Since 1967, Cemrn cnwelth Capital expenditure of nearly two
hundred million d-ollars aFs been ap prove: d, and total Commonwealth
capital and maintenance expend~ iturLe has beer. almost 630 million
dollars. ' A lot of monay, mione\ iell spcnt because it is
providing the basic infra-structuire: for dev' lcpment and for progress.
Let uF, take mining first. big ventures at Gavc, Groote
Evlandt and Tcnnant Cre; ek have involved new investment of almost
400 million dollars. The conner and gold mines at Tennant Creek
and the manganese mine at Groote_: ' Eyelandt arc alread y major income
earners for us. 
Production of bauxite at the 300 million dollar . Gove project
commenced in 1971. By mtid-1973 the project will be producing
1.4 million tons of bauxite and one million tons of alumina a year.
This will include 60 million dollars of export income.
These, and other mining projects, have attracted large-scale
private capital, modern technology and people. Private
initiative has been encouraged, and services have been provided by
the Commonwealth Government, in order to get these projects of f th6'
ground. But it is fair to say the development has only been made
possible by the faith and enterprise and large-scale investment of
the companies involved.
Then there ' is the investment in the pastoral industry, in
tourism and in prawning.
More than a decade ago, we took the initiative to construct
beef roads. To date, more than thirty million dollars has been
approved in expenditure on these roads. This has given a significant
lift to the pastoral industry and to overal national and local
development. Today 96 per cent of the cattle turned off are
transported by road, and the value of the turnoff has doubled to more
than 22 million dollars a year.
I am sure the tourist industry has uncalculable but enormous
potential. In fact tourists are now spending more than $ 20 million
a Year here.
Ta6 -~ ain~ industry, which has developed over the last three
years, is supplying about a third of the nations's prawn exports.
* This remarkable growth in the basic industries has led to a
rapid increase in population, as Mr. Reiher said, at a rate of about
nine per cent a year.
Darwin and Alice Springs are attractive in themselves and have
become the fastest growing towns in Australia. They've nearly
doubled their population over the Past six years, and can no l. onger
be regarded as frontier towns.
During the last five years, the Commonwealth has matched this
outstanding growth by programming now works in the main Territory
centres valued at very nearly 100 million dollars. This means a big
improvement in the quality of life for the people who live here,
and who want to come here in the future.
The government iJs also deeply concerned in case there should be
any possible conflict between the full development of the nation's
mineral wealth and the need to preserve the nation's environment.
In the reconciliation of these conflicting interests, we have
adopted a realistic and I believe, a practical ap * oroach. our
Paramount concern is Z2ustrali&amp;' ncitie-na iiuLe(: rcst, iin.-the welfare
in its widest sense of our own people.
The government would be irresoonsible if it failed to
develop the recently discovered uranium deposits, but we are not
interested in development for development's sake. ./ 3 
I1
3.
Wo ar,? coPnc? rnud about ccnsorvation of t'ic natural environment
an'. the preservation for posterity of unique feat. ures of the
ecology. The study which we have initiatedi on various, aspects of
the onvironment in areas of potential uraniuim develooment in the
Alligator River region, is an exanrple of our poliCy in action.
This study, jointly fi.? aic-d by tho government and the mining
comp:.. tes, is estimated to cost rnor than 500 thousand dollars.
it will Pd-kntify and evaluate th flora arid fauna and other
natural resources of tile area, so that the mining development_ can
proceed in a ; way consistent i ti the prteservatc fauiu n
. rrcrlaccable gart of our country.
The government's aim is-crnsistent with the descrP-ntion by the
Secretary of the Interior in th tUnitr-d States.-
proror balance between rz-ourcc: develonment and the
maintenance of leasant surround ' incrs'
We want to saee r-evelonment that i,. ill make a pormnennt contribution
to th-e Australian economy . in a 1., xy. which will prt: serve tho inherited
values of our own environment, anl. which will retain for all
Australians thez, features of t1~ rat ocnvircornt whilch Should ' ne
preserved and enjoyed.
ThIs lai is a credit to-all whio havc: worked on it, and who
have completoA it ahe ad o--f scho. d-ule7.. It hrings to over 15 million
dollars the total exnanditure anoro-a. 1 the-Commonwealth on new
watctr Fupl'.]. y 3? ro) jccts in the-rlorritorV cvor the Last five years.
' Congratu2. . tion: 7 to th-1'! rthern Torri. tcry aurninistratio'n,
resnonsible for the watezr surnply; to the Department of Works
tho aesign and construction authority; tc th. e main contractors,
McMahon Construction Pi. Ltd. of Adelae I can't claim any
r-zflected glor.-and to the oth; r contractors and organizations
involvzd here today.
I now have the very greatest pleasure in dcclaring the Darwin
River Darn open. 



OPENING OF THE ORD RIVER DAM
KUNUNURRA, W. A.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon
William McMahon, C. H., M. P. June, 1972.
Mr. Premier, Mr. Chairman, Sir Reginald, Sir Charles, my " ther
Parliamentary Colleagues, Distinguished Guest, including my own
Minister for the Interior, Hunt, Ladies and Gentlemen.
Before us as you can see stretch the waters of the greatest
man-made lake that has ever been built in Australia. It is a
unique and imaginative enterprise.
For years we have talked about the Ord Irrigation Scheme
here on Australia's North-West frontier, in a region where some of
our pioneers wrote their names into the record of our history.
This is the country to which the overlanders came in the last
century. Let us, now, remember those adventurous men and their
families, who drove their cattle until they reached the Kimberley.
The story of the Durack family is only one which enriches the
history of the far North-West. They first crossed our continent to
settle here in 1835, and it took them over two years to get here.
Today the site of their homestead, named Argyle, lies under this
lake. It is singularly appropriate, therefore, that the Government
of Western Australia has given the name Lake Argyle to this
great stretch of water.
The early pioneers broke the silence of this land. Since then,
the modern pioneer has come, and technology has made its contribution
to the pace of development.
The Ord River Irrigation Scheme is one result, with this dam
as its central feature. Storing millions of acre feet of water,
it gives a new kindcE like to this area: To the cotton and other
crop farmers, and to the adventurous Australian families who lived
and have made their homes here in Kununurra. They have demonstrated
their confidence in the North West in an unmistakble way. / 2 
It is not my interntion today to recite the history of the
Ord River Scheme although I want to say I have had a long
association with it ever since it was first mooted in the
Commonwealth Cabinet.
In some ways, it has been a controversial project, which has
had its troubles and its problems. Many have been overcome but
new ones crop up to test the skill and energy of the farmers,
research workers, and of the officers of the two Governments
Commonwealth and State as well.
Let us put problems aside to talk about the engineering
triumph this dam really is. Let us acknowledge the spirit, the
enthusiasm and the labours of those who live here.
The North-West no longer sleeps in the past. It is
bustling, adventurous and Drogressive. Beef-roads have soread
across the Kimberley. Highways link the outposts with our ports
and with cities, and the jet-port at Kununurra has conquered
distance and brought the Ord River community into the web of a
rapid transport system.
I am pleased to mention here that the Commonwealth recently
approved a major upgrading of the road to the Kimberley on the
Northern Territory side of the border. This will provide a high
standard, all weather link through to Katherine, Darwin, Alice
Springs and on to the east.
The West Australian and Commonwealth Governments have taken
many initiatives together in the Fast Kimnberley. We began in 194G
when the two Governments financed the Kimberley research station.
We brought the CSIRO to the area, and it is still here and will
continue to do valuable work. The Commonwealth has contributed many
millions of dollars to assist the West Australian Government. in its
development programmes in the whole of the North-West.
West Australia has always had faith and confidence in this
Ord Scheme and i the impact it would make in the East Ximberley and
in the North. It was against this background that the Commonwealth
Government decided in 1967 to provide funds within a limit of
$ 48 million for the main dam and the development of the irrigation
area around here.
You, Mr. Premier, as you so well said, as Minister for Public
Works were a driving force for this project in its early stages
and so were Sir David Brand and Sir Charles Court in later years.
The results of this enterprise and co-operative effort not
only by governments but by people cannot yet be measured fully.
Much has been achieved but and I repeat more or less what you said
1r. Premier there is much still to be done.
But let me mention two or three developments that stand out
at this time. First cotton. I amn told thc cotton area per
farmer has almost doubled in about seven years. The yield has reached
top world standard now 1000 lbs. of lint per acre or nearly
double what it was seven years ago. That is a first-class
performance. 
3.
Then there is research. The experts tell me the Kimberley
Research Station has made good progress on hybrid cotton, cattle
production, peanuts, safflower and sorghum. So, too, have the
West Australian Department of Agriculture, and scientists and
researchers of the University of New England in New South Wales
who are also working in this area.
These applied experiments will help to increase the range
of activities here, and give the Ord region further economic
diversity. They will make their contribution, Mr. Premier, to the
goals and to the ideals that you have mentioned.
So we have here today something made and something in the
making. It is an interesting and spectacular country and provides
the attractions and climate, I believe, for tourists. Who knows
that at some time in the future this Lake could be the site of a
great water carnival for the North and the North-West, attracting
overseas tourists who want to see the granduer of our new
frontiers. Both governments have been alert to preserve the natural
beauty of this environment, and funds have been provided for
ecological studies over a very wide area. This is a place, I
believe, where man and nature can live in harmony.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we have here today a huge dam
a great lake and a new horizon for the East Kimberley and the
North-West. Those associated with this project have planned and built
well. I would like to mention the personnel of the constructing
authority, which was the Public Works Department of Western
Australia, and the contractor, Dravo Pty. Ltd. which was awarded
the contract in world-wide competition. I cr-:-; aatulato them on the
jobs they have done so well.
This is part of our nation-building, and we are a great
country part of a process that is going on all. over Australia
today. I new have the very greatest pleasure n officially declarii
the Ord Piver Dam open. 



PRIME MINISTER
OFFICIAL OPENING OF NABALCO PTY. LTD. ALUMINA PLANT
GOVE, N. T. 1 JULY 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William McMahon
CH, MP.
Many of you have come from other parts of the world
for this ceremony, and many more of you have flown in from
" down South". I have come from Darwin and Kununurra, where I
have had the pleasure of inaugurating several other northern
development projects. I want to thank you, Mr Meyer, the Chairman of Swiss
Aluminium Limited of Zurich, and the Australian partners, for
inviting me to take part in this opening ceremony.
I am sure I speak on behalf of all the guests when I
say how impressed and enthused I am by what I have seen and
heard. I understand that this impressive and massive alumina
plant has been'korking up" for about a month now. And I am told,
too, that we may have to wait a few weeks more before we see the
first production alumina perhaps another five or six weeks.
I wish I could stay that long but, as you will know, it would
pose difficulties in a year like this.
Mr Chairman, you and your partners in this
European and Australian joint venture can take pride in the fact
that this plant will be " on stream'" one month ahead of the
company's own schedule, and five months ahead of the deadline
agreed to with the Federal Government.
It is now just over three and a half years since the
joint venture agreement was signed, with the present level of
per cent Australian participation. The partners then thought
that exports of bauxite would commence in 1P71, that the first
stage of an alumina plant of half a million tons per annum capacity
would be complete by tih end of 1971, and that expanded production
of a million tons a year of alumina would be achieved by the end
of 1974. / 2 
2
In 1969, these objectives had to be revised to take
account of the delay flowing from financial reconstruction of the
project. Taking this into account, it is all the more remarkable
that in this remote and undeveloped part of Australia, where literally
all the basic infrastructure had to be provided before construction
could begin, you have completed this alumina plant ahead of target.
There must be few projects of this size, cost and complexity anywhere
in the world which have been completed in such a short period.
This is a tribute not only to you, Mr Meyer, and to
your executives, but to the many contractors and sub-contractors and
to the multinational workforce who have met their deadlines, and shown
again that Australian and international partnership can operate
successfully to bring a major mineral project into operation.
We have already seen this happen in the West, we are
seeing it here again today in the North. I am sure that with
experience as a guide and barring the unpredictable, as the project
develops, it will beat the forecasts and the target dates for future
development. Another illustration of this success story is that the
plant will produce one million tons of alumina per annum by next July,
sixteen months ahead of schedule. By then, the Gove Project will be
generating an annual export income of $ 60 million, and that income
could double in the foreseeable future, with expansion of the alumina
capacity and possible eventual development into aluminium refining.
There has been, as we all know, a downturn in the
aluminium industry. That is true, but the speed at which this venture
is going ahead shows the confidence of the industry in the fact that
this is a temporary situation.
This project has in fact an assured market for the
whole of its alumina production for twenty years, and the Australian
partners may choose to sell uo to 30 per cent of production themselves.
For the basic raw material, bauxite, Gove alumina
can arrange contracts for up to 40 million tons over 20 years. It
has already contracted 33.5 million tons, including 19.5 million tons
to Japan, and 14 million tons to Eurooe. This is private enterprise
in action and deserves to be praised by all of us.
To gain some idea of the significance of this project
to the Territory, we should recall that the total value of mineral
production here in the Northern Territory in 1962-63 only nine
years ago was $ 7.5 million, and five years ago, it was only a
little over $ 20 million. Gove is a project of great national significance. It
makes its contribution in many ways to export income, to employment
and, if you will forgive me as a former Treasurer, to our taxation
income. / 3 
-3
It bears mentioning again that these achievements have
been made possible by a co-orerative effort between Australian and
overseas investment, investment that has been welcomed because it has
played a dynamic role in Australia's general economic development
throughout the postwar period. It has added to our domestic savings,
even though they have been high by world standards. These investments
have also brought here technological resources and managerial know-how
which might not otherwise have been available to us.
Recently, in Canberra, we have completed a far-reaching
review of overseas investment policies. As a result, we will soon
be presenting five papers to the Cabinet dealing with
whether there should be some regulation or control of
capital inflow;
whether we need better guidelines for borrowing;
the question of interest rates;
whether Australian companies should have greater flexibility
to invest overseas; and
whether there should be more flexibility in overseas.
corporations borrowing here from us.
These papers will be considered with the objective of ensuring that
the decisions made are unmistakably in the best interests of Australia
and Australians. It is obviously in the national interest to ensure thait
there is major participation by Australian companies in ventures of
this kind. I am glad that the Australian equity of 30 per cent
may be increased to 50 per cent depending on future programmes.
Australian companies may not have the majority financial
holding in this venture, but I understand there has been a true takeover
on the staff side, and that Australians now occupy some 60 per cent
of senior managerial Positions. As well, it is the company's policy
that Swiss managers will be progressively replaced by Australians.
Mr Meyer, it is more than satisfying to me, as Prime
Minister of Australia, to oen this plant with the knowledge that it
will process Australian natural resources in accordance with the
policy of the Federal Governmrent, and it will make an important
contribution, not only to decentralisation and northern development,
but to the prosperity of this wonderful and developing country of ours.
Mr Meyer, to you and your Australian colleagues and to
all the people present here too, I can say that it is with the
greatest pleasure that I officially open this plant and look forward
to seeing it get really into production. 1 



PRIME MINISTER]
LUNCHEON FOR P-LUM7-INA PW7.' JT OPENiING
GOVE, N. T.
Speech by the Prime fiinistCer, the Rt-. -I'ic. Willia-m
icahon, 1 July, 1972.
Mr. Chairman Ihave bezeri ass) ciate-' with Cove evor siflco the beginning.
In those d-ays it w-. as F, wast In those av wo couldn't hav3
t~ oqhtthat the -heeaotr anh as now, taken nlace coul; 1
conceivably hav eventuateD-. So yrou can imagine how I fLcoming
to this arca anA' bein~ g able look me an-: see ' athas
hap;:? n&amp;! 2 t-o( ay.
Your corperatinn is now th--third! largast -or at least
Gove is now tho thir,. 2-largor , t community in the Territory, and
judgecd by what we yev: , o far szcn, it a fnr cry from whiat I
call " roughing it" s in thi:-r. ays whc--n-I first camne up hero. And,
too, this is cnL, of the la-rgt:-. st sinale-stage -,. roje,-cts undertaken
by private: enterprise in Australia, an(! by far the largest in thc
Nort-Ae , n Territorv.
The Territory itself, as you know, is tho fastest growing
area in Lustralia with a nonulotion avcra-ing inlgot about
9 per cent ner annum. This' coulld have -occurred unless
.2c. loomrits like vc had made such1--'--henomenal growth possible.
that is not all, b:-cauoe t-hisl projcti.-uttndn
example of planneld dvlme'ofa rcmotc area, and it is boing
developed on th Arnhcm Land PAboriginal Reserve.
This unusual alnd novcl location ha5 and will continue to
raise problems. But our nroblems must bje understood and policies
de'veloped against t h1ihi S t oricanl fact that over th. e yr-ars large
areas of t-he Northern Territcry larcrar than the United-Kingdom
or, if you %, ant an Australian c. omoarison, larger than Vi1ctoria, have
ber sct aside as ri-serv-cs for thc uso and benofit of the 22,000
aborigincs who live he,: re.
Some; 110 12ees's of threa% and a half million acres have been
rovod on these rc~ szrv-. The great mjority of them have beon
aipprovold for aboriginal commnuniti. es. I. re:-cent times, we -avco
a'nproved threa pastoral le-aseri totalling about 5,500 square miles
to ab-original grounc. 
It is now part of the history of Gove that the aborigines
on the Peninsula claimed hereditary rights to the land. The
Territory's Supreme Court ruled that Yirrkala aborigines have no
legal basis for their claim.
This decision led to a wide-ranging policy review. I think
I have been associated in a very deep way with that Committee And
we had that review in order to find out exactly what we could do
in order to ensure that not only do the aborigines have their
reserves of which they have permanent occupation, but as well, we
wanted to give them a tenure, which they would be able to use and
use for their advantages.
I was able to announce on Australia Day, the 26th of
January, exactly what we would do. A central feature of the
statement I then made was the proposal for a new form of general
purpose leaseholding. I wellremember at the Cabinet discussions
then and there deciding to call it a multi-purpose lease, because
not only was it going to be used for a variety of purposes that
were associated with mining or commercial purposes or anything else
that might be involved in it. But we had these multi-purpose leases
and we would grant them within aboriginal reserves, and those multipurpose
leases would, in fact, be renewed.
May I clear up something here, because if there is one
difficulty I have felt over the time I have been associated with
this, it is that either people didn't want to know, or if they
knew, they didn't want to do anything about it.
But what I want to emphasise to you is that the reserves
themselves are of permanent duration, and they are for the
aborigines themselves. Within that we have the general purpcse
or the multi-purpose leases within those reserves, and of course
they can be granted by the Loan Board on which there are two
aboriginal representatives, and they can be renewed if the
aborigine people themselves make the application and the Board
itself decides they should be renewed.
For these reasons, I fail to understand( again as one who
is profoundly committed to the ideal of giving the aborigine all
the opportunity all the opportunities that a country can give)
I cannot understand the constant cricicism we still have about what
the reserves mean, and what within those reserves the multipurpose
leases mean as well.
Now, at the same time as I mention these multi-purpose or
general purpose leases, I think probably my friend, Ralph Hunt would
prefer me to at the same time we decided on a policy
relating to mining on the aboriginal reserves.
We considered whether prospecting and development on
reserves should be prohibited for the present. We concluded it
was in the national interest as well as in the interests of the
aborigines themselves that mineral exploration and development
should continue. But within this context, we are consulting with
those aboriginal communities which might be affected, so that
their welfare can be fully taken into account before mining
applications are approved. / 3 
6 
In the case of exploration applications, we have consulted
with aborigines having bona fide tranditional interests in the
areasinvolved. The aim of these consultations has been to inform
them of the type of work to be undertaken and to identify any
sitescf special significance which must not be disturbed.
As well, if aboriginal communities are interested in
exploration rights, their applications may be granted preference,
subject only to their a1. ility to carry out an exploration
programme and not necessarily with sophisticated techniques.
In the case of most applications by non-aborigines, we
expect exploration right'-s will be granted, and that satisfactory
development conditions to protect the interests of aborigines can
be negotiated. Where this cannot be done, or the Aidministrator
believes development would be prejudicial to the aboriginal community;
development rights may have to be deferred, for the time being.
These guidelines for development are aimed at securing
the maximum involvement for aborigines in projects, and a real
participation by them in their benefits.
There is one other aspect of prospecting for minerals that
I thinkl should mention. It is import ant to know what mineralisation
occurs on these reserves. And the only way td find out is to have
a reasonable policy of exploration and development. We have done
this without sacrificing in any way the interests of our own people,
our own aborigines.
At Gove, royalties from the bauxite and alumina will. be
about $ 550,000 initially. Within a few years, they are likely to
exceed $ 1 million per annum. * This money will be paid into the
aborigines benefits trust fund for all aborigines in the Territory.
In our review arising from the land rights decision, the
Government decided that 10 per cent of the royalties from Gove
should go to the Yirrkala community because of the special impact
of this project on them.
When we announced that decision on Australia Day, no date
was specified. I a= now glad to announce that we approved
arrangements only last week for this 10 per cent payment to apply
retrospectively from the time of the first royalty on Gove bauxite,
that is, 31 March 1970. This means the first pra yment to the
Yirrkala community, which is now due and has been approved, will be
$ 21,488. This money w'ill be Paid into a special fund administered
by the local Aboriginal Council whose representatives of the
Yirrkala community are at this function today.
I have had the pleasure of talking to some of you
previously about a number of your problems and I was glad of the
opportunity to visit you yesterday. I realised then, more than I
have done before how the people of two separate and distinct
cultural backgrounds are living close together here.
One group, the aboriginal people, is in a less favourable
position to cope with the problems presented by a new community
nearby. This is not only a problem for government or the
management of Nabalco. f 
a Sb
I A
I 
It is a problem which concerns averone who lives here. It is a
problem that concerns the Northern Territory Administration, and my
colleague Ral'ph Hunt. It is a oroblem that concerns me and my
Government. In such situations a balance of interest naturally has to
be struck. I think that whenever questions of competing interest
arise, weinve to find a fair balance betwieen the interests of the
aborigines and the general community.
To put it very simply, those who come here to develop the
natural resources should be ' prepared and ever ready to understand
the views of the aboriginal People and to make concessions to their
views. Unless this is donu, the-result could be a social environment
unacceptable to any of the residents.
It is therefore most important that the European community,
the main workforce on the ground at Gove, develops good and happy
relations with the aborigines.
The development of Nhulunbuy is of particular interest to
me and my Government. It is one of the few examples where the
Commonwealth has participated directly with private enterpris~ e at
the initial development stage.
Nhulunbuy was built at a cost of $ 45 million of which the
Commonwealth is contributing nearly one-third. Private enter~ prise
has taken the balance and has shouldered the major burden of infrastructure
in this multi-million dollar project. Theirs bas been a
splendid contributiJon here for the benefit of the aborigines and
Nabalco alike.
Surely, and for me particularly as Prime ? finister, it is
worthy of special recognition that the Gove partnership has taken
big commercial and social risks and has been able to achieve our
goals in their own interests, and those of the nation, and they
have beaten all their target dates.
An objective of our policy in the negotiations with the
Cove Companies to which I would like to especially refer and I
want to do so again for background of contemporary social thought
and trends was our desire to minimise ecological changes in the
environment and to avoid the effects of Pollution.
Stringent conditions were imposed relating to reclamation
and regeneration. We will want to know that the companies affected
accepted these obligations more than five years ago, and they have
lived up to every single one of them.
This in itself provides the perfect answer to those who
claim for their own reasons that the Government and the mining
industry have given little thought in the past to environmental
matters. From their past performance, we know that the companies
have a genuine wish to co-onerate with the Government in every way,
not least in the fields of aboriginal advancement and environmental
protection. 
It is worth recording and I can nrobably record this in a
stronger way than most n c. ope th--at the Cove Aqr. gornent was
negotiated long before my sttatemon-t of January aboriginaJ.
policies. Indeed, I can emnhisise, that this agreement in some ways
led to that statement.
We in tha Governmnt look forrward with confience to
continuad co-operation with the partnershi7 in this and in other
fields. Having said all this, may I now ask you every one of
you to please charge your glasses and (: riflk with me a toast
to the joint venturers for their cntri&gt;. ution to the development
of our Nrth and to th1 devlonzont of our own country. 



OPENING OF DHUPUMA COLLEGE
GOVE, N. T. 1 JULY, 1~ 72,.
Speech by the Prime Hlinister, The Rt. Hon. William ?' c. ahon
M. P.
Ladies and Gentlemen, and most importantly, boys and girls:
Thanks for the invitation to come here today to open this
school. Down south, we hear a lot about this very fast-growing
and developing part of the Northern Territory, but not enough
Australians get the chance to come up here personally to see for
themselves what is going on.
On Australia day five months ago, I made a statement about
my Government's policies for aboriginal citizens. It covered
important questions relating to the future progress of the
aborigines themselves. Some of my comments may not be known to you,
so I shall try to tell you what I said in that statement.
We had five changes to make in our programmes and policies
for aborigines. First we wanted to ensure that aborigines have
free and unimpeded access to the rights and privileges of our
society. We want to encourage and assist them to keep and develop
their own culture as a worthwhile and wholesome part of Australian
life. We want to emphasise that overy aborigine has the right to
say how closely and how-soon he will become integraded into the
mainstream of Australian society.
This is more likely to happen when aborigines retain their
own identity, traditions and their own culture.
The third point of my statement on Australia Day was that
our objectives must be based on plans which recognise the wishes
and the aspirations of the aborigines themselves; and which provides
the opportunities to develop their own personalities and abilities:
And which involve the aboriginal people themselves in the working
out of those plans.
The fourth objective is for government programmes to ensure
that aboriginal citizens manage their own affairs as much as this
is practicable in order to improve their potential and ensure
their fullest partici. ation in the national progress: And further
so that handicaps in health, housing, education and vocational
training can be reduced. / 2 
We also want to remove the few rcmaining laws which
discriminate against aborigines.
I cannot emtnhasise enou,-1-01. at this statement of policy
objectives means in effect that Australian as a people, through
the Federal Government, recognise that aborigines have many problems
and difficulties notf7, ce. by '--thcr .7trnlinn. It ma ns thert w,:
will -'-ovoryt!, i1n7 * ssill see that -~ ur abor~ rri-nal citizo: ns have
th cortunities to--reach at least the sam~ e standards of living and
education as are anjoyed b~ y all other Pustralians.
The opening of a newr school is, I believe, a big event in any
community; But the opening of a new school to meet the needs of
aboriginal. communities is an evan bigger event. Soon in these
buildings there will be new, young, fresh minds who will play their
Dart inl the future of our country.
May I snpeac ow.% to the older people here, and particularly to
the parents. * You havo., and] you will see many changes -chancles which
have brought and will bring you and your families benefits as well
as problems. Your children are now grow'ing up in a very different
world to yours, and for that matter even to mine. School will
fire their minds. The: y will ask questions and perhaps question the
authority of their parents.
Seeing these chang-ms might influe'nce parents to take their
children away from schi-ool. You must not let this hap~ pen: It is
better to accerot that our children will wa nt to ' change the worlti.
Some of you may feel that knowledge will loosen the bonds
between children and their parents, and load them to neglect: their
old ways. We must try nnd haln them enjoy both the new and the
old. Schooling should teach children to resnpect both old and new
ways, and should forster a child; love and respect for his parents,
his home and his culture.
To you students I say--Work hard3 at school because every
bit of knowledcae will make you better E1Pedto face the outside
world when you have grown into youn; j men and' women.
Ohupuma College is thc second residential school in the
Northern Territory for aboriginal children. Kormilda, in Darwin,
was the first. A third college is now being built at Alice S-rings.
It will cost a lot of money, but money is not important. What is
important is the onnortunity which these colleges provide for young
UreonAe. Kormil-da means "' tomorrow" and Dhunumua, as you know, means
" looking up" t. These names are well chosen, and -will enourage you
to look up to your life of tomorrow. Twenty-eight of you young
people come fro~ m Kcormilda. I want you to bel-p Dhupuma develon in
the same way. You should think of it, nct sn much as anothe-r school,
but rather ft a place of opportunity and riewarding assocation.
Having said this, it now gives me very great oleasure to
officially declare this College npen. 



3USINESS AND _ PP. CFSSIO17AL MEIV S DTNNMR
Speech by the Prime Minister, r'nc -It Flon. William Mcilahon, CH!, NIP.
24 July. 1972
Dir Macklin, Parliamentary Colicagues, Ge ntlemen:.
I cartehere toniciht zprimarily t'-o -talk to ' iou about a technical
subject that I know is v ry dear to most of you anai certainly
dear to my friend in. the Chamb-tr of !-. anuf-c-tures sitting inranediately
to my right. And t hat subject I wanted -to talk about wa:) s the subject
of tarif fs and its preoccupation with t;-c manuf acturing -: nd the
conuercjat industries of ti-. is country.
I also wanted to say somothIng to you a bout the state of
the economy, not too muc.. i ecause w) e have got a Budget comi ng aLong in
three or four weeks time, and I am one of the believers in the oldfashioned
British custom~ of Budget solidarity and abov" all, of Budget
secrecy. Not only bc&amp; c~ I think that you can kc: 2r ' jour secrets
to yourse-lf and you ca-, have -the surpnris~ oiemont when the Treasurer
delivers the Budget th~ en you will got infinitely better public
reaction and public resrpanse thian ," ou will if therc-are leaks, and
when the Cday comes, the Treasure r has nothing else to do but reci. toc
the taxation proposals and the wa-y t~ o bring disapproval by those whlo
have to pay thc7, m.
Tonight, seeing that thei gatharing is as great and
distinguishf2s as it is, I still beivdI had to go along with my
irmediate intentin But af-ta ng to your President, I al! so
felt th~ at, tima wil ling anC you ar~ cir. n to be intarc-sted and my
pra'yers rz usually answered -that I might say something to you on
a mucn morc+. Lnt:: resting subje-ct and thiat is my recent visit t"-o !,, uala
Lumpur, Singaporce and Djakarta. Pocause it was a momorable triP and
believe ou-r de-: stins to a zosdrhecxtc~ nt and our future
developmont are wra-) p d up itll tho dCrvc,: br-mient of those cou. ntties. We
are the ones w'no can raost+ benof it-froti close association with them;
from, their inchastri al developmeont; and from our capaci. ty f or trade with
thM. 11T But may I nowj, Mr ' lacklin, get on with the subje-ct. The
two subjzlcts that I want to speak to you about tonight. I want to
a ' ssure you, as one who has been Treasurer for some time, and enjoyed
the nortfoi i mens. y thnit I bolieve? I had a pretty glood comm~ a-nd
of Trcasury problems arnd kept the econony reasonably healthy, prohably
as healthy as It ') as ever heen. So I have the % nowledg-e and the ability
for quick adaptation and chango Lthat I think is so essential and
imoortant to a2 Treasurer and rarticularly to a Head of Gove-rnment when
we are looking at Cur economic problems. ./ 2 
I believe there are very sound grounds for thinking the
economy will significantly improve in the future, in both the short and
long term. There has never been any doubt about the long term, because
over the years we have continuously built this economy of ours on a
broader basis, much more variable, much more basically sound and with
inherent strength. And our record of two decades of growth has been
a tribute to the kind of policy that we have been able to adopt.
We are all aare that most of the problems which hav.? captured
the headlines in the past year or so have not been long term but short
term problems. It is true, too, that we have had setbacks. The unemoloyment
problems have been stubborn, somewhat too stubborn, and the oresent
level while low by standards of other countries is still certainly
not acceptable to me. As you know, and here I come back to that word
" flexible" again because we have considered it desirable since September
of last year we have taken positive measures to reduce the number of
unemployed. Even taking specific action of a kind that hitherto we had
not taken. We have also taken other measures on a broad basis, particularly
the mini-Budget and the assistance we gave to the Premiers. I
think I can say to you that as these measures work their way through
the economy, conditions most certainly will improve steadily. Encouraging
indicators are now showing.
The latest of these is the slowdown in price inflation
reflected in the consumer price index figures last weze. The increase
of point nine of one per cent is the lowest quarterly increase for
nearly two years, although I have to admit there were some special
problems or special influences that were involved thers. A little over
seven months ago we felt that in the June quarter we would be extremely
lucky if we could keep the consumer index at very much less than 2 per
cent and probably a little higher.
So that you can take it that we were delighted when these
figures of point nine of one per cent came about because it gave one
of the indications that inflation, one of the most difficult and intractable
nroblems that we have had to solve and one that could easily cost
us out of international markets, did show some kind of improvement. I
don't want to go overboard about them because the results affect only
one month. I will say it is pretty good, or satisfactory anyhow, and
I hope we can keep up this kind of record in the months to come.
I don't want you to think that I'm arguing that inflation
has been solved. It has not. Together, you and I as manufacturers,
people in the commercial world, and recole in the other sections of the
economy and in the Goverrment have .1l got to exercise our combined
skill and our energies to contain it.
Providing we can do this and make our contribution, and
providing only we can keep wages closer to the increases in productivity,
then the better the chance we have t First to conquer this problem;
and then to get the economy moving along at a growth rate of at least
per cent. Let me emphasise too, that c nsm. r demand has obviously
been far too subdued. I admit that and tlr'-t is the reason why we took
action at two successive Premiers' Conforeccs and in the mini-Budget,
and through the banking system to give at least the incentive and the
/ 3 
intucement for consumer demand to improve. And through that means to
be able to get the order books full and when the order books became full,
for it to work back into the basic industries. So I emphasise to you
that the community has been too cautious in its spending. But with
increasing confidence and I believe confidence is improving, and
there's evidence of it; there would be greater evidence of it still,
if industrial lawlessness were reduced to a minimum, and we were able
to reduce the uncertainty that has been caused by the difficult conditions
created by some sections of the Trade Union movement; cur record
must improve. What I can say in positive terms, and it has been emphasised,
and emphasised very well in the Treasury Annual Review, is that the
goals of national growth for this year are much higher than for the
financial year just ended.
Now to achieve our growth I believe we need four ingredients.
The first one undoubtedly is confidence; a little more confidence; a
little more willingness to spend can, I believe, achieve miracles.
We can increase consumer spending and I have just mentioned that; we
need greater industrial stability and we need less industrial lawlessness.
I believe as you look at all these oroblems you must make this concession,
particularly if you understand what my Government has done; that we have
acted in both a responsible, and I believe a comprehensive way.
I know it is a Government of decision. WJhen major decisions
have to be made, we have handled them. Only a few moments ago, talking
to my colleague on my right hand side, I was able to mention to him that
never in 72 years of Federation had any government had the courage to
introduce into the civil service the rule of ho work, no pay' despite
the year after year recommendations that were made. This year we introduced
the amendment, and I don't like to be boastful because that's not
my way but at least I can say that since that time we have not had a
strike or a threat of a strike on the Commonwealth Civil Service.
Let me give you two exampls of the kind of action we have taken.
First we have introduced into conciliation and arbitration a new system
which will be proclaimed shortly if it hasn't been proclaimed today. I
believe it is the most extensive reform of the conciliation and arbitrationi
system that has been carried out for a little over a quarter of a
century. We have in that review strengthened the sanction provisions of
the conciliation and arbitration act.
The second point I want to make is that we have, and we will
continue to intervene before the arbitration commission in wage claims
whenever we have considered it to be in the public interest. Never has
a case gone by where a. sharp increase in wages is demanded by the unions,
unless I have immediately asked my colleagues to have a lpok at the problem
and to see whether in the public interest, in the interest of keeping
inflation low and demand high, we should intervene.
I now move on to the subject I really wanted to speak about
tonight and that is tariffs, and I hope to explain what we are doing,
the reasons for our actions and if I can, to remove some of the indecision
and lac of certainty that might be in the minds of manufacturers
and producers of raw materials. My Government's policy was clearly
set out by my colleague, Doug Anthony, the Minister for Trade and Industry,
in a statement that he made to Parliament in April of last year. I can
assure you that we as a Government have not, and we will not, depart
from that policy. / 4
L 
Before I get on to policy explanation, may I say something
to you to put the issue in context. I want to emphasise in the strongest
terms the vitally important role that manufacturing industry and
the private enterprise system in general plays in the development and
pr-ogress of this country.
This, of course, includes transport and other areas of
commerce. I want to emphasise this because we are a great country
with a great performance per head of population. Those who travel
overseas as I do, come back delighted with the respect and admiration
that there is for us and the performance of the Australian people. And
a. Ll those achievements, or mcit of them anyhow, are by private enterp3ise.
The manufacturing and mining industries particularly are now
playing a magnificent part in development, and in our ability to expand
our trade and to play our part and make our contribution to the development
of the countries immediately to our North.
We, as a Government, do recognise that a sound, profitable
and growing manufacturing sector is of fundamental importance. Its
g:: owth must be fostered and the economic climate created to ensure that
manufacturing industry assumes an even greater and more important role
in our eeonomy as it does in the other higher industrialised communities.
In this context, I want to discuss tariff policy and I want
to make three points. As an essential condition of growth and progress,
we must encourage the best and the most efficient allocation and use of
our resources whether Australian, or those which are attracted here
by the inducements of the ratural resources and the economic climate of
tills country. Historically, in the two decades after the war, successive
governments consciously pursued policies directed towards a high and
sustained growth rate and the optimum employmentcf resources. This,
as I said, but I repeat it now in somewhat different language this
d: iversification of industry turned us into the broadly based industrial
economy that we have today. In more recent years, as our economy has
become more sophisticated, the need for greater selectivity in industrial
development has become more desirable. To achieve this we needed policies
designed and attuned to the times.
As I said last year, to the Chamber of Manufactures of New
South Wales, we cannot accept uncritically and without reservations the
use of our national re. urces in activities which require very high
levels of protection, because, prima facie, such activities are less
suited to the Australian economic cnvironm~ it than industries requiring
more moderate levels of protection.
The second main pQint I want to stress is that low tariffs
b:: ing benefits as well as costs. The benefits to the community which a
government must consider in making a judgment on the level of protection
include the direct marketing relationships which one Australian industry
may have withaiother, and the effect of one industry's costs on another
industry's prices. I assure you they go wider than that. For example,
an industry may be employing special classes of labour, which we what
to encourage. It may also be developing special skills and technology.
In the same way, there can be highly significant non-economic benefits
for us such as defence.
You will see, therefore, that when these factors are involved
in tariff decisions, the Government and I want to emphasise those
words must play a crucial role. I personally assure you my Government
gives and will continue togive very close attention to these aspects of
tariff administration when Tariff Board reports are before us. 
The third point I want to make! is that decisions are made
only after considering the capital investment in the industry concerned
and the employment which that industry creates. I want to emphasise
these ingredients of policy and also one other points.
In cases where, according to the recommendatbn of the Tariff
Board, it has been considered desirable to encourage the transfer of
resources from one industry to another, the Government has frequently
decided that the transfer should be a gradual process. And I can assure
you that in the implementation of this policy of gradualness, I have
taken an interested, and I believe on occasions, a decisive role. We
have done this, for example, in the case of woven and knitted shirts.
We did this to achieve an orderly transition to a lower level of protection.
We decided that the existing level would be maintained for a
longer, much longer period than recommended by the Board.
In the meantime, the Government is negotiating for voluntary
restraint arrangements with low-cost overseas countries in order to
ensure protection to Australian manufacturers.
Today, one of the greatest leaders in Australian industry
is in Japan, trying to and he will undoubtedly succeed ensum
some kind of restriction is imposed voluntarily by the countries that
are exporting to Australia. In the same way, protection given to
malleable cast iron pipe fittings is being reduced in three stages over
five years. More recently, as uith another case in which I was deeply
involved, the Government has provided the local shipbuilding industry
with a longer period for gradual change than the Board recommended.
So let me say to you now without reservation that if tariff action
ware considered likely to lead to phasing out of any segment of
manufacturing industry firms would not be expected to adjust overnight
anid, of course, the interest of manufacturers and emikbyees would be
protected. I emphasise again to you that special care will be taken
relating to changes that might have the effect of putting job opportunities
for Australia at risk.
Turning to another aspect of tariffs, as you know, a compreheansive
review of the tariff is now taking place. I have learnt a great
deal about it from my friend, Mr Pascoe, during the course of the last
hour. In fact it has been one of the most informative lectures I
have had since my university days.
I am aware that some sectors of manufacturers are feeling
apprehensive about the outcome of this review. I want to assure you
that the review is not in any sense an exercise against a policy of
adequate protection for economic, efficient and desirable Australian
industry. On the contrary, the Government's intention is that it should
work in the long run, for the benefit of our manufacturing industries.
The review will be completed in about six years. And, of
course, I want to emphasise that if ever you feel you are having unexpectac
difficulties which have to be solved immediately, then you have recourse
a~ s an immediate court of appeal to the Special Advisory Body.
There is a second point that I want to teake and I want to
make it now again because of the discussion I have been having with
y' colleague on my right hand side, Mr Pascoe. He has mentioned that
in this large-scale revie'w, there should be some kind of a timetable
drawn up so that industry itself will have a degree of certainty reintroduced
into the manufacturing industries and a degree of predictability
that they do not have at the moment. ./ 6 
I can assure you that when I go back tc Canberra tomorrow
night or when I arrive there on Wednesday, it will be one of the first
problems I will take up either with Mr MacKay of the Department of Trade
and Industry or, if necessary, with Mr Anthony. I can assure you that
it is one of the problems that has worried me and I am glad that you
have driven home this point effectively tonight.
As each review report is reviewed, it will be considered by
the Government, and we and here I want to emphasise this point and
keep on emphasising it if I can we, as a Government, and no-one else,
will decide what action should be taken. The Government needs and expects
the Tariff Board in its report to give as clear and comprehensive advice
as it can on both the reasons for its recommendations and the likely
consequence of adopting them. The fact is, however, that there are
larger areas of the tariff which have not been looked at for very many
years and some tariffs have never been reviewed since their inception.
In these circumstances-there are bound to be some tariffs which provide
protection far in excess of the amount required. Of course excess
protection of this kind adds unnecessarily to our cost structure, and
cost inflation. And you must know this is not in the interests either
of the manufacturing industry or of the community.
The existing economic climate and timing are, of course,
also imporant and must increasingly be taken into consideration in the
decision-making process. We also take note of the protection policies
of other countries where, in addition to tariffs arrangements or other
devices like quotas, import licensing and export schemes are used. We
are concerned entirely with the practical and beneficial effects of
tariff changes on individual industries and the economy as a whole.
So you will see and I hope I can convince you on this point we are not
and we will never be influenced by abstract theories.
Particularly, Mr Chairman, I want to emphasise that the
Government makes the decisions in all cases on tariff matters. We have
a very strong tariff committee of the Cabinet, and in major cases such
as the chemicals review or the shipbuilding industrv or of woven garments,
we take those into the Cabinet itself and if variations have to be made
based on the grounds that I have mentioned, we are not only willing but
happy to make changes we believe desirable in the interest of Australian
manufacturing industry and above all, the country itself. Now, the
Board is a highly exoert body but it is an advisory one only, and its
recommendations are not automatically accented by the Government ( as I
have already pointed out).
Gentlemen, tariff nolicy is -art of our overall policy
towards manufacturing industry and the free enterprise economy. That
rolicy I want to repeat is to give all the support we can towards the
development of a soundly growing and confident manufacturing industry
in Australia. I want to sum un to you in this way:-Confidence is
catching If we all . have confidence, talk with confidence, and above
all, act with confidence, we will, I am sure, and of this I can give you
great reassurance, get ahead faster and much futther this year than we
did last year. This must give our longer-term development programmes an
added stimulus for the good of the country, for iegood of manufacturers
and for the benefit of the consumers of all kinds. If we can give
these benefits to the consumers, I believe we inspire confidence to get
back in the market place and buy to let those who sell to the market
place get their order books full, and in time, as it works back to the
/ 7 
manufacturers and the producers of base materials, to ensure that they
are fully employed, that our growth rate continues and each and everyone
of us can make our contribution to the development and to the standards
of living and the values of life that I believe every person here tonight
holds dear. Mr Chairman, that was what I wanted to say to you on an cfficial
level. As time is passing and as you wanted me to speak for a somewhat
longer period than I intended, I thought I'd say something to you about
my recent mission overseas to Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia. I
must confess that I went with some trepidation based on advice given
to me that there might be perhaps some doubt or disenchantment in these
countries with Australia. As Foreign Minister I had the good fortune
to make the acquaintance more than that a valuable friendship with
Lee Kuan Yew, the Prime Minister of Singapore, and Tun Razak, the Prime
Minister of Malaysia.
I had also been able to establish a valuable friendship with
President Seeharto of Indonesia. What did interest me was the fact that
these people trust us; they hnow that we want to trade with them; they
know we want to make our contiibution to their duvelopment; they know
wevent to help them remove poverty and to assist them with the development
of their abundant natural resources. They believe that as a people
they can rely on the people of this country in whom they have the
greatest confidence. I addressed their Parliament. The welcome was
outstanding. And I can express this with certainty as they grow
wealthier and I know they will we will be the beneficiary, the main
beneficiary because they will want the kind of materials and the
finished products, the manufactured products, that we in Australia by
that time will be able to produce.
So it was not only a mission of goodwill but it was educational
in this sense. I realise the many opportunities that are open for
us and the way in which we can trade with them. This must be to our
mutual development. Particularly as they develop and we develop economically,
so too will our ability to ensure peace in this area, and in the
long run, if I can repeat those words again to be able to make our
contribution to the peace of the whole of the South-East Asian area.
Indonesia is a wonderful country! it is well worthwhile visiting; they
like us and I believe Australians should go there more frequently and
find out what the trading p:--ssbi1. ities are.
I then went to Singa~ oe to talk to the Prime Minister, Lee Kuan
Yew, who is a friend of ours. Of course, Singapore is developing quickly.
It is now trying to change its economy from a cottage economy or the
development of fabrics and textiles and things of that kind, into a
manufacturing industry that will produce the medium range, high quality
products such as television sets, radios and consumer durables of a
similar kind. Here you find a dynamic wholesome society. Again you found that
they trusted us and I think the spoech Lee Kuan Yew made on the night
that he gave me a dinner was memorable in the sense that while I left
Australia feeling a degree of hesitation and doubt, after hearing his
speech I realised how much he valuod us as partners and friends and how
much he wanted us to retain our armed forces in Singanore. Not only
because, as he put it in his own inimitable way, it was of benefit to
him, but it brought a feeling of confidonce and filled a vacuum which
if we were not there would be filed by somebody else, probably more
powerful and more intimidatory than we or they would want.ø. 48. 
Then on to Kuala Lump~ ur to meet an old friend, Prime Minister
Tun Razak. I was able to go up to Butterworth and see our Air Force
at the airfield which we've made a c-ontribution towards doveloping.
We provided Miragcs and other tV,. es of aircraft for the integrated
air-defence system there. Again, I believc we have stationcd something
like two squadrons of Mirages to be part of the Commonwealth Air Defence
System in the aroa. If you want to see efficiency developed over a
period of little less than two years if you want to feel proud of our
ability to make our contribution to the. welfare and the defence of othersthen
you should find out a little more about Butterworth. It was really
heartening to see the way in which their air defence system was working.
Not so long ago the Malaysians had little or no knowledge of the vast
techniques of direction-finding, of radar detection and the other
components of air defence systems. I think you. can now take it that thy
are pretty compotent and effective, and making a significant contribution
to the defence arrangements.
Up there and I want to drive this home because it's not
always adequately reported in the pre-ss not only are the trade
opportunities great because of incroasing stability, and they will
expand as the time goes by, but each of these realises that if
South-East Asia is to remain free, then it is desirable that we should
keep our forces, our armed forces of the three Services in Singapore
and the Air Defence System in Malaysia. We should be able to assist
Indonesia to build up a capacity tc develop a more ef f~ ctive Army, and
a more effective way of ensuring that if a threat does emerge from
outside, they will, with our help, and probably Ait help from other
countries, be able not only to defend themselves but also to make
their contribution to the defence of other South-East Asian countries.
The point I want to make and drive home is that if eva'r there
is a country that ought to be proud of what it is capable of doin~ g,
and in fact does do, it is ours. For that reason, thank you Mr
Chairman, forasking me to come. Above all, I have, come and I can,-
assure you it has givon me an enormous amount of pleasure to be with
Australians, to know what you are capable of doing.
May I express the hope that I will have the good fortune to
be qiven the chance to provide continued leadership. There could be
no greater honour than providing leadership to the kind of people I
see sitting in front of me tonight. 



LIBERAL PARTY
FUND--RAISING DINER, BARTON ELECTOPATE
SANS SOUCI, NSW. 31 JULY, 1972.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon,
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I accepted the invitation to come here without any
hesitation at all. There is a very simple explanation why I
wanted to come.
I want Barton back into the Liberal fold as I want
St. George back, too. I want Vince Bruce to take his place with
with us on the Government benches, and with your help I believe
he is a certainty. He is an excellent candidate. Everyone who
knows him will vouch for that. He will be an excellent member,
because he is young, talented and a good Liberal.
Most of you already know and if you don't I am
telling you now that he will do a first-class job representing
the people of Barton as well as representing the Liberal Party
and I believe when he represents you, you will find that
Australia as a whole is proud of him. The experts say we need
a swing of about 3 to 4 per cent to recapture this electorate.
With the candidate and the organisation we have got, that's easily
attainable, provided we can all get the truth driven home to the
voters in this and in all other electorates.
It is of critical importance that the Government's
achievements should be better known and its programmes better
understood. We have a first class team of Ministers, who are giving
this nation sound and effective administration. But from now on,
as we move into the election period, we will all need to redouble
our efforts to get our message across, and counter the propaganda
of our opponents. In the last eighteen months, I've been to every state in
Australia to some of them several times and recently I've
toured the Northern Territory. 
In that time, I've seen the country pause and adopt a " wait and
see, attitude. In recent months, too, I've seen it putting caution
aside and getting into its stride again and the pace is steadily
quickening in response to government measures deliberately taken
during the last eighteen months
to stimulate growth
to create employment
and at the same time to keep the brake on
inflation
Not one single area of government activity has been left out of
our continuing process of reviewing our policies, overhauling them
and developing them in new directions.
Our policy thinking goes on in the knowledge that Australians
are individuals and fiercely individual in the values they hold
dear, and the kind of society in which they want to live.
In today's world, there is an increased awareness of the
individual's responsibilities to his society. The Australian
people have delegated to us, as their Government, some of those
responsibilities, and before long, they must decide at the polls
whether we have kept faith with them.
Therefore it is important that we, as Liberals, should be
articulate in restating for the nation what we, as a Party, see
as our objectives and how we, as a Government, are going about the
business of achieving those objectives.
The Liberal Party shares with other parties of goodwill
the desire to create a society in which the individual can live in
peace and dignity, can enjoy the liberties which our civilisation
prizes and in which his enthusiasm and energy can find full
expression and potential. But unlike others, we are not a Party
representing sectional interests. Our concern is to build
Australia for all Australians.
In doing this, we look primarily to individual initiative and
enterprise as the dynamic force of proarss. Of course, if
experience shows the Government intervention is necessary to
protect the Australian people against exploitation, from whatever
source, then we stand ready to act and will act.
But the progress achieved since crld War 11, in the
development of this country within the private enterprise system,
vindicates our confidence in this approach.
Let us look at how our Party's objectives and its
pragmatic political philosophy relate to the issues of our time.
Take first our foreign relations. Proud as we are to be
Australians, we are also conscious that we are members of a world
community. All Australians want to assist in creating and
preserving for others the same freedoms and prosperity as we seek
for ourselves. / 3 
Our concern naturally focussos on the hunger and strifo affecting
the countries of our own region. It is for them alone to decidc
the road they wish to follow in seeking to better their lot. But
we think Australians are anxious to nurture their efforts.
Liberal Governments have assisted with material aid and
training, and by participating in joint economic and defence
endeavours. Following my recent visit to Indonesia, for example,
we are arranging naval exercises between the two countries. We
already play our part in the Five-power Defence Arrangements with
Malaysia and Singapore. During my recent personal discussions
with President Soeharto, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singap~ ore
and Prime Minister Tun Razak of M1alaysia, the single fact that
stood out above all others was the degree of confidence they have
in us: That is the degree of confidence they havo in you the
Australian people.
They know they can trust: us. They know the part we have
played and that we will continue to play in the region and I am
confident they also know that if we were to leave, if we were to
lose our interest in this region, a vacuum would be created, which
might well be filled hy another influence not as friendly, nor
as trustworthy. So that our efforts to contribute to the stability
and pros perity of countries in our region are not only a moral
responsibility. They help to lessen tensions and misunderstanding.
They also represent an important contribution to our defence.
Regrettably, tensions and misunderstandings still persist.
For these reasons, our policy is to continually strengthen the
capability of our defence forces and to effsctively maintain our own
defence alliances, as for example, our alliance under ANZUS and
with the United States and New Zealand. Our policy is also
designed to protect the liberties of others whilst emphosising
the primary effort must be our own dcfence, and then the contribution
we can make to world stability and prosperity.
Another important issue of our time, an&amp; ono that is of
immediate importance to us in the maintennce~ of public law and
order. One of the basic freedoms is the right of the inc'ividual to
build his life within a stable framework of just laws. No
individual c-an rest secure,/ or cnnfidently plan his own and his
family's future outside of such a framework. We in Australia have
been fortunate in the stability of our society, but we would he
unwiso to assume it is an inevitable featurc of Australian life.
Like all worthwhile things: it must be protected and preserved.
Today we see it threatened by a growing di srogard for the
observance of our laws and the processes by which wc arrive at
them, whether in the industrial or the political sphere.
Draft resisters are encouracd by individuals and groups
who themselves aspire to the responsibilities of office , protesters
resort to violence and vandalism in the name of goodwill. Unionists
blackmail the community and threaten the livelihood of their
fellows when arbitral decisions are not to their liking. The whole
basis ef public law and order within our community is threatened
by these actions. 
Unfortunately, many of the: people responsible are wellmeaning
individuals who fail to see the grave consequences which
can flow from these actions. Liberal Governments -and you who are
Liberals will know are committed by our Party platform to the
principle of " Parliament controlling the executive and the law
controlling all". My Government has stood firm and we will continue
to stand firm, to ensure respect for all constitutionally valid
laws. I should not let this opportunity pass without referring in
this context to the critical situation that has been reached in
the oil industry strike. On television last night I stated that
we as a GovernTment would not permit any one person or group to
determine who will or who will not receive fuel: We hold to that.
We are also determined that the arbitration system will be upheld.
The alternative, I repeat, is industrial anarchy.
Today's events have shown that the emergency proposals
under which only some of the strikers return to work are not good
enough. And to show clearly how political this is, Mr. Hawke has
now allowed free access to petrol in South Australia because it
happens to be a Labor-dominated State. The men on strike have
already received in an interim decision from the commission, a wage
increase of $ 4.80 per week for tradesmen and $ 3.60 for trades
assistants. Some of the strikers still refuse to accept the
umpire's decision. I ask those still on strike to return to work so that
their outstanding claims can be dealt with by the Arbitration
Commission. There is still time.
We are not seeking confrontation. The confrontation is
in the defiance of an arbitrated decision by a diminishing number
of union meCmers. Turning to the economy, we see an area whcre our philosophy
puts us furthest apart from our political apponents. Our primary
concern is with the creation of wealth in which employer and
employee can share as co-operators not with the re-distribution
of the community's wealth at the risk of economic stagnation.
We see our success not only measured by gross natinal
product, but also in terms cf our objectives of full employment and
improved living standards.
Running a government is just like running a business. In
any financial enterprise, one must expect some setbacks. This also
applies in the national context, where some of the difficulties are
not within our own national control.
Economic problems overseas have reacted to the detrir-ant of
our own economy. There have been seve; re difficulties in the rural
economy which are being steadily overcome, due in part to the
fall in overseas prices. 
Our difficulties hia becn compounded by inflationary
pressures, due in part to irrosponsible domnnds for unrealistic
wages and conditions. But I assure you now re~ covery is well under
way. With a continuation of the same prudent management, Australia
in 1973 will see a continuation of the prosperity which has been
a feature of successive Liberal Governments.
Finally, I want to speak about the wonderfully
descriptive, but ill'-defined term, the " quality of life". Our
Party objectives have long recognised that a government's
responsibilities go far beyond simply prctecting the individual's
freedoms and creating conditions of material well-bing.
We view the availability of comprehensive educational opportunities
for all as an essential element in the soci. pty we are working to
create. We do so, because it is essential to provide the skills
and knowledge needed by industry, and because we know education
develops the spirit of true citizenship, and provides a basis for
a fuller and a more meicaningful life. Liberal Federal Governments
have been responsible, together with the states, for the great
expansion of tertiary education ever recent years.
Now we are becoming increasingly involvK-in socondary
education. Policies dosigned to encourage cultur. al activities are
a logical extension of our educational objectives. We look
ultimately to tho time when community interest in the arts is
sufficient to provide the finance nccessary to sustain and encourage
national cultural activities.
Meantime, we are continuing to provide modest support and
broadening the basc of Australian artistic cndeavcurs, by
initiatives like the national film schoci.
We have also been responsive to the recently awakened
national concern for the protection and improvemont of the
environment in which we live. With the States we have established
the Australian Environment Council for consultation and co-ordination
between us in environmental matters. We are concerned to maintain
the fine qualities which have characterised life in our great country.
We take pride in our whole Australian heritage both the country
and its people. Wo will work to protect and nurture buth.
Time alone prevents mae giving further examples of how our
dedication to political liberty and the freedom and dignity of man
guides cur policies. But the matters I have touched on uc. onstrate
the continuing relevance of Liberal Party objectives to our national
destiny. Naither time nor events have outmoded them. Mo~ reover, our
Party has the human resources and the purpose to lead the Australian
nation forward towaras; the goals the people themselves have chosen
I certainly have an abundance of confidence. We are confident that
a majority of the Australian people share our ap~ preciation of the
important issues of our national life and will yet again place their
confidence in our Government when the elections occur towards the
end of the year.
My personal and my wholehearted belief is this. With a
candidate of the kind we have in our prescnce here tonight, with the
support I know we can expect and will in fact get from the people
who are here representing as they do Liberal thought, Liberal
ambitions and Liberal ideals, I feel absolutely certain that you 
will put Vince Bruce back thcre and you will make certain of
a magnificent victory in this election.
Give us the opportunity to govern, and I can assure
you that we will cary on the tradition of the last twenty-two
years. But above all, we will do more than carry on in that
tradition. With an economy as soundly-based as ours is, with
increasing diversity and increasing strength, we will be able to
do all the things that you want us to do better health,
better education, better transport, and above all, a feeling
of confidence in the community. 



OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE
OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
APPEAL FUND
CANBERRA
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. lion William McMahon
M. P. 31 AUGUST, 1972
S This is a pleasant occasion for me and I hone your appeal
on behalf of the Australian year Of National Development of the
Australian Institute of International Affairs, will attract widespread
support throughout Australia.
In the time I have this evening I want to emphasise two
points that the making and public explanation of Australian foreign
policy is of great and increasing importance to t-he future of this
country; and that our foreign policy should be based on the
understanding and support of the Australian people themselves.
No-one should underestimate the importance of Australia's
involvement in the world around us at a time when there is a
tendency to concentrate on our domestic issues. To underline the
point, may I remind you of a remark made by the late President
i: ennedy. He said once and I quote him: " Domestic policy can
defeat us but foreign policy can kill us."
I endorse and support this view that the survival of
man and the continuing search for progress towards a stable and
peaceful world is very much a practical ani necessary daily
problem for the governments of the world.
A policy of isolation would not be in the best interests
of Australia. Desnite the fact that we are a prosperous island
with relatively few problems, w are directly involved in changing
world conditions of continuing importance to our own future security.
If peace is to be securc in the Asian and Pacific region
in this decade the United States, the Soviet Union, Japan and the
People's Repub'lic of China must come to some accommodationn and a
balance must be found in which each will live with an understanding
of the different systems, goals and aspirations of the others. / 2 
2.
Arrangements must also be made which accommodate the determination
of the smaller countries in the region to preserve and strengthen
their own independent societies. It must be obvious that we in
Australia have a constructive and helpful role to play in the
Pacific threatre. The other point I want to emphasise is that we believe
that Australia's foreign policy should rest on the understanding
and support of an enquiring and well-informed public opinion.
Ideally, in an educated democracy like Australia, foreign
policy should grow out of the people. We want to see a more
outward-looking Australian community with a great feeling of
involvement in the affairs of the world around us, and I would like
this informed public opinion to have more influence on the shaping
of foreign policy. Our own foreign policy will obviously be more
effective and stable if it enjoys widespread support based on the
interest and understanding of an informed public.
An active Australian Institute of International Affairs can
and must play a vital role in improving such interest and
understanding in seeking to inject informed ideas into public
discussion of foreign policy, and in stimulating a greater feeling
of public involvement in international issues facing Australia.
I believe that the work of the Institute is steadily and
surely becoming of greater importance. Indeed, at this stage of our
development, it is a role the Institute is well fitted to play.
More than ever before, we want to establish a more distinctive
Australian identity in a changing world. I therefore welcome the
vision and energy the Institute is showing in seeking to strengthen
its role. The target of the apneal $ 300,000 is a sizable one
and it will not be achieved without considerable effort on the part
of the organisers and without widespread and strong co-operation.
I emphasise that the Institute is independent of the government
the success of the aopeal will strengthen this independence and the
capacity of the Institute and add depth to areas from which the
government may draw in shaping official foreign policy. A
successful appeal will also ensure that funds will be available for
the national headquarters the Institute certainly should have.
For all of these reasons I have the greatest pleasure in
launching the Institute's year of National Development and in
asking you and your friends to contribute to this cause. 



CONFERENCE OF THE PRESIDENTS OF THE
NATIONAL MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
ASSOCIATIONS
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. William
McMahon, M. P. 4 OCTOBER, 1972
Mr. President and Gentlemen:
This visit gives me the opportunity to welcome you
collectively to Canberra and also to say something about the
matters of special interest to both Government and industry.
First, let me say that I am giving close attention
personally to the representations you have made in recent months
about the future of manufacturing in Australia, about current
matters like the tariff review and trade practices, and about the
Government's administrative system for dealing with manufacturers
and manufacturing policy, and about the state of the economy in
general. Let me take this last point first because it is against
the background of the state of the economy that we measure the
progress and the prospects of manufacturing industry.
I believe that the worst is well behind us and that
steadily and deliberately the economy will continue to gather
strength, providing there are-no self-inflicted injuries resulting
from prolonged industrial trouble and industrial lawlessness, and
always providing that when wage increases take place, productivity
increases are not far behind.
The level of unemployment is being watched closely and
the Government has already taken corrcctivc measures, through the
Budget and other ways, to ensure that-unemployment falls.
I am completely confident that we can overcome the
problem to the satisfaction of the Australian people and the
discomfort of the Labor Opposition and ' he President of the ACTU.
To my mind it is tragic that there are sufficient numbers
of people about who seem to have a ves~ ted interest in unemployment
for purposes of political advantagi! that they can conmmand
headlines in the media to the ext _ nt t:. iat they do.. 2 
-2
This is a time when by word and deed we should
demonstrate confidence, each in our own way and in our own field.
I ask manufacturers to join the Government in approaching the
problems of the day in this fashion because manufacturers have
an honoured place, a vital place, indeed an indispensable place,
in this industrialised society of ours.
Now I want to mention two or three matters
as a positive act of reassurance by me, because i am aware that
some of you are a little uncertain and anxious about the effect
of Government policies on manufacturing industry.
I refer to policies like the Tariff Board
review which is already in progress and the revision to the
Trade Practices legislation which has yet to comb before the
Parliament. Here and now, I want to assure you that our
fundamental political philosophy is unchanged. We are committed
to the free enterprise philosophy, because we know it works to the
benefit of the whole Australian community and that our policies are
related to, and do not displace, that philosophy.
I have told manufacturers on other occasions
that neither I nor the Government will do anything to compromise
the future of economic and efficient Australian industries, and
more than that, we will continue to encourage and provide incentives
to those industries. We seek your counsel and co-operation regularly.
And we are Prepared to give the most careful consideration to
ways and means of developing both those practices, if necessary
by new arrangements. Mr President, in the last eighteen months, the
Government has taken a new look-at every major field of Government
activity. We have restored the investment allowance
decided to continue the financial incentive
provided under the Industrial Research
and Development Scheme for a further five
years
-decided to extend the export incentives
scheme beyond 30 June, 1973
-made the most significant amendments to the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act since 1947
-announced important new measures on overseas
takeovers
and we will table the llono-, Dlies Commission and Trade Practices
Bill and we will give time for informed public de-bate before we
legislate. 
3
This to my mind is a sensible way because we get
the benefit of public reaction, suggestions and criticisms before
the final commitments are made.
Of course, you have to live with criticism that
you can't make up your mind quickly. But surely there is merit in
such a course. A " hit and miss" policy would be as dangerous as
the application of doctrinaire socialism to the business life of
this country. And, believe me, those are the only alternatives
to the way we act. Now, Mr President, may I say a word or two about
tariffs. It's pretty clear to me that our tariff policy is still
under fire from some groups. So let me go over some of the ground
again very briefly. As a general principle, let me say this. In
all industry matters within its jurisdiction, including tariffs,
the Government is the body which makes the final decisions. It
does so with a full exposure of the facts. It does so after taking
the advice of its experts and considering the recommendations of
its committees, tribunals and appointed authorities.
The advice it seeks is objective and non-political.
It comes from specialists, researching, studying and examining
specialised fields. It is a major factor in political decisionmaking
but it is not the only one. The decision a Government
takes has to be made in practical terms. The theorist has his
value and he is important. But he is not the decision-maker.
The Government is the decision-maker and has to
take into account the national interest, the industry interest
and whether a proposal can really work or not. It has to make
its decision against a far wider background than the one against
which its advisers, by the nature of their specialty and their
brief, have tD work. Now, I've heard the Tariff Board described as
a " bunch of theorists". That isn't fair to the able men on the
Board. And I think that kind of criticism stems from an over-ready
assumption that a Board recommendation becomes the Government
decision as a matter of course.
The Tariff Poard's current review of the high areas
of the tariff which should be completed in about six years is, as
you know, concerned with identifying any excess protection which
may exist. 
-4
In recent months, some manufacturers have sail"
they would like to have advance indication of the timing of the
enquiries under this review as far ahead as possible to help them
in their policy making. Yesterday, as you no doubt know, the Tariff
Board issued a publication which sets out its timetable for the
thirty-five industry references which will take it up to 1978.
The Board's programme gives proposed. sequence and duration of
individual enquiries. This publication is avaiable from the Tariff
Board in Canberra and I hope it will go a long way to meeting
your wishes in this matter of timing.
You will appreciate as the Deputy Prime minister
has said yesterday, that it was desirable to have a broad
timetable and that somne flexibility will be needed by the
Government in the exact timing of references. I want to assure
you, too, that you will have advance indication of the timing
of review enquiries as far ahead as Practicable.
Now I want to emphasise that the Government does
not see this review as challenging either the principle of the
practice of protection. The Tariff Board works in the knowledge
that the Government's long-established policy is one of full
adequate protection for economic and efficient Australian
industries. That hasn't been changed and won't be changed.
Both my colleague, t%-he Minister for Trade and.
Industry, and I have repeatedly stated this in the past year or
SO. But what I do want to do today is to stress
those " other factors" which arc taken into, account when the
economics of an industry are under study. These " other factors"
have their relevance in any study of the best way to allocate
and use our national resources.
One is a defence consideration. An industry
which has a 3otential contribution through somne sector of its
operations to our defence resources is entitled to, and will
get that potential recognised in any tariff decision.
Another is the industry which may not be able
to survive without protection above the level assessed exclusively
in terms of its cost disability against imports, but which employs
special classes of labour which we want to encourage, or which
may be developing special skills and technology.
I remind you of our recent decisicns in the
case of woven and knitted shirts. We decided that to achieve an
orderly transition to a lower level of protection, the existing
level would be maintained for a longer period than was recommended
by the Tariff Board. 
In the meantime, the Government negotiated for
voluntary restraint arrangements with low-cost countries to ensure
that the manufacturers were able to keep going. However, despite
these negotiations, it was not possible to reach acceptable
agreements, and the Government therefore decided to establish tariff
quotas on competing imports to ensure that the local industries did
not " go to the wall". The point I want to emphasise over and over again
is that if tariff actionisconsidered necessary by the Government to
achieve rationalisation, then firms would not be expected to adjust
overnight. Special care would be taken not to put job opportunities
for Australians at risk.
Mr President, there are other examples, but my time
is short. The message I want to leave with you is that the Government
regards a strong, growing and prosperous manufacturing industry
as a great pillar of economic strength and wants it to grow and
expand. I state further that in the Tariff review and the
Government's approach to it, and in the proposed Trade Practices
reforms, the Government is encouraging healthy progress in a
competitive, free enterprise economy.
Our recent decision on foreign investment in
Australia is, I submit, further clear evidence of our desire to
foster Australian industry and to make it stronger, more efficient
and affluent. 


SPEECH BY THE-PRIME MINISTER, THE RT HION. WILLIA4McMAHON, CH,. MP, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,CANBERRANATIONAL RFTIREMENT BENEFITS 19 October 1972I wish to announce to the House the terms of reference fora committee of enquiry into the best way of abolishing the means testover the next three years and -f responsibly financing this significantmeasure in association with the possible introduction of a nationalsuperannuation scheme.The Government's decision to introduce means-test-freepensions for people aged 65 and over represents a major social advancewith considerable financial, economic and social implications.We accordingly announced in the 1972-73 Budget speech ourdecision to appoint a committee of enquiry to examine and report onthese matters, including the question of how the proposal formeans-test-free pensions could be responsibly financed with particularreference to national superannuation.As announced in the 1972-73 Budget speech, the Governmentis committed to abolition, within the next three years, of the meanstest on ae m. nsion eligibility for residentially qualified men andwomen aged 65 years and over.The Government has also decided that the free-of-means testpension will be subject to tax but, following past practice, provisionwill be made to exempt or partially relieve from taxation persons inthe lower income groups receiving free-of-means test pension.In addition, the Government has determined that eligibilityfor supplementary assistance and for Commonwealth ancillary pensionbenefits will be conditional, as now, on satisfaction of the relevantspecial means test../ 2
The terms of reference of the committee will be" Having in mind the policy of the Government to abolishthe means test within the next three years on age pensioneligibility for residentially qualified men and women agedyears and over, as announced in the 1972 Budget speech,to report on1. Matters involved in the implementation of theabolition of the means test in accordance with theGovernment's announcement as set out in the Treasurer's1972-73 Budget speech.2. Appropriate ways and means of financing the free-ofmeanstest retirement benefits associated with a possiblenational superannuation scheme, includingthe type of national superannuation;the persons to be covered;whether the scheme of national superannuationshould be voluntary or compulsory.3. The relationship of the new free-of-means testretirement benefits and national superannuation ( if any)to private schemes and to life assurance.4. The method of adjusting the new benefits over time.The taxation treatment of the new benefits.6. Methods of making the administration of the newscheme as simple as possible.7. Any associated matters that the committee considersrelevant to the objective of the enquiry."I am glad to be able to announce that the committee ofthree to enquire into these matters will be under the Chairmanshipof Sir Leslie Melville, C. B. E. With him as members of thecommittee will be MR T. P. Scott and MR J. E. M. Dixon. On behalf of theGovernment, I express our thanks to these gentlemen for agreeing toundertake this important and substantial task.CANBERRA



ANNUAL CONFEPENCE, LIBERAL PARTY CENTRAL COMMITTEE
OF WOMEN'S SECTION
ST. KILDA. VIC.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. William. McMahon, CH, MP.
October 1972
Just as the strength of the family rests with
women, so does the strength of the nation depend upon the quality
of its women. And that leads me to say that I believe the same
principles apply to national political parties like the Liberal
Party of Australia. I don't think we could have succeeded as
well over the last twenty-two years, nor could we have endured
for so long and have such bright prospects as we now have, if
it had not been for the Liberal women.
Here, I am not talking exclusively about women
mem! Ders of Parliament. I am talking about the women of the
Party who comprise the backbone of our electoral and of our
campaign organisations. So today, I want to pay tribute to you on behalf
of the Liberal Party as a whole. But, now I am going to ask you
to work even harder during the next five weeks, or six weeks, in
order to ensure that we have a bigger majority in the House than
we have at the present time. I know you will. And I know you
are going to ensure your return on December 2 with a resounding
victory, and I repeat again with an evcn greater majority than
we have in the House now.
Now this election campaign will, I believe, be
decisive for all of us. It will in fact be a crucial decision.
On December 2 Australians will be making their choice between
a way of life that puts the individual, the family and the
nation first, living in and working in and sharing in the
Government of an Australia which has modern defences, strong
alliances and good neighbours. That is the Liberal way; that
is the Liberal choice. / 2 
We will be choosing between this and a radically
different way of life, a radically different Australia,
compulsorily squeezed and moulded by artificial controls to
conform to Labor's foolish and repulsive socialist policies.
It is, I believe, becoming clearer, as the tide
of public opinion continues to turn in our favour, that
Australians will emphatically reject the wrong-headed visions
of our opponents. I want to emphasise this just as strongly
as I can. Labor's blueprints for remaking of Australian life
are alien to everything on which we have based the nationbuilding
of our post-war generation of progress, growth and
development. In every phase of national and personal life from
external security to ' Private morality, they want to attack the
way of life that the great majority of Australians have built
and which we want to preserve. For these reasons, Australians
are realising that this is an election not between similar
Parties and similar policies, with nothing more than a minor
shade of difference to tell them apart because the differences
between us are sharp and they are real.
So, it will be a major part of the Liberal Party
campaign in the next few weeks to drive home these unbridgeable
differences in public understanding. It is essential that all
of us in the Liberal Party make certain that no Australian goes
to the polls without a clear understanding of these differences.
That is one vital aspect of our campaign. But the most important
message that we should bring to the Australian people is this.
It is the message that in the past eighteen months this
Government has achieved more changes and reforms than any other
Government in history in a comparable period. This pattern of
change and reform matches, I believe, the new aspirations of the
Australians of the 1970' s.
But that is only a beginning. We have shown that
we have a combination of youth and experience in Government which
successfully tranerlates imaginative ideas into constructive and
into responsible action. In the next few weeks Members and
Ministers will be travelling the length and breadth of the nation
and we will convince Australia that the return of this Gpvernment
will be a mandate for continuous, constructive contemporary, and
above all, responsible change. 1
And so I want to put this to all Australians. Put
back a Government that will guarantee your freedom of choice while
it goes on changing and reforming and improving the quality of
life in a dynamic Australia. Whilst we are proud of what we've
done, we are not content. / 3 
Before I go on to examine some specific areas of
policies and issue in this election lot me go bach~ a little over
what we have done in a very short period of Government. I remind
you immediately of the success of Premiers' Conferences and of
the Loan Council. But I want to move now fairly quickly to what
occurred three months ago whcn wco brought down the most
humanitarian, wide-ranging and far-sighted Federal Budget in
memory. We slashed personal taxation. They were the largest
cuts in th~ e nation's history.
We also demonstrated that this is a Government of
roal social conccrn going wel~ l beyond any previous actions.
The Means Test has been c" scd " a we ore pledgod t" its complete
abolition within the next throe years. Pension rates in the last
eighteen months brought an increase of 29 percent in the stanard
rate of pension, never before equalled in so short a time from
$ 15.50 per wcek to $ 20 per week or more than three times the
changes in the cost of living at that time. All other pension
levels went up to give thrm the largest buying power ever.
The wives of all pensioners become entitled to receive benefits
ranging up to an increase Df $ If.? 5 pcr week, and because we
allowed superannuation ponsions and annuities to be treated as
property, many thousands of people will receive further pensions
for tho first time.
Our nursing home and home care reforms will be a
milestone in the care of the aged. For care in the home, there
is now a home care allowance of $ 14.00 a wcek in addition to
their social service benofits.
The personal income tax cut has bcen cut an average
of 10 percent following a 2h percent reduction we made in April.
For the man on the average wage with a wife and four
children, the amount of tax paid is down by a quarter and his
take-home pay is increased by $ 3.10 a week. Dependants'
. Allowances have been increased by $ 52 a year.
We have exempted 600,000 taxpayers from tax completely
by lifting the tax threshold from $ 417 a year to $ 1,041 a year.
pstate duty exemptions have been doubled and the Home Savings
Grant has gone up from $ 5C0 tc $ 750. 
In education, 1-ye are allowing u-p to $ 40~ 0 as a deduction
for self-education ex'-enses. Deductions for student children have
gone up from $ 300 to 450, and secondary and tertiary scholarships
have been increased dramatically from $ 53,000 to $ 123,000 a year.
Living allowances have been raised and limits on scholarship
holder's incomes abolished.
We have begun assistance in child care with an initial
million for centres for children in snecial needs and those
from low income families.
These, I assure you, are but nart, and only part, of our
Budget measures, and this I can assure you, is only part of the
story. Let us look at other major ' nolicy decisions. ! We have
within recent weeks, in fact -within the last ten days, implemented
controls on foreign takeovers, and if the advice tendered to me is
correct, and I believe it i3, it will -over 90 ner cent of the
cases. But equally important, I believe, that not only does the
law itself provide a major deterrent, but it is also indicative of
the fact that we will take whatever strona measures are needed in
order to ensure that no foreign takeover takes placeif it is contrary
to the national interest.
We have acted to Protect the environment. We have
established an ambitious new;, framework for urban growth. We have
already established an inquiry into poverty.
1bw these are just some of the things we've done, and they
are the kind of actions which we have shown we can initiate and
implement both capably and responsibly. We will do more, we will
do much more, but no Government can build this nation without
ensuring its basic security.
Not so many years ago we. ir elied for our defence and
security on the might of tie British-and American Navies, and to a
lesser extent uoon thoir airforcoes. World War II and subsequent
events, ' narticularly the dramatic changes that are occurring in
Asia, have changed that basic concept. For centuries the Asian
nations remained unchanged and unchangeable. Today this area of
the world is one of the most changing and dynamic and we are
participating in that change and those dynamic areas whcre the
change is taking place.
There can be doubt, howover that, China in its
international policieCs, continually promotes the idea of
insurgency in other countries, for example, in Thailand and
Malaysia, which are both very important to our security and to
our trade. 
People might argue, that is all right, but we cannot
see immediate prospects of danger of an attack upon our nation's
frontier and on Australia itself. For them who argue this way,
I want to give an unequivocal answer. Akny person who is prepared
to take a risk with the security and defence of this country is
acting in a way that is completely intolerable and will not be
accepted by the vast majority of Australian people because the
unexpected can happen.
Let me 4ve you a few illustrations. You will
remember the confrontation between Indonesia and Malaysia a few
years ago and the possibility that this could have spilt over into
East Nlew Guinea. You will remember the insurgency in East Malaysia
and in North Malaysia and in Thailand and of the activities of the
Communists in Thailand and the military oerations between India
and Pakistan and you know, too, of the growing presence of Russia
in the Indian ocean. In these circumstances, we just could not
take a risk and any person or party who Promoted the idea that
the risks should be accepted is not worthy of representing the
Australian people. Of course we would wish for policies of
bipartisanship but this is not the nature of politics and cannot
be for long periods anyhow.
So you see there are great and fundamental differences
between the Government and our opponents but let me summarise them
to you. In our regional defences we are building good relations
with Indonesia and the Five Power arrangements with Malaysia and
Singapore were reaffirmed as in good shape during my visits to
those three countries earlior this year.
Labor, the alternative, would pull Australia out of
the Five Power arrangements. We will remain as long as those
nations want us to do so. We continue to support, and give full
support for the ANZUS Treaty as a guarantee of our security, while
continuing to build our self-reliance and our ability to help
others within the region.
Labor would downgrade ANZUS from a primary defonce
treaty to a social welfare document and concept. It would, in
fact, make ANZUS completely lacking in concept, lacking in vitality
for purely defence pu rposes.
Similarily they would write off SEATO as useless, even
though it is a regional arrangement which links the powers in our
part of the world, both to Britain and the Ujnited States and they
would do this through the immediate abolition of National Service
and they would straight away destroy the traditional strength of
the army which military experts state is the basic minimum structure 
necessary for the army to be able to field in any significant
force. In fact they would reduce the size of the army from about
41,000 to 26,000 and they would reduce the strength of our army
from about nine to somewhere about five or six battalions.
This would inevitably mean that our army would
immediately drop out of the currency of diplomacy and of deterrence
in the region. Career opportunities in the army would be
irreparably damaged. our security would be undercut, and our
ab~ ility to give our Asian friends our word and be able to back it
up would be non-existent. If this is not the recipe for an
isolationist, friendly, and ultimately defenceless, Australia, I
cannot imagine what is.
They see no problems emerging in the Indian Ocean,
and they would deny ? imerica access to defence communications
installations in Australia. These are all very great differences
between us. I now turn to the important issue of immigration,
because, here again, my Government and the Labor Party are poles
apart. We believe that it is essential that the Government should
control population policies. Through our Liberal Party
immigration policy we exercise this control.
Labor runs away from this responsibility. It wants
the entire migration programme based upon sponsorship by relatives
of migrants already living here.
Now this assumes that the sum total of the individual
wishes of relatives of migrants will always equal the sum -total
of Australia's immigration needs. This is nonsense and many
people in the Labor Party know it and they let their views become
known. My Government combines two processes. A sponsorship
process to encourage family reunions and a process of actively
seeking migrants under Government sponsorshiD to fulfil those of
the nation's needs not met by sponsorship. Labor's policy of
non-control is doubly dangerous. It abandons the means of making
adjustments to meet the nation's varied social and economic needs.
Worse, it ensures that there will be an immediate and substantial
cut-back in immigration followed by a rapidly accelerating change
in the pattern of immigration.
In the past five years, only half of all settlers in
Australia were either Commonwealth or State nominees, only thirty
eight rprcent were privately nominated settlers. To abandon
Government nominated immigration as the A. L. P. would do would have the
effect of reducing settlers by at least one half, despite the
/ 7 
weight of expert opinion that migrants put far more into the
economy than they take out of it. We would also lose an essential
supply of skilled workers and these, I believe, areD very important
figures to present to you.
In the past five years, Labor's policy would have
denied Australia 73,700 of the 98,000 skilled workers who came
here as assistant migrants. These skilled workors are essential
for regional development, such as the develonment over in the
North-West of Western Australia and the development as well in
various parts of Queensland, including the alumina developments
and the development of our bauxite deposits.
The other major effects of Labor's snonsorship-only
policy will be an inevitable change in the pattern or the
composition of immigration programmes because of the sponsor ship
rates of various nationalities. These show that the non-European
migrants have by far the highest sponsorship patterns of the
highest sponsorship rates. Under Labor there would be a
pyramiding effect of immigration amongst those migrants with a
traditionally higher sponsorship rate. This would mean the
systematic elimination of immigration from Northern Europa, the
United Kingdom and the 71mericas. Mr. Whitlam has done this with
complete disregard for the national interest. He even admitted
on television, as you probably know and saw, that this policy
was to get him " cff -the hook" on the issue of discrimination.
In summary, therefore, Labor would abandon the
existing immigration policy which, while by no means exclusively
European, is strongly oriented-I in that direction. Labor's policy
would ensure that no selection was to be made on the ground of the
country of origin. It would, in short, ignore the lessons learned
in other countries and it wouldl significantly alter the ethnic
structure of -Australia in the long tcrm.
By contrast, we support the existing immigration
scheme, with intake scale~ d to ensure maximum employment. Skilled
workers, 30 per cent of which wlould be eliminated by Labor, have
benefitted everybody by adding to the nation's nroductivity, and
their substantial demand for goods and services has helped to
sustain employment. This policy, based upon assisted European migration,
has encouraged rapid assimilation and it has given us an integrated
nation with minimal ethnic problems and controlled yet rapid
population growth, with an increasing insurance:-on our defence
potential. / 8 
The last issue I want to mention to you today is
the question of freedom under the law and how it affects our
society. Democracy and the guarantee of individual human rights
to freedom and independence depend upon two concepts: They are
the rule of law and the maintenance of public order and regular
free Parliamentary elections.
The rule of law means this, that everybody has equal
freedom and equal rights under the law which are administered
fairly, impartially and honestly. This means freedom for
everybody, freedom without any sort of discrimination. Tp be
effective, the rule of law requires discipline in the use of
sanctions which in turn require legal enforcement. That is what
the maintenance of public ordcr means.
It is truly said that without law is without liberty.
When we s * oeak of freedom we mean your freedom under the law. It is
not a licence to do as you please without restraint or without
respect to the rights of others. Particularly some young people
think it fashionable or exciting to become involved with the
so-called conscientious breaking of the law through civil
disobedience. Such people are easily exr'loited and manipulated
by a small hard-core group of militant activists because of their
relatively innocent political idealism. This hard-core group
makes no pretence whatsoever of respect for the law or concern
for democracy although, as most of us know, they fully exploit
democratic freedoms to preach their own propaganda.
Our political opponents try to ridicule and degrade
freedom under the law with a smokescreen of self-righteousness
or attacks upon the police. The question must be asked: Why?
Here in Victoria, the Labor Party has answered by
its action in endorsing as a candidate for an unwinnable seat a
young man who is on a run from the law. That endorsement must cast
doubts on Labor's belief in our political system of democracy, or
at least that section of the Labor Party which took part in, or
applauded this candilate, because the endorsement of the young man
did nothing less than throw the concer't of the rule of law of
which I have been speaking into ridicule and contempt.. You would
think that a democratic constitutional party would immediately
disown this sort of action as political delinquency, something to
be condemned. What happenedl? Mr. Whitlam was asked about it, and
he retorded:---" Draft dodging is not a crime." As you know, or
you should know, Mr. Whitlam is, or is alleged to be, a Queen's
Counsel. / 19 
4 9.
And what did Mr. Hawke do? He took part in the
young man's campaircn. Mr. Whitlam, I can assure you, put his
mouth to it, but Mr. Hawke went one better and out his foot in it.
Now Mr. Whitlam and Mr. Hawke are engaged in a contest
about who is going to be the front-runner in the Labor campaign.
Whichever one it is, this provides a fair indication of their
attitude to freedom under the law and the public order.
We are, unfortunately, living in an increasingly violent
society. This year alone, there were twenty-four bombing
incidents in an Australia, previously relatively free from them.
I ask you as Liberal women and those others, those other guests who
come within Liberal women today to ask and to frequently to ask
others this question: Which Party would you trust to preserve law
and preserve the authority of the law from the contempt which
eventually incident by incident will attack the foundation of our
society a foundation, steadily built un by the Liberals over the
years, steadily developed in a way that has given not only the
maximum of security internationally, but which has helped us to
develoo a world of our own where traditional values do matter, where
welfare of our own people is of paramount importance and where we
have created an impression overseas that is one of envy for what we
as people have done.
You, the women of the Liberal Party, who have played
such a magnificent part in developing this as a realistic concept
and making life better and better for every succeeding generation of
Australians deserve, I believe, the wholehearted commendation of all
Liberals and certainly deserve the respect of every Australian.
For these reasons, I have much pleasure in being
invited to come here, and I now officially declare this Conference
open. 



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB
CANBEIRA 29 NOVEMBER 1972
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hhn. William McMahon
M. P.
Mr. President, Members of the National Press Club and Ladies and
Gentlemen of the National Press;
One of the perennial questions in a democracy like ours
is the one about the Press and politics.
Does the Press have the power to radically influence the
political process? Can the Press actually change a Government or alter an
election result? And as a politician, I am isked with some regularity what
a Government ought to do about it.
Well, I'll give you one commitment and one non-election
promise. I am committed to a free Press as an essential element
of a democracy and I would always want to preserve it.
And I make the non-promise. We will not establish a
Ministry for the media.
I noticed that a distinguished British Journalist said the
other day that newspapers who claimed they could win an election were
being fanciful. I'm not sure how closely this translates to the Australian
situation, but I will say this to you:
That all the praise and the blame,
agreements and disagreements,
and conflicts of opinion between politicians
and the Press eventually finish up at one point.
and we will reach that point on Saturday
when all the newspaper readers,
television viewers
and radio listeners
turn themselves into voters and make the final
decision for themselves.
That's the only way to settle the argument.
Ana i think for once we all have to agree that it's the
correct and proper method. / 2 
4 2-
Having said that, I come to my main purpose in accepting
your invitation today
And that is to review this election campaign and the
major issues that are before the Australian people today.
If I could sunarise them briefly in the form of a list
but not necessarily in order of importance, they are
First of all
representative Government.
Gcod Government rests on three basic principles:
It should be truly representative.
There must be respect for the rule of law:
And there must be an independent judiciary to protect
the individual against the State.
As an elected representative, you are there for the
people's purposes Not your own
And you should reflect the ambitions and the vitality
and the feelings of all Australians.
This goes hand in hand with my strong conviction
that no single person or group of people should become dominant
or too powerful in the community.
That is the road to dictatorship.
And here lies the fundamental and primary difference.
We stand fcr truly representative Government.
We are there to reflect the will and the wishes of the
people, and I believe we do.
The evidence of the years against Labor is overwhelming
and irrefutable. Labor Members of Parliament are pledged to obey
the instructions of the party machine.
This has been true for many years. It remains true,
despite Mr. Whitlam's cosmetic efforts.
In fact, it may well be that a Labor Government in the
nineteen-seventies would be more subject to outside non-elected
direction than in the nineteen-forties.
It is certainly true that the influence of the left wing
unions through Mr. Hawke and the A. C. T. U. executive is stronger.
So that remains a primary issue.
The second question is that of irresponsibility and
inflation which has been made an issue by Whitlam's costly and
incredible total of 140 policy promises.
Together with his delv. sions about w. hat can be done with
the growth rate. 
-3
Closely linked with this is the state of the economyaad
the management of the economy.
The latest indicators
Industrial production,
New motor vehicle registrations,
And building approvals,
All confirm the diagnosis of an economy which is bubbling
along and which by this time next year
or possibly a few months earlier
may well be in the condition of boom.
Clearly it is not appropriate in the coming months to
unleash demand in the tremendous and irresponsible manner that
Labor's huge list of promises implies.
Next, there is the very real question
of why the Labor Party wants to run away from the
issues of respect for the law.
And the preservation of accepted social values,
now that the election is so close.
They are. badly divided on this.
And that issue is very closely tied in with Labor's
impotence and silence on industrial relations and the future of
the arbitration system.
There is the question also of the party which puts
itself up as an alternative Government consistently skating away
from and trying to dodge the great issue of the defence and foreign
policies of this nation.
And the issue of centralism versus federalism, which
is an expression of one of the great and overriding philosophical
gulfs between us and the socialists.
As well there is the question of campaign opportunism
again made an issue by Labor's
on-the-run attempts to prOduce last-minute vote-catchers
and plug gaps which it seems oven the 140 election
promises did not cover.
Then there are the other great issues.
Is there to be freedom or onforc--d conformity and
monolithic control of education in Australia?
Is freedom of choice
and the whole private and religious hospital system
to be destroyed in the name of a single, depersonalised and more
expensive health machine? / 4 
04 4
Are our cities to be renewed and our new cities built
according to the rules of the political game or should it be done
by a properly constituted expert body advising both Federal and
State Governments? Those are some of the major issues.
But let me look at them in a little more detail.
The Labor Policy Speech ( and his attempt at economics
at Queanbeyan) showed that Mr. Whitlam had dropped all prctence of
responsibility and moderation in this attempt to buy his way into
office and bluff his way through the questio-n of cost and the
impact on the economy.
We have attempted to make sense
out of this ness of ambiguity and half-baked proposals
in order to get a fair and sensible estimato. of costs
to the taxpayer. As you know, their figure was $ 1,330 million against
$ 375 million for my Government's election proposals.
That is, four times the cost.
A~ s you know, too, Labor's figure covered only a few of
the firm proposals and have not been costed.
We had to leave out many of Labor's deceptive and vague
proposals simply because they-were too sloppy for any disciplined
and proper costing.
In total, they would most certainly run into many
hundreds of millions more.
All this was wrapped up in pious talk about open
Government. M4r. Whitlan might well have started by being open about
the exact nature of his proposals,
their timing,
the specific priorities in implementing his myriad
promises, and, most importantly, how they are to be paid for.
He has been too clever by half in dodging the taxation
question by saying there will be no change in taxation rates.
Every Australian knows that rising incomes and prices
automatically cause a greater and greater burden of actual tax in
dollars. The serious inflationary consequenices of the Labor
programme such as thle 35-hour week and reduction in immigration
would accelerate the speed at which the burden becomes
heavier and heavier, and the tax paid becomes punitive. 
N 5
We have recognised this with two large tax cuts since
the last election Nearly 10 percent in the 1S70-71 Budget
and an average of 10 percent in the Budget three months
ago. Mr. Whitlam hopes that no one will see through his
lawyer's talk about tax rates rather than actual dollars paid in
tax. As a means of financing his white elephants through a
two-way squeeze of inflation-boosted taxation.
This policy is not only dishonest to the taxpayer
and inhuman in its effects
on fixed income earners
and social service beneficiaries
it is also inadequate
to meet the huge costs involved.
Taxation rates themselves would have to go up,
or it would have to be done through new or increased
indirect taxes. Remember, Labor would impose two new taxes immediately.
The Health levy of 1.35% and the Social Services tax
of Or 3.85 cents in every dollar of your earnings.
We have reduced personal income taxation twice, as I
have already mentioned.
As I said at the beginning of this campaign and I repeat
now, Under Labor either taxes will have to be increased,
or many of Labor's promises wo* uld have to be quietly
dropped as forgotten election gimmicks.
: nd Labor talks about trusting the people.
While it deliberately perpetrates this slick and
unworthy deceit. In fact, 1ir. Whitlam doesn't trust his own Shadow
Treasurer who was candid enough to admit
that anyone over the $ 90 to $ 95 a week level would pay
more tax under Labor.
It is typically dishonest of him to try and get around
this by talking about tax rates.
Most people are rightly concerned with just how much is
going to be left in their pockets.
But the misery of
unremitting taxation burdens
chained to unchecked inflation
is only one side of this type of mandrake economics
we hear from the Leader of the Opposition.
You know what I mean. / 6 
-6
Think~ of the growth rate halve it and then-pretend
you can multiplyit-by magic.
The other side of this story is simply the very structure
of Government which the history and geography of this nation has given
us that is the three-tiered Federal system.
The whole thrust of the socialist takeover scheme is the
concentration of all political power here in Canberra
while State and Local Governments are to be strangled
and emasculated. There aro a lot of wolves in sheep's clothing around the
place on this subject.
Not least M4r. Whitlam himself.
But I put it to you that no one who has read the Labor
Platform, the Labor Policy Speech,
or Mr. Whitlam's many constitutional speeches could
have any doubt about his Party's true intention.
To put it in the words of my friend, Bob Askin:
" They want to murder the States"
The policy of the Liberal Party on this issue could not
be more opposed to that of Labor.
We are convinced that power should not be sucked into
the centre but pushed out and down to the grass roots, close to
the problems and close to the people.
his is a world trend, even in Mr. Whitlam's so-called
" comparable countries."
So much for the Policy Speeches.
What have we seen since from our oppocnents?
Incredibly it appears that Mr. Whitlam was not satisfied
with his 140 promises, once he saw our proposals.
Opportunism was piled on top of irresponsibility and we
heard first that Labor would match our plans for $ 330 million for
city transport. Since then, every time he arrives in a capital city he
adds another titbit from a stolen report
and at last count, was well past the $ 700 million mark
in extra transport promises.
On tcp of that, his Deputy suddenly discovered that
Labor might also be able to afford an enlistment bonus for the
army although this appears to be still in the half-baked
promise category. / 7 
-7
Two more bribes from the Labor Party.
After that we have heard virtually nothing from Labor's
sham campaign but a few belated bleats about their half-hearted plans
to quieten down organised Labor rowdies
who have been trying to drown out my own election
meetings around the country.
The truth is that once the Labor Party had trotted out
its T-shirt, TV commercials and its tremendous election bribes,
it ran for cover, leaving it to Mr. Sayers to throw the
mud. With -plenty of financial support, of course.
So what then have we seen in this campaign?
Mr. Whitlam is scared of defence and foreign policy.
He refuses to discuss law and order.
He has been muzzled on industrial relations policy.
He won't talk about immigration.
He wants to wash his hands of moral issues.
So much for trusting the people
So much for leadership.
Let me sp. eak to you now about this question of
leadership. I know many of you are experts in this area
you write about it so much.
So you may want to know how I see it.
As I said at the start, I believe Government should be
truly representative. That is the first of the three ingredients of good
Government. The second is that we should respect the rule of law.
And the third is that we should have an independent
judiciary that can be able to determine disputes between the
individual and the State.
So I believe that a man should have those qualities of
leadership which will make certain he can
sensibly and satisfactorily interpret the will and the
wishes of the people.
He should also be able to makec the machinery of
Government function in such a way that those wishes can be put into
practice. And the people themselves should be kept informed that
he is carrying out their will in the way they wan -t him to do.
He is also the man
who can create the conditions under w~ ich the individual
himself can realise his own ambitions ( providing. they don't interfere
with the rights of others), / 8 
8
can satisfy his needs and his wants, can help his
neighbours, and can help to develop the better society we all want.
It is also a fundamental task of leadership for the
Government. to interpret the changes occurring in society as life
becomes more complex
to be able to adjust
the Parliament
and the law
in order to mesh with the changing environment and
changing values. Now, I'd like to relate these thoughts to my own
party to show how in a practical way we have been able to
put these principles into practice.
I faced a difficult task when I took office twenty
months ago, as most of you have recognised
with no small emphasis in your reporting.
First of all, I had to make sure
that the State Premiers were treated as men
with their own serious responsibilities of Government in their
own areas. The results have been worthwhile.
The relations between the Commonwealth and the States
are much better and they have been able to play a much more
effective part in getting this good society that we all seek
to achieve. Then we had the problem
of unemployment getting too high
and demand for goods and services falling.
We had the problems of falling prices for rural
commodities and the exchange rate
and the alarming rise in wages and average earnings
and industrial lawlessness.
So we deliberately set cut to boost demand
to get production and employment rising
and to improve the climate of expectations
so that economic conditions would be improved.
Part of this was to ensure that people would have
the opportunity to earn more money
and keep a greater amount of it in their own pockets.
After all, this is the incentive to do better
remembering always that there are national and
social nieds which the Government must take into account
at the same time as it looks at the tax burden on
the individual. / 9 
9-
So as I have said, we twice reduced taxation
substantially to meet this objective.
Looking at this problem in the much wider national
sense You will remember that we acted with a series of
measures The Premiers' Conferences
with the mini-Budget
the Budget
and then on to our Policy Speech
In all of these, you will see that our objective
has been to represent the individual men and women in our
society. And we wanted to give priority to those in the
greatest need. I believe any honest witness will agree that we have
achieved our purpose.
But once having satisfied those basic or conventional
needs we believe there's much more the Government should,
and must That is, to promote the arts
to Provide opportunities for recreation
opportunities for travel
opportunities to ensure that if man is the paramount
objective of social life,
that he is able to realise inherite* d1 qualities
to burgeon and to grow
and to ensure that as he burgeons and grows
he will be able to help his own family
his neighbours
and to more helpfully participate in the social
life of the community.
In my view, this is the true objective of Government
I don't believe in dictatorship.
I do believe in leadership.
I hope that I have made some contribution to
achieving the true liberal ideal
of ensuring that the person himself
the individual man, woman or child
can have a much better life, a much happier one,
and that his prospects for the future in the wider sense can be
fully realised. We have come a long way along this road in twenty
months. Notwithstanding both the economic and political
conditions which were very much le: os than ideal.
The economy is now in good shape and obviously
getting better. The quality of social ju., tice has been greatly
improved. And I have a young, ablB and dedic-ated team of
Ministers with me. 
I think Australians recognise that what we have
done has been sound and practical and progressive as well.
I think they recognise
that we are moving into better times
and a greater future
a future in which good Government
means that it is the Government's job to do its
best to meet the will and wishes of the people as individuals.
I am therefore convinced that when it comes to the
decision on Saturday
they will accept us
and reject the alternative of a Goverrnment which
wants to impose its will and its machinery and its theories
on the people themselves.
Thank you. 


