Thank you very much Rodney and Brendan, so many distinguished friends, parliamentary colleagues.
Let me deal with the greatest role of war correspondents, indeed of all journalists, and that is to stand up to the powerful – to hold up the truth to power. It is often said that in war the first casualty is the truth and it is the war correspondents that have to tell the truth, often in the face of considerable criticism.
It takes courage for any journalist, for any correspondent, to stand up to big businesses, to vested interests, to governments and never more so in a time of war, when all of the arguments of patriotism can be levelled, inveighed against a journalist who seeks to tell the truth.
And so it is wonderfully fitting that we, a great democracy, one of the world’s greatest democracies, are dedicating this memorial on the centenary of Keith Murdoch’s letter to Andrew Fisher. What Keith Murdoch did – an Australian journalist and war correspondent – what he did was tell the truth. He told the truth in the nation’s interest. He told uncomfortable truths because, my friends, our democracy depends not just on the politicians, not just on the judges, it depends on the armed services defending our freedoms but it depends vitally on a free press; on a free and courageous press; on free and courageous correspondents who are not cowed by governments and by big vested interests.
Now we have had a very long tradition of courageous journalists covering our nation’s wars. They have, as Brendan said, written the first draft of history. Arguably, the first war correspondent, arguably the world’s first historian, was of course Thucydides who wrote and who was a participant in the Peloponnesian War. Although, I’d say to the Admirals and the Generals, he was also a General so he was multi-tasking – perhaps that wouldn’t be allowed, wouldn’t be acceptable nowadays.
Can I say that it is wonderful that the Charles Bean Foundation has sponsored this because Charles Bean, like Keith Murdoch, broke the mould of the war correspondent that, in effect, becomes part of the military’s, or the Government’s, publicity machine. And as those of you who have read Ross Coulthart’s excellent book would know very well, some of his dispatches were rejected because they were not jingoistic enough, they strayed too close to the facts, to telling the full horror of what was going on.
So this is a memorial about courage in the face of death, courage in the face of physical threat but it is also a memorial to the courage of men and women who do what is so essential in our democracy – hold up the truth to power and at a time when the power is more powerful than it ever can be. That is when Governments are at their most powerful and the pressure they can exert on a free press is the greatest. So we are talking today about a tradition of courage, a tradition that is absolutely fundamental to our democracy.
Now we remember our war correspondents who were killed doing their work. Damien Parer, who died with a camera in his hand, like Bruce Piggott, John Cantwell and Michael Birch who were killed in Vietnam. Neil Davis, who filmed his own death while covering a coup in Bangkok and Paul Moran from the ABC who died in Iraq. And, of course as Brendan noted, Shirley Shackleton is here, the widow of Greg who, together with his four colleagues, television reporters and camera men, who were killed in Balibo forty years ago.
The trauma of covering war is considerable. We should not forget that and I would just record, or repeat, what the Australian journalist Michael Ware wrote about returning to what was supposed to be a normal life after covering the war in Iraq and I’m quoting from his work, he said:
“I felt chewed and spat out by my past employers. In the field it was only a colleague, a mate and a true brother-in-arms with me everywhere who helped me at all and then in New York two other friends, both cameramen, discreetly found the doctor I went on to see, in secret, for almost two years. His bills came out of my pocket, no recompense from those who paid me for my wars, from them came only rebuke and lectures.”
Bean, of course, was originally offered the role of Chief Censor and he rejected that and instead became our chief journalist, he wrote the first draft of history and then – well the final draft is never written, but he wrote a very advanced draft as well. I mentioned Thucydides earlier, the Athenian General and writer who wrote his history, the Peloponnesian Wars and, you know when you reflect on how Bean was chastised by editors for not being romantic enough in his coverage and often reproached himself for not having enough poetry in his copy – preferring to set out the facts. I can just quote to you from Thucydides’ work, two and a half thousand years ago, and he wrote:
“The absence of romance in my history will, I fear, detract somewhat from its interest but if it be judged useful by those who desire an exact knowledge of the past as an aid to the interpretation to the future I shall be content.”
So there is a long thread of telling the truth from Thucydides right down to our war correspondents of today.
Now we also have with us Peter Greste. Peter Greste’s courage and his dedication to telling the truth and paying a very heavy price for us is understood by us all and I want, Peter – as I said to you yesterday – you to know that the Australian Government continues to support you and your colleagues and will continue to press the government of Egypt to pardon you and the other journalists with whom you worked that are still imprisoned in Egypt.
So, finally, friends, I want to acknowledge the support of the benefactors here today, particularly those in the Australian media and – without running the great, very grave risk for any politician to single out one part of the media over another – I cannot but help note a friend, Kerry Stokes, whose generosity as one Australia’s greatest philanthropists and his generosity to the Memorial is truly remarkable and a great example to all of us.
I want to thank the War Memorial itself, led by Dr Nelson, for the great care they have given to the creation of this Memorial and their dedication to protecting and preserving Australia’s heritage.
And, finally, may I just conclude where I began. We are one of the oldest democracies in the world. Our democracy depends on many men and women, on many institutions – all of them vitally important – but none is more important than a free and courageous press and today we are honouring the war correspondents, but in doing so, we are honouring the freedom they have worked so hard to preserve.
Thank you very much.


Well, thank you very much, Christopher, and can I say right at the outset, before I embark on the extravagant praise that is due to Ian Chubb, can I second the remarks that Christopher made about his predecessor in the industry and science portfolio, Ian Macfarlane.
Ian has been a remarkable leader in Australian government over many years. He's been a minister for energy, a minister for industry, minister for science and just recently Ian, you showed a judgment about probably the most important choice that people in our line of work have to make. Because we can't do everything ourselves, the most important thing we've got to do is hire, engage good people to do the work for us.
Ian Macfarlane recognising and treasuring the importance of the CSIRO and determined to ensure that it was resilient and creative and dynamic and had the leadership the 21st century demanded, first appointed Larry Marshall as the Chief Executive and then appointed David Thodey as its chairman. Two outstanding Australians who can bring to that great scientific organisation the entrepreneurial and transformational skills that it needs to be even greater in the 21st century. Fantastic judgment, great choices, great leadership. Ian, you have done such great work for Australian science in your time as a Minister. Thank you very much.
Now let me take a moment to acknowledge our Chief Scientist Ian Chubb, whose distinguished term of leadership in the science community ends on 31st of December – five years. Ian, you once said that being the Chief Scientist and being out there talking about science was not a chore but a little tiring for a retired gentleman. Well, if in coming months you do get some rest, which I doubt, having regard to your hyperactive personality, it will be well earned, if improbable. You have been a champion of science and you have done so much to lift the esteem of scientists and science teachers around the country. Even when science has been under attack, you have never flinched and you have always stood up for science and its central importance in Australia, both today and in our future.
I'm told productivity is all the rage and I'm told that last year you delivered 104 speeches, attended 541 meeting – you should be canonised for that – and visited nine countries. You have been a really outstanding advocate and among your achievements are helping set the national science and research priorities, benchmarking Australian science in three major reports and of course delivering advice to the Government through the Science Council – of course we had a meeting just a few hours ago here in Parliament House.
I know that you won't ever truly retire, in fact it's a very bad thing to retire, if I may say so, I'm quite serious. Talking about medical scientists, or medical men and women, two great psychiatrists in this country are Ian Hickie and his wife Liz, I'm sure many of you from the medical world know them well. And Ian Hickie and I have often talked about the problems with young people and depression among young people, often young men, as you know, it's a very big issue that our Government and governments everywhere have sought to address, and Ian said to me once, he said "With older men it's very simple, never retire, keep working". So there it is, don't retire, you will just get sad. So, think of yourself, think of your own health, just keep working, work until you drop, just keep doing it.
Now, the best accolade I can give Ian Chubb is to assure him that we're working to put into effect the very ambitious agenda he set us. We have to be – and we will be – a country that invests in science and puts it right at the centre of our national agenda.
Let me say to you, the alternative is really not an option. If we want to remain, and we do, a high-wage, generous social welfare net, first world economy in a rapidly expanding global economy that has vastly more opportunities than we could ever imagined only a decade or a generation ago, and is more competitive than ever. If we want to seize those opportunities and not be cowed into fearful desperation by the challenges, if we want to take on those opportunities, then we have to be everything that your work as scientists enables us to be – more productive, more innovative, more technologically sophisticated, more imaginative.
We have to be a nation that embraces volatility and is not frightened by it. We have to recognise that the disruption, the pace of which is unprecedented in human history, is an opportunity, not a threat. We have to be courageous, not fearful. We have to recognise the central role of science and the work of scientists and people that follow the scientific method. I was just speaking to Graham Farquhar about uncertainty in science and I know that sometimes people will criticise scientists for saying that something is not certain. Well you know something, nothing is certain except death and taxes. That I can absolutely assure you is certain – you won’t escape either of them.
What we have to do is recognise that we, all of us, whether we are scientists or politicians or whatever, we live in a world of uncertainty where we have to be agile and we have to adopt the scientific method of developing one hypothesis after another, the hypothesis improving as we have more information and more experience, recalibrating it in the light of that and adjusting our policies, our approaches, as we achieve greater information. That is absolutely critical. That's why we should never allow people to say, we as politicians, as governments, if we change a policy, never allow people to say "You've back flipped, you've backtracked". The reality is that we can't guarantee that every policy will work.
The most we can guarantee in the real world of rational discourse, as opposed to what passes as political discourse from time to time, the most we can guarantee is that our policies are the best we can put together in light of the information we have at the time. If experience suggests that we should adjust them or change them, we will do so. If they don't work, we'll dump them. If they can be improved, we will improve them. If somebody else has done something that is even better than what we have thought of, then we will, recognising that plagiarism is the sincerest form of flattery; we will pinch it and use it. We have to be absolutely nimble. Now you have seen the way we have put innovation and science at the centre of our agenda. This is of critical importance, absolutely critical importance, to our success as a nation, to our success in the world.
Now, the Prime Minister's Science Awards have been a feature of the Australian scientific community since 2000. In that time, the recipients of the award have come from all around the world. At least six were borne outside of Australia. Others like Sam Berkovic were raised by Jewish immigrants who survived Nazi death camps and fled Europe after the Second Wold War. It's a reminder that in fostering an environment for innovation and science, we have to build an ecosystem from the bottom up. At the top are the great institutions like our universities and the CSIRO, which has had far too much lavish praise today, Larry Marshall – we will have to think of something to pull Larry back after all the praise he's had today. The Labor Party asked me about the CSIRO today in the Parliament. I couldn't help myself, Larry, about saying how fantastic the CSIRO is.
But below that, education institutions like schools that inspire the next generations of researchers to become interested in science. Two teachers tonight I spoke to – one primary, one secondary – who have won prizes tonight and will be honoured later, they are really in the frontline. If we are to be a more scientifically literate community, as we must be, if we are to be more aware of the challenges of the world around us and prepared to engage them and investigate them in an honest and rigorous way, then we need great teachers, not just at the universities, not just for doctoral students, but in primary schools and secondary schools.
Good teachers change lives. The charisma, the passion of a good teacher, and I suspect most of us here in this room have had their lives changed by a great teacher. I certainly have. Those great teachers change people's lives and in doing so they can change the destiny of a nation. They are at the very fulcrum of destiny, changing lives at their most impressionable, at the time when you can ensure that somebody's real potential can be maximised. So the teachers, at every level, at the universities to be sure, but at the primary schools and secondary schools, they are shaping Australia in the 21st century and they deserve our support and they deserve the prizes and the recognition they are being given tonight.
Now my former partner in establishing OzEmail, which some of the older ones may still have an OzEmail internet account, they have become collector’s items. But my former colleague, great technologist who began as a medical student and dropped out – there’s quite a few people who have done that and gone on to greatness. But my former partner Sean Howard said that in this age, many years ago, well over 20 years ago, when the frontier of knowledge is advancing at the greatest rate ever in our history, we are not lacking in technological tools, what we often lack is technological imagination.
That is a fundamental point when it comes to some of the limitations of government. We play a critical role in ensuring we get the basic settings right. From investments in education, research and infrastructure, to our own use of technology and Christopher mentioned the digital transformation office that we've established to take the Government's use of technology into the 21st century or as somebody said to me, it would be good to get it into the late 20th century would be a start. But we are doing well and making good process, I can assure you.
We play a very important part in supporting the entire innovation system. But we can't simply flick a switch to turn on an innovation nation. We have to fund, target programs with a clear policy rationale. If a program like the R&amp;D tax incentive is successful, it should continue to be funded but we always have to test that it is meeting its objective. You could say that we've always got to be operating in Beta. We have to be agile and we have to be honest about that. We have got to recognise that in a highly disrupted, highly volatile environment, agility means you keep your eye on the goal, if you are in business it's the customer, if you are in politics, it's the policy objective and then you have to adjust your course, much like a sailor adjusts his or her course in a sailing race and knows what point to reach but is constantly trimming the sails and adjusting the rudder to meet that.
There is a dreadful tendency in politics to confuse the means with the end. We've got to be very adaptable and very flexible about the means we use but, of course, focus on that end which is, as I said right at the outset, ensuring that we remain and become even more so a high wage, generous social welfare net, first world economy. That is the critical goal. We do that by ensuring that we are more technologically sophisticated, more innovative, more creative and so forth. Everything we do has to be focused on that.
There's a tendency in Canberra, perhaps in the pages of financial newspapers, to talk about economic reform and economic reform is important but the real objective is jobs, the real objective is growth, the real objective is ensuring that the Australians have the ability to realise all of their dreams more than ever, that they have greater opportunities, that their intellect, their imagination can be better exploited and displayed and deployed all around the world and we do that by ensuring that we are agile. And you are a critical part of it.
So, I want to say congratulations to all of you, it is a great honour for me, not just to be Prime Minister, but to be your Prime Minister, to be the Prime Minister that says that science is right at the centre and the heart of our national agenda and not just that, it is at the very heart and the centre of our future.
Thank you very much.
Ends


Economics is often said to be the dismal science.
Well, there should be nothing dismal about today's discussions.
And that's not just because we are in marvellous Melbourne – somewhat damply glowing with joy and pride at the way in which Michelle Payne gloriously despatched first another glass ceiling and then her detractors with a pithy candour politicians can only envy.
We are living in the most exciting times in human history.
Free markets, globalisation, long periods of peace and above all the acceleration of technological change has produced economic and political transformations at a speed never seen before.
In the lifetime of almost everyone in this room, China has gone from barely contributing to the world economy to becoming the single largest national economy.
In just a generation we've seen the Internet and the smart phone connect most people in the developed world and before long most people in the entire world to each other and potentially to all the knowledge mankind has accumulated.
The first iPhone was released only eight years ago; Google was founded 17 years ago; Facebook with 1.5 billion active users - and YouTube with 1 billion users - are ten years old, Twitter is nine years old and Airbnb and Uber are seven and six years old respectively.
Most of the companies reinventing our world would still be at school if they were humans.
And the venerable elder statesmen of the digital age - Microsoft and Apple - are 40 and 39 years old respectively. Think about it.
In the midst of all this change - economic, political, technological - the opportunities for Australians have never been greater or the horizons wider.
But how do we seize those opportunities, how do we ensure that in the midst of this dynamic region, in the midst of so much growth and change, we are able successfully to transition our economy to one that wins and keeps on winning.
We talk a lot about reform, especially here, but that's just a means to an end. Let's talk about where we want to be - a big national goal.
Surely it is that we should continue to be a high wage, generous social welfare safety net, first world economy. A nation that is as fair as it is open to opportunity.
And how do we do that?
Clearly as an open market economy in a much larger, more competitive world, we must be more productive, more innovative, more competitive.
Across the board, we must acquire not just the skills but the culture of agility that enables us to make volatility our friend, bearing fresh opportunities, not simply a foe brandishing threats.
So reform, since that is the topic of your conference, should not be seen as a once in a decade or two convulsion, accompanied by a hyperbolic scare campaign.
Rather it should be seen as a change of political culture that sees us like the sailor, surrounded by the uncertainty of the sea and the wind, who knows only two things for sure - where she needs to go and that she has the skill to get there.
Sometimes the sailor reaches the mark with rapid ease, her sails big bellied in a following wind; sometimes with slow and deliberate tenacity, sails close hauled, tacking into the teeth of a gale.
But her vision is as clear as her destination is certain. How to get there and how quickly is the measure of her skill.
As we focus on our future course, it requires us above all to be open and honest about our circumstances, understanding and explaining both the challenges and the opportunities.
It is fair to point out where mistakes have been made and being only human inevitably concentrating on those made by our opponents while treading lightly past our own.
But over the years I've noticed the public, on whose goodwill all hope of reform depends, is impatient with the blame game.
The first step in persuasion is to understand and respect the intelligence of your audience - in this case that is the Australian people.
We need to explain that every vector, every sinew of our government's policy is designed to deliver better jobs and greater opportunities - in short a more prosperous and secure future for them and their children and grandchildren. And above all that one that is fair both to those who want to get ahead and those who, for whatever reason, are not able to do so.
That is why good open discussion and consultation aids the task of reform. Because it is not enough to persuade the public that your motives are good - you also have to demonstrate that you've taken decisions in a thoughtful, open, consultative way, that you've carefully weighed up the various options and arguments.
And that is why we are not trying to reduce complex issues to slogans, why we are not playing the rule in rule out game, that's why we welcome every contribution to this debate.
So, across government, business, the labour movement, the wider community, we need to have a grown up discussion which first clarifies the policy goals and then identifies and removes any obstacles that may be hampering our capacity to generate growth, productivity, investment and jobs.
We need to work practically and in partnership, to anticipate economic opportunities as they emerge and to be brave enough and smart enough to make the most of them.
If a particular policy approach doesn't deliver as required or anticipated, we have to be ready to reappraise it, reset as and when needed so objectives can still be met.
If a policy doesn't work, chuck it out, if you see somebody is achieving your objective in a better way remember the sincerest form of flattery is plagiarism, copy them, take it over. Adjust, tweak, agility is the key, the objective is what we're all about. Remember we are like that sailor of whom I spoke, we know where we want to go. We are surrounded by uncertainties and we have to adjust our course, our tactics, our policies to get there. Agility in today's world, in a world of volatility is absolutely key and that requires a very significant change to the political culture and political discourse.
This new discourse, this new culture that embraces change, which is by the way no more than what the business world does all the time, I mean we have, what we are seeking to do is to talk about policy in the same way practical men and women in the business world have been doing forever. What we need to do is embrace change, be adaptable, flexible, innovative.
Structural shifts in today's global economy are not dissimilar in scale and scope to the transition from the agrarian to an industrial society, but it is the velocity of change that is unprecedented.
It is the velocity of change, the rapidity. The changes that used to take centuries are now taking years, maybe a decade.
Right now, for us in Australia, there is also the challenge of making the transition to the post mining boom era. As you know at the beginning of the last decade, the rapid industrialisation of emerging economies led by China and in particular by China's massive stimulus response to the Global Financial Crisis, drove unprecedented demand for raw materials like coal and iron ore.
Prices rose sharply, they delivered a massive windfall gain to Australian incomes and a boom in new resources projects globally. In Australia alone, mining investment rose from less than two per cent of GDP in the early 2000's to a peak of over seven a decade later.
As this new supply has come on stream, as China is rebalancing to have more consumption, move towards - still a long way to go I might add - move towards a more conventional share of GDP than it is today.
We've seen a sharp fall in our terms of trade. This was always going to happen by the way, this was always going to happen.  We can't rely on rapid growth in commodity prices to fuel future income growth.
But there are enormous opportunities available to us and to his great and enduring credit, Andrew Robb, fellow Victorian has opened up the doors to these markets and in particular the China market with the Free Trade Agreement. 
It's not so long ago I was in this very room of this hotel with a Chinese online business JD Worldwide, the largest in China which was opening up its virtual doors to Australian businesses. Did you know that the Chinese online commerce market is already larger than that of the United States? The rapid growth of this economy at the consumption level is remarkable. For the first time in 300 years, if you believe Angus Matterson's work, which of course we must, the number of Asian middle class consumers equals the number in Europe and North America combined.
Our services exports have been growing by nine per cent over the last five years which has seen rapid growth in agricultural exports, food and drink and so forth, education, tourism, design - right across China you see the work of Australian architects.
Now these are enormous opportunities. How do we equip ourselves best to take advantage of them? A key focus of our Government is innovation. I said earlier, we need to be more innovative, we need to be more technologically sophisticated. We will deliver next month an innovation statement, a set of policies that will focus on how we attract and retain talent, how we support and encourage start-ups. How we, across the Government and the country, encourage a culture of innovation, ensure that our children are requiring the STEM  skills that they need, that they have the understanding or familiarity with machine languages that they will need in the future.
Let me say a little about tax, it is much in the news but the Treasurer will be speaking later. The object of the taxation system is plainly to raise the revenue the Government needs for its services it provides. But it must do so in a manner that backs Australians to work, save and invest, that backs them in rather than holds them back. That has, in the language of the Melbourne Institute, the minimum dead weight loss, the minimum handbrake on economic activity.
Now of course any set of tax reforms must be fair which is why picking off one of the by now very venerable reform proposals, I am waiting to see one that hasn't been around for a decade or so. We need a new idea here. I am looking at Chris Richardson, in particular. Surely there must be one!
They have been kicking around for a while and there is no harm in that. That is why picking off one of these by now venerable proposals in isolation to others is always going to be misleading. I think you understand the point I am making there. A reform package must at the very least, raise the revenue we need, share the burden fairly across the community and do so in a way that incentivises employment, investment and innovation. Fairness I repeat is absolutely critical. Any package of reforms which is not and is not seen as fair will not and cannot achieve the public support without which it simply will not succeed.
There are many other elements of reform in this field and I'll just touch on one of them the Ian Harper report – that will not gather dust. It poses important challenges for all Government, especially, or including if not especially State Governments. There are very big - still very big structural breaks on growth. I heard the Chairman of the Productivity Commission talking this morning on the radio about the supply side constraints on development and planning. The Federal Government's arms are a long way from those levers. Nonetheless, it is something we have to recognise.
It is one of the reasons why we have a Minister for Cities and the Built Environment, why we are engaging with cities, with States on matters of infrastructure in a thoroughly non-ideological manner. Why we will support and indeed invest in infrastructure based on what it delivers, analysed in a rigorous, cost benefit manner and without discriminating between one type of infrastructure or another.
I have outlined a few ways here where we are seeking to deliver those goals. A high wage, generous social welfare net first world economy, one that is more innovative, more competitive, more productive.
That is the goal of the Government. That is what we are seeking to do in this field. We will use every measure that we can to achieve that. Everything we do will be assessed by that test.
Is this making Australia more prosperous? Is this making us more competitive? Is it enabling us to compete more effectively? Is it enabling us to seize the opportunities of the future rather than, as some would have us hiding under the doona, shuddering at the changes around them.
We are living in the best times in human history. There has never been a more exciting time to be an Australian. The challenge for our Government is to do everything we can, with your help, with all of the ideas and the advice, with all of the consideration and thought that you and so many other Australians can muster, to do all we can to ensure that we enable Australians to do their best, enable them to realise those opportunities, seize that future, confident, optimistic, proud and strong. This is a great era of opportunity. We are a great nation with a great future. Thank you very much.


Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I seek the indulgence of the House to make a statement on the recent terrorist attacks around the world.
And I acknowledge the presence in the House of the Ambassador of France, His Excellency               Mr Christophe Lecourtier.
Late on the afternoon of Friday, 13 November, Paris, the city of light, was assaulted by godless ISIL murderers who blasphemously claimed to be killing in the name God, who claimed to be killing in the name of Islam, but defame and blasphemed Islam itself.
One hundred and thirty citizens of France and eighteen other countries were brutally murdered. Many more were injured, including a young Tasmanian, Emma Parkinson – a brave young woman with whom I spoke as she recovered from her surgery.
This was a coordinated attack involving eight killers and six locations. It was more than a lone wolf attack, but it was not an elaborately sophisticated one. It reminds us that a few fanatics with automatic weapons and explosives can do great damage and strike at the heart of free, open and democratic societies. This was not just an assault on French lives and French freedoms. It was an attack on all humanity, on all our freedoms, freedom to gather and to celebrate, the freedom to share time with our family and friends, the freedom to walk our streets without fear. 
Mr Speaker that is why, when I spoke with both President Francoise Hollande and Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius, I conveyed not just the heartfelt sympathy but the unwavering solidarity of all Australian people with the people of France. We are, though, Mr Speaker, forever reminded that terrorism is not only a problem for the West. Recently we have witnessed terrorist attacks in the form of suicide bombings in Beirut, Ankara, Tunisia and Nigeria. The murder of hundreds of innocent civilians in a Russian airliner flying over the Sinai, the attack of a hotel in Bamako, Mali, and ongoing extremist violence and killings of course in the Middle East and South Asia.
I have discussed recent developments with world leaders and all are united in our condemnation of this terrorism. We are united in our steadfast commitment to defeating those who carry out these terrorist acts. The leaders of the Muslim nations with whom I have met in the last week, President Widodo, the leader of the world's largest Muslim nation, Indonesia, President Erdogan of Turkey, Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia, have all said loudly that ISIL's deeds and ideology defame and blaspheme Islam and are utterly contrary to the precepts of authentic Islam. President Widodo reminded us this week past that his own country demonstrates that Islam, democracy, diversity and tolerance are completely compatible.
President Erdogan of Turkey explained at the G20 that ISIL does not speak in the name of Islam. It is an abomination to religion, he says, and must be utterly rejected.
Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia reminded us at the East Asia Summit that Islam teaches that to kill one innocent life is as though to kill all humanity. 
Mr Speaker, the Paris attacks – all of these attacks – highlight just how critical it is that the international community cooperates to defeat ISIL in the field, in its base, in Syria and Iraq. 
They highlight how important it is for us more effectively to counter the messaging, the corrupting messaging of ISIL and other violent extremists in schools, mosques and above all online. This will not be an easy fight, nor will it be quick. But our mission to disrupt, degrade and destroy the terrorists is making progress.
A lasting defeat of ISIL will require a political settle settlement in Syria and Iraq. There are some signs of progress in that regard, but it is very early days. It will also require military force and Australia is second only to the United States in our military contribution to the international efforts in Iraq and Syria. 
I can reassure the Australian people that we will do everything we can to keep Australians safe, at home, and so far as we can, abroad. There is no greater responsibility for any government, and my Government, than Australia's security. Our law enforcement and intelligence agencies are the finest in the world.
Mr Speaker, the leadership of Muslims around the world in condemning ISIL is another key factor, and I want to commend the Muslim leaders – Presidents of great nation and Presidents of community associations alike - who have spoken out for an authentic, moderate and tolerant Islam. Extremism is a challenge all Australians must address. Extremists aim to sow discord by driving a wedge between Muslims a non-Muslim, dividing us as a society.
We are the most successful and harmonious multicultural society in the world. The richness of our diversity is one of our nation's greatest strengths and we must protect and defend it dearly. The terrorists want us to bend to their will, to be frightened, to change the way we go about our lives to abandon our values.
If we do that, they win and they will not win, we will not let them win. When the French people left the Stade de France complex after that shocking attack, they were not cowed. They sang ‘La Marseillaise’ proudly in one voice and that is how all free people should respond to these assaults.
Mr Speaker, to all whose lives have been touched by these evil acts of terrorism, the Australian people send their heartfelt sympathy and unwavering support.
M. L’Ambassadeur, vous avez nos plus sinceres condoleances et notre plus forte solidarite. 


Mr President, Secretary General, Excellencies, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen.
From Australia we come with confidence and optimism.
We are not daunted by our challenge.
It inspires us. It energises us.
We do not doubt the implications of the science, or the scale of the challenge.
But above all we do not doubt the capacity of humanity to meet it - with imagination, innovation and the prudence that befits those, like us, who make decisions that will affect not just our own children and grandchildren but generations yet unborn.
And Mr President while we come to you in Paris with our deepest condolences, we bring you the most resolute solidarity in our common cause for freedom in the face of terrorism.
Here in Paris Australia supports a new – and truly global – climate agreement.
It is an agreement that must drive humanity's capacity for inventiveness and a new wave of technological advances.
Good for our environment, good for our economies.
I join over 150 leaders in calling for a strong and effective agreement.
And over 180 countries have now announced post-2020 targets.
This is an extraordinary effort.
For Australia's part, our 2030 target represents real economic effort, and will halve our per capita emissions – one of the biggest reductions of any G20 country.
We will meet and beat our 2020 emissions reduction target.
Today I  announce that Australia will ratify the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol.
We firmly believe that it is innovation and technology which will enable us both to drive stronger economic growth and a cleaner environment.
We are a highly social and innovative species and so the more we share innovative technologies, the better they will become.
Today Australia joins with many other countries in supporting Mission Innovation which aims to double investment in clean energy innovation over the next five years.
Australian universities are at the forefront of energy and climate science innovation.
To give one example, the University of New South Wales has held the world record for solar cell efficiency for 30 of the last 32 years.
And by 2018 over 60 per cent of the world's solar cells are to use technology developed by Australian researchers.
But our task, and that of the technologies we deploy, is not just to reduce emissions.
The impacts of global warming are already being felt and will continue to be so even after we reach global net zero emissions.
Adaption to the impacts of climate change is equally important and there too innovation is a key.
Some of the most vulnerable nations are our Pacific neighbours and we are helping them to build resilience through practical action and assistance.
To this end, Australia will contribute at least $1 billion over the next five years from our existing aid budget both to build climate resilience and reduce emissions.
Our agreement here in Paris must provide a common platform for action, the dynamism to build ambition and a robust and transparent reporting system.
Australia is not daunted by the challenge. With great optimism and faith in humanity's genius for invention, we are confident that with your leadership, Mr President, we will, in common cause, secure our future.


Thank you for the very kind introduction. Lucy and I are thrilled to be here.
I'm sorry Louise you regard this as grungy, of course, it’s hard for us to compete here in Sydney with marvelous Melbourne, but we do our best.
Interestingly, I was thinking about Melbourne and Sydney today, we had the first meeting of the Advisory Council on Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in the Constitution. Sixteen Australians, half of them Indigenous, half of them men, half of them women.  A very distinguished group. And we started off, obviously, talking about history and we started off with a Welcome to Country by Yvonne the Chairman of the Metropolitan Land Council, here in Sydney.
And, it reminded me of one of the big differences between Sydney and Melbourne. I mean, Melbourne of course, Sydney was established as a British colony, Melbourne, was of course established in 1835 as a Tasmanian colony. And one of the big differences is that, financed by Indian capital too actually, settlers from Launceston financed by an Indian bank. James Boyce set that all out very well in his book 1835.
But, one of the interesting things about the two cities is that each of them carry with them, each of those places are heavy with the spirit of the Aboriginal people, the Eora nation in the Sydney area, the Kulin nation in the Port Phillip Bay area, who had inhabited those lands, where the two great cities reside for [inaudible] tens of thousands of years.
But, the interesting difference of course is that Melbourne, because of its topography is almost entirely the creation of the people that came there after 1835. The course of the river was altered, the parks were landscaped, the built environment was built. And it is a jewel, it is a jewel of the city. But, quite a remarkable city.
And yet, Sydney, on the other hand, while it has been a city for longer, nonetheless, the natural landscape totally dominates — the harbour, the headlands, the big cliffs, the islands in the harbour. All of that dominates. The view, the imagination, the perception.
And, it was interesting, as I looked down at the harbour and out at the city, and reflecting on Lucy's work, Lucy wrote a great work, a history of Sydney, some years ago. She wrote about the view of Sydney, the view of Port Jackson, that was seen by the first settlers as they came in and one headland after another unfolded. And, so many of those views are still there.
Interestingly, the landscape is somewhat more overgrown than it used to be. The Aboriginal inhabitants of Sydney were very good farmers, fire stick farmers. They deliberately kept the undergrowth burnt away so that it resembled, as Watkin Tench observed, something more like a series of paths, big trees and lots of pasture. And that was done quite deliberately to encourage the kangaroos and the other game the Aboriginals hunted.
So, here we are. In Sydney and Melbourne, two great cultural centres. The spirit, the memory, the Eora nation here, the spirit, the memory of the Kulin nation in and around Port Phillip. And yet, it is simply because of the dominance of our topography, the great fortune we have, those scenes, those vistas, the things that were seen, the cliffs under which the Gadigal people fish are still there. The headlands which they looked out across the waters are still there, just as they were, a little bit more overgrown in some respects. And of course, in some other areas, a bit more overbuilt. Just as they were in 1788.
You know, all of us live partly in the here and now, but in large part, in a world of imagination. The world of our imagination or perception is one that is created by artists -is created by writers and celebrated in books. Tonight, it's created of course by visual artists and other artists as well.
Our whole perception of Australia is a work in large part of literature. The Bush myth, the image of Australia as rugged outback frontiersmen. We have always been a highly urbanised nation. We have always, as Banjo Patterson wrote, been dreaming of Clancy of the Overflow. There have been many more of us as clerks in cities, listening to the traffic, as Patterson described, rather than actually chasing cattle along the rivers of Western Queensland. And that world of the imagination is as real as the here and now. It is as real as these fine pillars. And that world is created by our writers.
So it is correct, it is good that there is a Prime Minister's award, it is good that we are here to celebrate our literature. It is good that we encourage our writers, heaven knows, many of us here have written books, some of us have written quite a few.
I think everyone who has ever written a book knows about halfway through it you become completely and utterly bored with it and you think to yourself, 'how can I ever get to the end'. Then you require some sort of new shot of adrenaline or confidence, often, it is poverty, the need to get paid.
I can remember once giving a speech at one of your competitors annual dinners, Louise, in which I talked about freedoms, important freedoms. I talked about freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom of assembly and I said that in the world of literature, the most important freedom is the freedom of the author never to have to return an advance. But that didn't go down very well with the publishers, but a few of the authors liked it.
That commitment, that often very solitary commitment of the writer is so worthy of commendation, so worthy of encouragement. Because, we ask a lot of our writers, don't we? We ask them to be so empathetic, to be so plugged in, and so engaged that they understand our lives, our country, our imagination better than we do ourselves. We ask them to be the most convivial and understanding publican, if you like, and at the same time, we expect them to lock themselves up for hours, for days, for years sometimes, to write away, to create that work of art which they can only do by themselves.
So, it is good to be here to celebrate our writers. Books will never go out of fashion. Louise, I think even if territorial copyright were to crumble, even if it were to crumble, authors in Australia will be able to stand up on their merits, their works are seen across the world and across the ages. And I'm very proud to be your Prime Minister, to be here tonight to present these awards.
Thank you very much
Ends


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you very much Gerard and to our 2015 Australians of the Year, the 2016 Australian of the Year finalists, ladies and gentlemen. Friends, here we are on the eve of Australia Day. There has never been a more exciting time to be a finalist in the 2016 Australian of the Year finals!
Now Lucy and I are really delighted to welcome you to The Lodge today, this is the first function at The Lodge since it has been renovated and since we moved in so you could say this is our housewarming party so we’re thrilled that you’re here!
It’s great that so many of you demonstrate that selflessness, that passion, that practical patriotism that is what makes this the most remarkable country. It gives everyone such confidence, such inspiration to do, to bring out more of their better selves when they see the example that you provide. You are shining examples of our best selves. Of what we can do and you represent all that is good in our nation. Selfless, dedicated, creative, innovative, pragmatic, practical.
Each of you has followed your own calling, responding to what has spoken most emphatically to your ethics and your values. And you’re motivated by the purest incentive – improving the lives of those around you.
It is a great honour for all of you to have been nominated and you have the respect as you know of all your fellow Australians.
You also have their attention – you’ve been rewarded, commended for your leadership in different fields of expertise and we want to learn what you know, understand your causes and share your passions.
And if you’re wondering how to discharge the responsibility of your new positions, look no further than the 2015 Australians of the Year, who are here with us today.
They’ve all served in their roles with great distinction, devotion and dedication to the nation and I want to thank them all as the Prime Minister.
Can I also particularly thank the 2015 Australian of the Year, Rosie Batty.
Her appointment marked a very significant turning point in our nation’s response to family, domestic violence, violence against women and children. It really was a watershed.
Rosie, you have been a tireless advocate, an inspiring, charismatic leader on this issue. You’ve suffered a terrible loss because of domestic violence and we acknowledge that and we give you again our love and sympathy for that loss. But we admire what you have given and we thank you for what you have given in response.
Rosie’s efforts on the COAG Advisory Panel on Reducing Violence against Women has laid the groundwork for real change and now that we’ve made such great headway, we have to keep going and that’s why I’m very pleased to announce today that the Australian Government will provide a grant to the Luke Batty Foundation to support Rosie’s continued advocacy on gender equality and violence against women and their children.
Rosie’s voice will continue to be there. A powerful, persuasive, compelling advocate to tell all of us, to remind all of us, that there has to be a cultural change and that we have to recognise that while not all disrespecting women ends up in violence, that is where all that violence begins and I want to acknowledge and thank Michaelia Cash especially, Senator Cash, who is here today in her capacity as the Minister for Women.
Michaelia you’ve worked closely with Rosie, you’ve helped made this grant possible. You and Rosie have been a great team.
And so on the eve of Australia Day, let us Australians all rejoice and thank you for what you have done to make us the most remarkable nation in the world. We are a remarkable nation. We are the most successful multicultural nation in the world and the foundation of that is selflessness, patriotism, commitment to others and above all mutual respect.
I’ll be so proud to stand with you all at the Australian of the Year Awards tonight and I wish all of you a very, very happy Australia Day.
Thank you very much.
Ends


Thank you, Jeremy – and together, we gather on the land of the Ngunnawal people and we honour their elders past and present.
Australians, let us all rejoice, rejoice that tonight, we are honouring the Australian of the Year Finalists. Selfless, committed to the service of others, in different ways improving and enriching the lives of our whole Australian family.
Our 2015 Australian of the Year – Rosie Batty – used the platform of that office for a passionate advocacy.
Out of sadness and loss, but moved by love, she inspired us to stand up and say "no" to violence against women and girls, and "no" to the disrespect from which that violence stems.
I want to thank Rosie, and all her fellow 2015 Australians of the Year, for their remarkable contributions.
And like them, yes – they deserve some applause! Well, it's very important to be agile in the year of innovation.
Like them, like our 2015 Australians of the Year, our 2016 finalists come from across Australia and from every walk of life.
We rejoice that they, too, are shining examples of our best selves.
And tonight on the eve of Australia Day, we rejoice in being citizens of a nation whose identity is not defined by religion or race, but rather, by shared political values, open to all, democracy, the rule of law, mutual respect, and our deep instinct in our Australian DNA that everyone is entitled to a fair go.
To all our fellow Australians, each and every one of you, each and every one of us, has made this country what it is today.
So for tomorrow, happy Australia Day, and to all the 2016 Australian of the Year Finalists, congratulations!
Ends


Mr Speaker I move that the amendments be agreed to.
Mr Speaker this is a great day for democracy. For too long, Mr Speaker, the Senate has been, the Senate Voting System has been disturbed by backroom deals, by preference whisperers, by the manipulation of micro parties such that we have seen the will of the people frustrated.
Mr Speaker there is nothing more important that the men and women that sit in this chamber and the Senate reflect as far as possible the wish of Australian people. And that has not been the case with the Senate and we have known this for many years.
For many years the practice of group voting tickets, of backroom deals, of elaborate creation of micro parties has resulted in people being elected to the Senate with a tiny fraction of primary votes. It has undermined the reputation; it has undermined the democratic reputation and credibility of the Senate which is half of this great Parliament, Mr Speaker.
The changes that are contained in this Bill and reflected in these amendments represent what was not so long ago the bipartisan position, the position of every party in this Parliament. Mr Speaker, it was the unanimous recommendation of Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters. Labor, Liberal, The Greens, all agreed that it should be Australian voters who decide where their preferences go. It should be Australians who choose who should be elected to the Senate, not backroom deals. And there was no stronger advocate for this than the Member for Brand, Gary Gray. And then, Mr Speaker only weeks ago for base political reasons the Labor Party did a complete backflip.
They abandoned their position. They left the member for Brand, Gary Gray, a solitary beacon of integrity in a sea of Labor opportunism. Mr Speaker, these amendments are for democracy. I want to thank the Senators who supported them. I want to thank the Senators who stuck to their principles. I want to thank those Senators in the Green Party and the Independent Senator Xenophon and all of my colleagues in the Coalition who stayed up for hours and hours ensuring that this was going to be carried.
Led, Mr Speaker by the Special Minister of State Senator Mathias Cormann whose leadership on this issue showed as usual his uncanny combination of intellect, determination and energy. Senator Cormann, Mr Speaker has served the nation and his state well because Mr Speaker we should never forget, Section 7 of the Constitution says that Senators will be elected, directly elected by the people of each state. This ensures that they will indeed be directly elected by the people of each state because the people voting will determine precisely where their preferences go.
This is a great day for democracy, Mr Speaker, I thank the Senators for their perseverance in supporting these changes and I thank my colleagues in the House of Representatives here who stayed back and stayed up late so that we can deal with these amendments as they’re returned to the House. I commend the amendments to the House.
ENDS


What a stirring speech from Russell – let’s give him another round of applause!
Who can imagine a better representative for Macarthur than Russell Matheson? He’s passionate, he’s a local, you can see that his depth of commitment and understanding of all of the issues is really second to none.
Russell, that is why you are such a powerful advocate for your community. That's why you have been able to achieve so much and why you'll be able to achieve even more in the future.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's great to be with you and, Steve, thanks for the good introduction too.
Can I also acknowledge my parliamentary colleague Angus Taylor, the Assistant Minister for Cities and Digital Transformation. Angus, of course, is playing a big role in the development of our policy which is going to be so important for this region.
And can I also acknowledge Shayne Mallard, Legislative Councillor. And the mayors – Paul Hawker and of course Ned Mannoun and other mayors – I pay great respect to mayors, your worships, I address you all collectively. Of course, my only distinction in local government was to be the first man to the lady mayoress of Sydney. So Lucy became the first woman to be Lord Mayor and we share an absolutely passionate fascination and commitment to cities and the development of Sydney and the development of Sydney as one great metropolis that it is. And ensuring that we work together to ensure that as you were saying, Russell, the future of Sydney, the future of the greater Sydney region is in Western Sydney.
Just as the Macarthurs with the merinos began – that was the beginning of Australia's economy in the years after European settlement, so the future of our city, of our great city, and so important to the future of Australia, is here in Western Sydney.
Now let me give you some good news on the economy. Our economy is growing strongly – 3 per cent real growth last year. Over 300,000 jobs created last year – the highest number since 2006, since before the global financial crisis. Our growth is higher than any G7 economy and it's well in excess of the average of the OECD which is the developed nations club. Our economy is in a state of transition, however.
We're moving from one which was really fired up by the mining construction boom, where investment in mining and resources infrastructure got up to nearly 8 per cent of GDP – extraordinary level. That of course couldn't go on forever but mining of course continues forever, the production of commodities continues forever, but the big hit, adrenalin shot from the construction boom, couldn't go on forever. And so a lot of people felt Australia would fall back as a result of that when that construction came to an end or tapered down. But it hasn't. We've maintained strong growth. Why is that? Well, one of the reasons is strong business confidence. It's very strong. Business confidence and consumer confidence is strong.
Australians are confident about the economic future of their country and what we are doing is ensuring that every single element of our policy is designed to drive greater growth, more jobs and better jobs for our children and our grandchildren. Every lever of policy is designed to secure our prosperity and economic security for the 21st century.
Now Russell talked about our Innovation and Science Agenda. Believe me, this is critically important.
To be successful in the 21st century, you have to be more competitive, more productive, more innovative and that doesn't – we're not just talking about a biotech company or Internet company. Every business has to be more innovative. You have to be.
I think all of us in business understand that. And so that's why we are doing everything we can to drive that through our Innovation and Science Agenda. We're providing real tax incentives for people to invest in start-up companies and you're starting to see more investment in the start-up sector. We're ensuring that our researchers at our universities collaborate with industry and business.
We have some of the best researchers in the world. I think no-one has better researchers and better scientists but for reasons which are historical, I guess, we have been very poor at the collaboration between university research and business.
In fact, depending on which lists you look at, we're either the worst or second worst in the OECD. And that's the wrong end of the table to be on. We want to be up at the top and so we're providing - Christopher Pyne, the Minister and I - are providing the right incentives for that. And also there's a whole range of other measures, ensuring our kids get the right digital training, the computer science in schools, that's critically important.
And then I imagine many of you have observed over the years that the laws on corporate insolvency in Australia are really – really do not encourage business continuity. One of the great strengths of the United States is that they have that chapter 11 process where when companies get into financial difficulties they are able to restructure, the directors are able to restructure the company with the shareholders and debtholders and the show can go on. And that preserves jobs, it preserves all of the benefits of business continuity.
Well, again, we're addressing those issues and our bankruptcy laws to ensure we have a greater emphasis on business continuity.
And, as I mentioned earlier, Angus Taylor is helping me on the cities policy and what this is designed to do – and I'll come to a little bit more detail in this part of Sydney in a moment – what this is designed to do is ensure that the Commonwealth Government is an active partner with state and local governments right across the urban landscape.
Historically, Federal Governments have been pretty much passive suppliers of grants, like an ATM – that's probably a bit unkind but there hasn't been a lot of interaction. What we want to do is work collaboratively with local government, with local government, your worship, with state governments and work to reach an agreement on what the big urban outcomes you want to achieve; more affordable housing, better connectivity, more jobs in a particular area in Western Sydney or it might be on the Central Coast, areas where too many people leave the area every day to go to work and there's not enough local jobs. So agree on your plan and then ensure that everything we're doing is calculated to deliver that outcome.
This is based on the city deals model that is being used very successfully in the United Kingdom. It's really no more than saying that we should all be pulling in the same direction and will have the outcome – this I can assure you – of stronger job creation, more consistent policy, better urban development and urban renewal, increasing the supply of housing and of course improving amenity because what is the big objective of cities policy? Better liveability. That's what people want. They want their cities to be more liveable and this, you may have heard my wife Lucy speak about this in her capacity as Chief Commissioner of the Greater Sydney Commission – that is what everyone seeks to achieve. But we've got to make sure that all levels of government are working together for the same objective.
Now I want to just touch on a couple of issues that are going – that are very relevant in the political debate at the moment and I want to do so in an objective way. I'm not here to give you a rip-roaring politically-partisan speech, but you will have seen lot of commentary about the restoration of the Australian Building and Construction Commission.
This is of course an issue with the Senate at the moment and we're bringing back the Senate on 18 April to consider that bill and either pass it – thank you so much – either pass it or, if they don't pass it then we will have an early election. It won't be that early an election, it will be an election on 2 July as opposed to August, September, October, and that will enable us to break the deadlock between the House and the Senate.
For those of you that aren't familiar with it, a double dissolution is an occasion where when there's a deadlock between the House and Senate on legislation and they haven't been able to agree on two occasions with three months intervening. And then on that – if that's established then you can dissolve both the House and the Senate, all of the Senators, then there's an election and they come back and then they vote on those bills in a joint sitting and that's how you resolve the deadlock.
So that's the only reason we would do it and of course if the Senators pass these bills – Registered Organisations and the Building Construction Commission – then there won't be a double dissolution.
You've seen Senator Bob Day, who of course is a man who's worked in the property sector all his life, he is very supportive of the restoration of the Building and Construction Commission, trying to get six Senators together to support it. We'll see what happens – but certainly our objective is to get the laws passed.
Now, why is it important? This is not an anti-union exercise. I respect, I understand, the role of unions, believe me. My mother actually was a labour historian in her youth, so if we look at the Australian Dictionary of Biography you'll find my mother as the author of the entry on William Guthrie Spence, one of the founders of the Australian Workers Union. So I don't come from an anti-union background at all, quite the contrary,
But it is clear enough, I think we all understand that the level of lawlessness, the level of thuggery, the level of waste and inefficiency in the construction sector is unacceptably high. And the Heydon Royal Commission demonstrated that yet again, as if we didn't need to.
When the Building and Construction Commission was in force under the Howard government, productivity in the sector grew by 20 per cent. Since it's been abolished by the Labor Party, days lost to industrial disputes have increased by 34 per cent. Two-thirds of all industrial disputes in Australia, which are at their highest level since 2010, are in the construction sector.
So the support for the ABCC is simply about ensuring that the rule of law applies, that industrial agreements are complied with, which will mean more construction, more affordable housing, more jobs in construction and, frankly, more jobs for members of unions in construction. It's absolutely a win-win. The only people that will lose will be union officials who want to continue this style of confrontation.
I mean, as the Australian Industry Group CEO Innes Willox said last week, "Because of the industrial risk associated with the unlawful actions of construction unions, every school, every hospital, every office, every residential tower and every road costs a lot more than it otherwise would. The community, every taxpayer, every union member and every consumer pays the cost of the actions of Australia's construction unions."
So the restoration the ABCC is not a political exercise, it's not an ideological exercise, it is a fundamental, critical, economic reform. And some – nearly 24 per cent of the registered businesses here in Macarthur are involved in construction and that's higher than the New South Wales average of about 15 per cent. So that's why we're talking about the ABCC.
Let me make another observation about negative gearing too because that is very relevant and, again, I want to deal with that in a very business-like, matter-of-fact way. When we talk about negative gearing what we're talking about is the ability of a person to offset against their income, their personal income – in this case their professional or salary or wages income – the interest costs associated with a loan they've incurred to buy an income-producing property. Could be a piece of machinery, could be shares in a company, could be a flat, could be a shop, a commercial property. That's what negative gearing is. As you know, a very large percentage of the, around a third of the loans that are raised to buy housing are borrowed by investors.
Now what Labor is proposing is that after 1 July '17, if they're elected, it will not be possible to negative gear for an individual against their personal income, any investment other than one in new residential property. Okay, and this is said to support housing affordability. Now what that will mean is that in areas where there are subdivisions in this electorate where you’ve got house and land packages, new housing, that is for the most part being sold to home buyers, and often new home buyers, they will be competing with investors because that's the only asset class they'll be able to invest in.
It will mean where you've got apartment developments which are largely owned by investors because most of the occupants are tenants, those investors will not be able to sell them to other investors; they'll only be able to sell them to owner/occupiers. So the price of property will obviously decline because you'll take lot of the buyers out of the market. We had a funny moment in the House of Representatives which Russell remembers where I made the point - I thought it was pretty uncontroversial, I said if you take a third of the buyers out of a market, all other things being equal, the price will go down. One of the gentlemen on the Labor side of the House called out, "you're making that up." I wondered what was I making up, the laws of economics, supply and demand? It is a big deal. What it will do, it will have the result of bringing housing prices down and will send rents up because investors will need to get a better return because otherwise they'll be behind after tax and of course the supply of housing, of rental housing will decline.
We believe it will materially undermine housing affordability. The answer to greater housing affordability is more housing. It is building more dwellings, it is greater supply. The issue's been looked at again and again for a very long time, going right back to studies in fact I commissioned the Menzies Research Centre in 2003 and the Reserve Bank has done work on it and it is very clear what you need is planning that results in more approvals so that you get more DAs and more ability to build. It is a supply-side issue.
So again, that's the point of difference on negative gearing. Read a lot about it, it's described as being a big tax concession. It is income tax 101. There's nothing special about it. Everybody is able to deduct interest that they incur from income if it is used to buy an asset that is an income-producing asset so this is what the Labor Party is proposing is a massive change to the tax system.
And I just also draw to your attention that I think at the moment we would all feel that we need more investment, we want everyone here to go out and invest, have a go, and investment levels are good. We'd like them to be higher. Labor is proposing to increase capital gains tax by 50 per cent and I just make the observation again, and not in a partisan way but just as a businessman, if you want people to do less of something, put up the tax on it. That's how tobacco taxes are justified. Make tobacco more expensive, fewer people will smoke, there's no doubt about that. You make – increase the tax on investments and you will get less investment and that is not what we want. We want more investment because that will deliver more jobs.
Now those are two of the hot issues at the moment. I wanted to turn now to the question of the airport. Now this new Western Sydney Airport will be, will through the construction phase will create more than 11,000 jobs. It’s expected to commence operations in the mid-2020s and cater for an estimated 10 million passengers a year by 2030 and create nearly 9,000 direct jobs in the region by 2031. That will increase to over 60,000 jobs by the 2060s and 82 million passengers are expected to use the airport annually.
Naturally the airport will need transport connections to the rest of the city and the region and without a doubt the fastest and most efficient is rail. Now we are asking ourselves, and as a Federal Government working with the state government, what would it take for rail to be operational at the airport when it opens? How can we use a rail link to improve supply and hence affordability of residential and business premises? Can rail give people in Western Sydney better access to better quality jobs here in Western Sydney?
Now we have a state and federal, a joint study underway which will give us costed options on how soon it can be developed and how much more value will be created. The 3.6 billion Western Sydney Infrastructure Plan, of which Russell spoke a moment ago, will connect this region by roads. One of the biggest is the Bringelly Road to a minimum of four lanes from Camden Valley Way to the Northern Road. But to be more productive and competitive you don’t just need greatl infrastructure, you need great ideas.
Our businesses at their very core need to be innovative and entrepreneurial and it’s always been the case that the path to new enterprise, the path to entrepreneurship, more often than not involves someone who just starts off in life with their human capital. And that’s one of the reasons why we are so opposed to what Labor’s proposing on negative gearing. Because we start off with that human capital, we start off with some income from a job, or work we’re doing, and then we borrow some money to buy something and we build brick upon brick. Sometimes you build a great business, sometimes you don’t, but that is the road of enterprise and entrepreneurship. We believe that door to entrepreneurship should be wider; it should not be slammed shut.
That is going to be a really big difference, a really big choice in this election. You know small to medium businesses are the drivers of the local economy here and right around the country. 96 per cent of all Australian businesses are small business. They employ 4.5 million Australians and in this electorate of Macarthur small businesses are a critical part of the local economy. Retail trade is the largest employer, with over 11,000 local jobs. And with the Western Sydney Airport the distance between Ingleburn and businesses on the streets of China, Japan and Korea are closing fast. Those massive Asian markets are opening up through our free trade agreements. These are the extraordinary achievements and it’s a really, it is a great credit to Andrew Robb as our Trade Minister that he’s been able to secure in these 2.5 years. Andrew of course as you probably know is not running again so he’s stepped down as Trade Minister. But what an extraordinary job. He’s opened up free trade agreements with Japan, Korea and China. They are driving export growth right across the country. 
On the present trends there could be more than 2 billion people in middle class households in Asia by 2021. That’s 2 billion people who want to buy what we do best and one of the early winners of the free trade deal with China is Western Sydney University School of Medicine, in Campbelltown, and an MOU has been signed as I’m sure you know between WSU National Institute for Complementary Medicine and the Beijing University of Chinese Medicine. Together this Campbelltown integrated health hub and this prestigious Chinese University will look at ways to  deliver innovation in healthcare to assist another growing concern across the Asian region - the need for better and better and more, and more adaptable, innovative aged-care services.
Now for any business large or small, use of the internet particularly at high speeds is a critical business opportunity. Over 11,000 homes and businesses in Macarthur can already connect to the NBN. Remember the National Broadband Network – when we came into government – was a completely failed project. I think those of you involved in the project’s business would know that the melancholy experience of life is that bad projects generally get worse and worse and worse. This is one of those rare occasions where a bad project has got better. A lot of money has been wasted and we can’t get it back but it’s on track now. So 11,000 homes can already connect, construction’s underway for an additional 21,700. By June 30 a quarter of all Australian households will be able to access the NBN. By June 30 2018 it will be three-quarters, and it will be finished by 2019-2020.
Now your community here in Macarthur is a great place to do business. Because of you, you the human capital of Macarthur. You are the greatest asset this region has. But you are, as a consequence of that, the gateway to the innovative future that Sydney and Australia needs to remain competitive in the global economy. So I want to urge you to grab those new opportunities with enthusiasm and energy. See what we can create with the benefits of the second Sydney airport, with rail links with better roads that will drive an imagination that you represent. I can assure you that as you step out the Australian Government will work with the State Government, with Local Government, with businesses big and small to make the Macarthur region and through it our whole national economy more innovative, more imaginative, more competitive, more productive. And the consequence of that, in this time, the most exciting time to be an Australian, this time in human history where there are more opportunities than ever before because of the unprecedented pace and scale of global growth. What that means is that you here in Macarthur, working with us, all of us, the Federal Government, State Government, Local Governments, with fantastic local members, passionately committed to, engaged with and able to persuasively advocate for their communities. What that will mean is that we will ensure that our children and our grandchildren will have better jobs, better high-paying jobs in the years ahead, and it will be founded on your enterprise and your entrepreneurship. This is the most exciting time to be an Australian and there has never been a more exciting time to be in Macarthur.
Thank you very much.
Ends


PRIME MINISTER:
Australia is one of the most successful multicultural societies in the world – from the oldest human cultures of our First Australians, to those people who come from almost every UN member state.
Ours is indeed an immigration nation. More than a quarter of our people were born overseas.
Australians are not defined by religion or race, we are defined by political values; a common commitment to democracy, freedom and the rule of law, underpinned and secured by mutual respect.
These values drive our approach to migration. We invite 190,000 migrants each year to join our nation of 24 million. And our commitment to refugees is longstanding – our humanitarian resettlement program dates back to 1947.
This has made Australians truly global citizens, connected by family, culture and language to people across the globe. These links drive economic development, trade and innovation.
Australians are enriched by the cultural diversity of our community - we regard our people as our greatest assets and our unity in diversity, one of our greatest strengths.
This is not a recent development. As just one example there is SBS, founded nearly forty years ago the public broadcaster, not only broadcasts in dozens of languages but interpreting and celebrating our multicultural society and the values of mutual respect to the whole society.
Diversity is an investment against marginalisation and extremism. It helps our community unite against extremism, rather than be divided by it.
At a time when global concern around immigration and border control is rising, the need to build community support for migration has never been clearer.
Australia’s experience bears this out.
Addressing irregular migration, through secure borders, has been essential in creating the confidence that the Government can manage migration in a way that mitigates risks and focuses humanitarian assistance on those who need it most.
This has had a direct impact on our ability to provide generous and effective support to refugees.
Without this confidence, we would not have been able to increase our intake of refugees – the world’s third largest permanent resettlement program – by more than 35 per cent.
And we would not have been able to commit to welcoming 12,000 additional Syrian and Iraqi refugees on top of this.
Of course not every country is an island. And each country needs to institute policies that suit its own circumstances.
But the reality of people smuggling is one of profit from, and exploitation of, some of the most vulnerable people on earth. And we are all too familiar with the tragedy of lives lost at sea.
The unregulated movement of people globally is growing fast. We need measures to create order out of the resulting chaos if we are to provide safe pathways for refugees and target those who are most in need.
These are challenges that cannot be addressed without strong international cooperation.
We need to work together to facilitate safe and regular migration for refugees and migrants and, above all, ensure that those who are able, can return to their homes in safety as quickly as possible.
And we need to support, rather than duplicate, the important work of the International Organization for Migration and the UNCHR.
Australia welcomes the momentum we are seeing in the United Nations system and internationally, and we’re committed to playing a role that provides resettlement options to genuine refugees, that sees our multicultural society grow from strength to strength and that supports international efforts to help the most vulnerable.
[Ends]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Thank you all, the Holocaust survivors here and the children and grandchildren who have been so courageous, so courageous in surviving and in creating this extraordinary museum.
John Saunders, the founder so many years ago, another survivor of the Holocaust, sought to ensure that the memory of those terrible crimes never faded from view. That the depths to which the most advanced, civilized, technologically sophisticated, artistically sophisticated nation in Europe, if not the world, the depths to which it sank would never be forgotten.
And you see in the gallery there today - just you can walk past it actually, just one panel – you should nod, you should stay and contemplate - it is the panel that refers to the Wannsee House.
Now the Wannsee House I have been to with Lucy. This is where they drew up the plans for the Final Solution.
Let me tell you about it. It tells you everything about the banality of evil that Hannah Arendt wrote about.
This house is a villa, it’s on the lake. It could fit into a posh suburb in Sydney or Melbourne or any other part of the world - it is not a particularly remarkable house.
And around that table all those years ago sat not just slabbering fanatics but the leaders of the civil service, bureaucrats, who calmly and methodically worked out how best and most efficiently to kill six million people.
A reminder that we should not assume ever that the Holocaust was one break in reality, one act of insanity that could never be repeated again. The Holocaust revealed that the most advanced of us, the most sophisticated of us, the most technologically advanced of us can do the most horrendous things.
We are capable of the greatest love us - humans, people. We are. But we are capable of the most terrible crimes and that is why we must never forget the Holocaust.
We must always be vigilant and we must always say here in Australia, the nation which you have all helped build, the nation whose achievements would never have been possible without the contribution of the Jewish people.
We must always say here in our land that we are so proud of what we have done - us, the most successful multicultural society in the world.
And why is it so successful? How is it that we have people from every part of the world, every culture in the world, every religion in the world, every language in the world have come to Australia - and we live in the midst of an age of growing intolerance around the globe - we live here in remarkable harmony.
How do we do that? We do that because we have a strong commitment to mutual respect.
And as Gus said, mutual respect means two ways – we expect all Australians - and all who seek to be Australians - to respect their fellow Australians, to respect their neighbours.
We are utterly and totally committed to that foundation because believe me, that foundation of mutual respect is the building block, the bedrock, on which our nation is built.
And that is why this museum, this memorial is so important? Because it reminds us of what can happen when respect is gone, when hatred takes its place.
It reminds us of the depths to which people can sink. As I said, advanced societies, sophisticated societies, distinguished and experienced civil servants gathered around that table in 1942 on the Wannsee. That is how deep you can sink if you do not hold fast to that commitment, to mutual respect, the rule of law, democracy, freedom of speech, freedom of worship. These are not freedoms to take for granted.
We have defended them since our nation's foundation and before.
Generations of Australians have fought and died to keep us free. One of them is remembered in the entrance to the Museum, John Monash.
Now John Monash, if there was General that you could say won the First World War, it would be John Monash.
Montgomery, the man with a high opinion of himself as we know, General Montgomery, Field Marshal Montgomery described Monash as the finest General on the Western Front. That’s what he said. High praise from a man who wasn’t often giving away bouquets. That’s how good he was. He is a Jewish man as you know, born from Polish parents who came to Australia, Polish Jewish immigrants to Melbourne.
And despite the anti-Semitism in the British Army he rose to the top through sheer talent and he served. And next year we will remember and honour those extraordinary battles in which he led Australians and Americans into battle for the first time and he turned the war, he turned the tide.
Now I spoke about this, about Monash when I was at Moriah, just fanot so long ago, many of you were there I know. And certainly many of your grandchildren and children were there.
In fact, when we went in with Bibi Netanyahu and Sara, Lucy and I - Bibi and Sara had got there. Bibi said to me, he said: ‘Are there any of these children’s parents that you don’t know?’
(Laughter)
I said: “There’s a few, there’s a few but I know their grandparents.”
(Laughter)
Fair enough. But it was a very family occasion for the Member for Wentworth and Lucy.
But I referred to Monash and Bibi said to me, just before he got up, he said: ‘Monash, I’m going to talk about him.’ That’s what he said.
And then he spoke - and if you didn’t see the speech it is worth getting a video of it. And he talked about Monash and he said, he reminded those kids, he said in those days, Monash was remarkable because he was a soldier. There weren’t many Jewish soldiers in those days. Because the Jewish people did not have a state, they did not have a country and Monash was an exception.
And then he talked about the Holocaust and how Jews were defenseless, did not have an army to defend them against this extraordinary campaign of extermination.
And he talked about how the State of Israel had changed all of that. And now the Jewish people had a home, a state, and an army and the ability to defend themselves.
It was the best speech he gave. Every speech he gave was good, I listened to almost all of them, but that was outstanding.
And it was a reminder too of the importance of Israel, and the importance of Israel in the context of what came before the Holocaust.
The Holocaust did not spring, as you know, out of thin air. It came out of a practice of anti-Semitism, Russian pogroms, the anti-Semitism of Karl Lueger in Vienna – all of those histories and threads you understand. And those stories are told upstairs.
Many of you have lived through and know all too well how it began.
And what was at the heart of that, or the object of that, was a desire to dehumanise Jews. And you see that in so much of the attacks on Israel today.
Now, it is not compulsory for anybody to agree with Mr Netanyahu’s policies any more than it is to agree with mine. And indeed as Bibi would acknowledge himself, Israeli’s have, there is numerous varieties of opinion as to his performance, many of them, as is always the case highly critical, with any politician. But when you see movements around the world today, such as the BDS movement whose object is to delegitimise the state of Israel. And that is the new avenue of anti-Semitism. He’s not saying Israel should do this or that, or its policy should be this or that – it is saying as the Iranians do that Israel does not have a right to exist. And once, just as if you delegitimise a state, then you are justified in attacking it - if you dehumanise a person, well then as we have seen upstairs, and as all of us remember, and you remember most of all, then the next step is extermination.
So the Holocaust is part of history never to be forgotten. But what led to it is still with us. Anti-Semitism is still with us.
Now here in Australia we have no tolerance for anti-Semitism, no tolerance for racism, no tolerance for anybody who seeks to demean or delegitimise or dehumanise somebody because of their race or their religion or their culture.
We stand on a foundation of proud, mutual respect. That is what makes us the great multicultural society that we are today - in my view undoubtedly the most successful in the world.
Can I indulge myself with a little memory of my own, if I may?
When I was a little boy I lived with my mother and father, then subsequently with my father in a flat in New South Head Road, 119 New South Head Road. It was a block of four apartments that were built, I imagine, just after the war. In the flat above lived a lady called Weil, that was her name, Jacquie Weil, Acki, as I used to call her with her husband Paul. And each of them had, both Jewish, had escaped the Holocaust in different ways and met in Australia and had married.
And Acki used to sit on her balcony in the blazing Sydney sun, a really hot day, and she would say to me that the rattle of the trams in New South Head Road reminded her of those trams on the Ringstrasse in Vienna.
And she spoke about the vanished worlds that you have so brilliantly recorded upstairs. Worlds, Jewish worlds, worlds of elegance, worlds of culture.
She used to teach me French in fact, but her first language was German. She used to insist that Shakespeare sounded better in German.
(Laughter)
And would then proceed to read me speeches from Shakespeare in German and insist: ‘You see! You see Malcolm, I’m telling you its better, better in German!’
All of that snatched away, the vanished world. And you remember that here.
The sense I felt as I walked through the gallery today was an aching sense of loss only matched by a deep and visceral sense of injustice.
But as your Prime Minister I am determined to ensure that it never happens again. That the love, that the strength, that the mutual respect, the commitment and the solidarity that we have heard from the survivors here today and whom we all know, and they are after all, David and Pauly here today? There are so many friends here today, this is our parents’ generation David isn’t it. That’s who we are talking about. And we, all of you, are determined to ensure that that foundation of mutual respect is maintained and strengthened. That is what makes Australia the great multicultural society that it is.
Now let me conclude finally with the words from Isaiah that inspired the name of the Holocaust Museum in Israel, the Yad Vashem, “Even unto them will I give in my house and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and daughters: I will give them and everlasting name that shall not be cut off.”
In this house I know that you will always give those who perished and those who survived and those who witnessed an everlasting name but shall never ever be forgotten.
Thank you.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Benjamin Disraeli is a giant of our shared parliamentary tradition.
So I am both grateful and humbled to receive the Disraeli Prize tonight.
Thank you to Dean Godson and the Policy Exchange.
Disraeli entered Parliament in 1837 after four unsuccessful attempts and spent three-quarters of his 44-year parliamentary career in opposition.
We look back at that era through a flickering sepia screen of sentimental memory and compare its apparent elegance to the unruly political times in which we live.
And yet the invective hurled at, and by, Disraeli would be more shocking today, than it was then.
He took no quarter and asked for none. He scrambled to the top of what he called the greasy pole despite being a Jew in an age when anti-semitism was the norm, and despite making his living as a novelist at a time when a Prime Minister’s qualification almost invariably came from their ancestors’ broad acres or, less often, from the law.
Of course as you look around the table at the G20 there are more than a few leaders - myself included - whose prospects of success seemed unlikely not so long ago.
As Disraeli’s contemporary, Mark Twain, observed - only fiction has to be credible.
The tenor of our times is change and at a pace and scale utterly unprecedented in human history.
And in such times what price political labels.
Is every boy and every gal that’s born into the world alive still a little liberal or a little conservative?
Is it conservative to support free trade and open markets as Theresa May and I did at the G20 as I did together with Shinzo Abe and Angela Merkel, I’m sure it is – or to call for more protection as many on both the self-styled “liberal left” and “conservative right” in the United States do today.
The truth is that the labels have lost almost all meaning in the furious outrage cycle of social media politics, long cast adrift to be appropriated, often cynically, by one politician or another as it suits their purpose.
At the heart of our political tradition, whether we describe it as the tradition of the Conservative Party of the United Kingdom or the Liberal Party of Australia, is respect for humanity not in the mass, as the Left like to see us, but as individuals and families, Edmond Burke’s small platoons, Robert Menzies “forgotten people”. 
So what we admire about our distinguished predecessors, from Churchill to Thatcher, from Menzies to Howard, is not their label but their dogged devotion to the principles of a free society under the law.
Sovereignty. Law. Security. Liberty.
In 1944 Menzies went to great pains not to call his new political party, consolidating the centre right of Australian politics, “conservative” - but rather the Liberal Party, which he firmly anchored in the centre of Australian politics.
He wanted to stand apart from the big money, business establishment politics of traditional “conservative” parties so styled of the right, as well as from the socialist tradition of the Australian Labor Party - the political wing of the union movement. Menzies said at the time:
“We took the name ‘Liberal’ because we were determined to be a progressive party, willing to make experiments, in no sense reactionary but believing in the individual, his right and his enterprise, and rejecting the socialist panacea.”
It is important to remember the context of Menzies’ new Liberal Party. In 1944 our nations were still fighting a war against fascism. There had been plenty of local admirers of Mussolini and even in some cases Hitler before the War but, by this point, the authoritarian right had no appeal. The Soviet Union was still an ally in the war against Hitler, but the authoritarian Left had no appeal to most Australians either.
At the same time, laissez faire capitalism had not had a good run. The Great Depression had convinced many that the Government needed to play a much bigger role in the economy than the leaders of the Edwardian era would have ever imagined. So classical liberalism was out of fashion too.
The sensible centre, to use my predecessor Tony Abbott’s phrase, was the place to be and it remains the place to be now.
I mention this only to remind that when we quote Menzies, Disraeli, or other political leaders, we need to consider the historical context. Menzies sought a lesser role for Government in citizens’ lives than Labor did, but by our 21st century standards he was hardly an economic liberal. He believed in a highly regulated economy with high tariffs, a fixed exchange rate, centralised wage fixing and generally much more Government involvement in the economy than we would be comfortable with.
Of course he was not alone - his UK and even American counterparts had similar views.
It was a different age.
But a strong thread of principle, of value, connects our party, the Liberal Party, to that of Menzies - one that combines both the liberal and conservative traditions - John Howard’s broad church.
And it is best summed up in this way.
From its foundation more than sixty years ago, the Liberal Party has stood for freedom.
Nothing is more fundamental to our philosophy than a deep commitment to individual freedom and enterprise. The Liberal Party stands for freedom or it stands for nothing.
We in the Liberal Party believe Government’s role is to enable citizens to do their best - and that commitment to freedom is based in a deep, instinctive respect for the dignity and the worth of every individual. We respect each other when we say: you are free to chart your own course, to make your own choices, and strive to realise your own dreams.
Our opponents on the Left in their DNA believe to the contrary, that is Government knows best.
So in the balance between the individual and the State, our side of politics leans heavily in favour of freedom and the individual - preferring choice over prescription and freedom over regulation, always sceptical about the wisdom and the interference of governments.
The area where we must most carefully scrutinise the relationship between individual freedoms and Government intervention is national security.
Security and freedom are frequently represented as binary opposites - as if there exists a universe in which you could have one without the other.
But these two principles - prioritising public safety and maintaining individual freedoms - are not mutually exclusive. They can be - in fact, they must be - mutually reinforcing.
The question is not what freedoms to forgo for security. It is what security is required to enable our freedom.
The fundamental tenet of liberalism - going back to the classic work of John Stuart Mill - is that people should be free to pursue their own ideas provided their actions do not impede the rights of others to do the same. 
This foundational principle of liberalism took on an even greater significance in the twentieth century when threatened by the modern totalitarian state.
The march of both fascism and communism led Karl Popper, to examine what he called "the paradox of freedom".
Freedom he wrote, "defeats itself if it is unlimited. Unlimited freedom means that a strong man is free to bully one who is weak and to rob him of his freedom. This is why we demand that the state should limit freedom to a certain extent, so that everyone's freedom is protected by law. Nobody should be at the mercy of others, but all should have a right to be protected by the state.”
And this of course is what we mean when we talk about democracy under the rule of law which constrains the majority as it enables it.
Or as Churchill observed once in the House of Commons, “Democracy is no harlot to be picked up in the street by a man with a tommy gun.”
Karl Popper’s paradox of freedom was not the rationalisation of a dictator crushing his enemies. To the contrary, Popper was fighting to defend what he called "The Open Society" of freedom, rationality and peaceful debate.
And this is what we in this room are fighting to defend today.
To defend the Open Society - to defend freedom - we cannot give free reign to its enemies.
And those enemies are resurgent.
Terrorism is the starkest and most urgent enemy of freedom. Terrorists seek to disrupt our freedoms and disable our societies based on trust through fear. They seek to create a society in which people are neither free nor secure.
It is in the very pursuit of freedom that we seek a stronger role for the State in protecting citizens against the terrorist threat. By fighting terrorism - with proportionate means - we are defending liberal values.
In order to be free a person must first be safe.
The reality is that individual freedom, liberty, the rule of law, and indeed national sovereignty, are under threat.
In a world of rapid change, we must constantly review and improve the policies and laws that will best keep us safe.  To set and forget would be easy, but it would not be right.
When a government abdicates its national security responsibilities the consequences can be fatal - and sometimes catastrophic.
Australia is the most successful multicultural society in the world. 26 per cent of our people were born overseas, in my own city of Sydney the percentage is 37 per cent, and half the population have at least one parent born outside Australia.
Our migration nation is also very diverse with people drawn from every party of the world, the second most commonly spoken language at home in Sydney is Chinese, the third is Arabic.
And yet in an age of increasing uncertainty and friction we live together, citizens of a free society, in relative harmony.
This freedom is enabled by strong national security.
In particular our strong border protection policies have ensured that Australians know once again, as they did in John Howard’s day,  that it is only their Government which determines who comes to Australia and on what terms they can stay.
Howard’s strong policies were dropped by Labor when they were elected in 2007 and over six years there were 50,000 unlawful arrivals and at least 1,200 deaths at sea.
More than 14,500 refugees waiting in UN camps were denied a place under our offshore humanitarian program in those days – the places going instead to those arriving illegally by boat.
Taxpayers paid over A$10 billion for managing these arrivals – money that could have been spent on hospitals or schools.
It’s a record, a shameful record that utterly vindicates the Coalition’s border protection policies.
As Europe grapples today with unsustainable inflows of migrants and asylum seekers, the Australian experience offers both a cautionary tale and the seeds of a potential solution.
The lesson is very clear: weak borders fragment social cohesion, drain public revenue, raise community concerns about national security, and ultimately undermine the consensus required to sustain high levels of immigration and indeed multiculturalism itself.
Ultimately, division.
In contrast, strong borders and retention of our sovereignty allow government to maintain public trust in community safety, respect for diversity and support for our immigration and humanitarian programs.
Unity. Security. Opportunity. Freedom.
Australia continues to welcome around 200,000 migrants each year; we have issued an additional 12,000 visas for people displaced by the conflicts in Syria and Iraq, and we increased our broader humanitarian intake by 35 per cent. This could not have happened if had not restored order at the border, maintaining strict security vetting and earn the Australian people’s trust that it is the Government that controls who enters Australia and for which purposes, not the criminal people smugglers.
I say to the critics of our border protection policies: Are these not precisely the outcomes that every just and decent society should seek? I believe they are, and I hope you do too.
And it’s this foundation that will allow us to effectively deal with the most pressing security challenge of our time – Islamist extremism terrorism.
While small in number, its adherents are resolute in murderous purpose.
They have already eroded a measure of public trust in our pluralism and cast doubt on the ability of our governments to protect their own people.
So we must answer this question - will we cower before their barbarism? Will we change the way we live in the face of these terrorists? Or will we defy them and defeat them as you are doing in the United Kingdom and as the men and women I met today with the Prime Minister at London Bridge and the Borough Markets are doing, defying and defeating those who seek to undermine our way of life?
Now in our response, we draw strength from the finest political tradition ever devised.
The values of Westminster are those of openness, mutual respect and the rule of law.
We believe that a good society is one that welcomes all peoples who commit to these core values. We believe that contending religions and philosophies should have to make their case in a marketplace of ideas. By comparison, the extremists are morally and intellectually bereft. They can offer nothing in life, so they promise glory in death.
It’s easy to scoff at the paucity of their vision - many have made the mistake of trivialising the threat they pose.
But as Disraeli once observed, “something unpleasant is coming when men are anxious to tell the truth”.
In the fight ahead, there is no space for the mush of moral relativism.
There is no justification for the mass murder of children at a concert in Manchester, or the killing of innocent people on London Bridge and at Borough Market – including the young Australians Kirsty Boden, who had rushed to help people who had been injured and Sara Zelenak, a young Australian au pair. I met today the two brave metropolitan police officers who gave her CPR and sought to save her life.
We must acknowledge, as so many muslims acknowledge, that Islamist extremism is a disease within the body of Islam itself.
Equally we must recognise that Muslim leaders who stand for mutual respect and democracy whether at home or, like President Widodo of Indonesia, on the world stage are our best allies in the war against Daesh.
And we must also recognise that those who seek to tag all muslims for the crimes of a tiny minority are doing precisely what the terrorists want them to do.
After all, their pitch to muslims in Australian is “you don’t belong here, they don’t want you, this is not your home.”
The last thing we should do is confirm their poisonous propaganda.
The genius of Australia is that we define our national identity not by race or religion or ethnicity but rather by a commitment to shared political values of freedom, democracy, the rule of law, equality of men and women, mutual respect - values accessible to all.
So we must never take a backward step from our values - lets face it, a bad idea does not become valid, let alone good, simply because someone claims it was divinely inspired.
Religion and tradition should be acknowledged, but the values that prevail in our society are our values, the laws that prevail in our society are our laws - and no others.
Now, as we honour our law enforcement and security services – who rush towards danger when others flee – we must ensure that they have the powers and resources to stay ahead of the threat. 
As our adversaries’ methods and tactics evolve, so must ours.
The privacy of a terrorist can never be more important than the safety of the public. The information security of a terrorist or a child abuser must not be protected above the personal security of our children, our communities and our values.
A government that gets this upside down would be abdicating responsibility; its duty of care to its citizens to keep them safe. It certainly is not helping freedoms cause.
This is where Mill’s view on liberty is so important - we must not allow harm to be done to individuals and communities where we can act.
This must be the case online as it is offline.
Now the question of Internet freedom is an important one. There is no institution or infrastructure more important to the future prosperity and freedom of our global community than the Internet. There has never been a more transformative democratising technology; its broken down national boundaries and distance. Not so long ago only States and large corporations had megaphones powerful enough to address a nation - now a tweet or YouTube video can reach millions, if not billions, and do so in seconds.
But these remarkable technologies that are designed to unite us are also being used by those who seek to do us harm.
We have seen how terrorists have used, trained in and developed operations in ungoverned places all around the world. This is why Australia and the UK are part of the international coalition to defeat the islamist terrorism of Daesh at its source in Syria and Iraq.
But as the so called Caliphate is destroyed, the terrorists will continue to sue the Internet for recruitment, planning and advocacy.
We cannot allow ungoverned spaces, whether offline or online, to be exploited by those who would do us harm.
The Internet must remain free and secure. But it cannot be ungoverned. Laws offline must apply online. Otherwise, freedom and security will both be lost.
To ensure terrorists are unable to operate with impunity in the ungoverned digital space, I set up a task force last month to drive action on our capability and response to cyber threats.
And just three days ago, in an unprecedented show of solidarity, the G20 agreed to work with industry in the pursuit of public safety and together fight terrorists and organised criminals.
We agreed we would “collaborate with industry to provide lawful and non-arbitrary access to available information where access is necessary for the protection of national security against terrorist threats. We affirm that the rule of law applies online as well as it does offline.”
And I want to thank again as I did earlier today, Prime Minister May for her very strong support in ensuring that we got that strong consensus at the G20.
I will refer to two areas where we need to do more.
First, we need to secure swifter and more effective action by the owners of the big online services, like Facebook, Google and Twitter, to take down extremist material as soon as it appears. By and large I am confident that we can do more in this regard. I think there is plenty of goodwill.
Second, we need to address the problem of encryption. Now encryption is vitally important to protect our security online but just as a locked bank vault or a filing cabinet cannot resist a Court order to produce a document, why should the owners of encrypted messaging platforms like WhatsApp, Telegram or Signal be able to establish end to end encryption in such a way that nobody, not the owners and not the courts have the ability to find out what is being communicated.
The G20 communique is not talking about giving Governments a backdoor to access messaging, nor is it seeking access to the source code that some countries are demanding of companies for the pleasure of doing business in their jurisdiction.
Rather it is saying to Silicon Valley and its emulators - the ball is in your court. You have created messaging applications which are encrypted end to end, they are being used by terrorists and criminals to hide their murderous plans.
You must ensure that these dark places can be illuminated by the law so that the freedoms you hold dear will not be stripped away by criminals your technologies have made undetectable.
This will be a difficult conversation in many places, and especially in the USA, where there is a strong, anti government libertarian tradition on both the left and the right.
But here is the bottom line: the best defence against terrorists’ plans is good intelligence. We have in the last few years in Australia disrupted twelve major terrorists plots, including several that would have resulted in large mass casualty attacks. How many more can we disrupt if every communication, by every conspirator, is encrypted end to end and cannot be read despite every lawful right, indeed duty, so to do?
So these are some of the challenges as we balance liberty and security, ensuring we have the security that enables our freedoms. I want to conclude tonight by thanking you again, ladies and gentlemen, for the honour of the Disraeli Prize.
[ENDS]
Q&amp;A
DEAN GODSON:
Prime Minister Turnbull has very kindly agreed to answer questions. Usual house rules – no question too outrageous, you just have to say your name and organisation first. Do I see any openers?
MATT RIDLEY - THE VISCOUNT RIDLEY DL, HOUSE OF LORDS:
Matt Ridley, House of Lords.
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh hello! How are you? Good to see you again.
MATT RIDLEY - THE VISCOUNT RIDLEY DL, HOUSE OF LORDS:
Very well thank you.
Prime Minister you’ve said that Britain could learn a lesson from Australia on immigration. What lesson can Britain learn from Australia on your very successful negotiation of comprehensive free trade agreements with China and other major nations?
PRIME MINISTER:
You’ve just got to get the deals done, Matt. Britain hasn’t done a free trade deal or trade deal for a very long time, since it joined the European Union. So there is obviously plenty of work to do to get the negotiating teams and the talent that you need to do it.
But basically if you believe, as your government does, as I believe both sides of politics do in Britain from what I’ve heard, that Britain needs to find as many open markets as it can, then you just have to get on and negotiate. And look, the chill winds of protectionism are blowing around the world in various places, some more strongly than others but I firmly believe that protectionism is not a ladder to get you out of a low growth trap, it’s a shovel to dig it much deeper.
JAMES MASSOLA, FAIRFAX:
James Massola, from the Sydney Morning Herald and The Age newspapers. Thanks for your speech of course and I’d like to pick up a point you made about Sir Robert Menzies in founding the Liberal Party which I’m willing to guess is not going to go unnoticed back home. Can I ask do you believe that Menzies-
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I hope that people have noticed that he founded the Liberal Party.
(Laughter)
You’re reflecting very adversely on the historical education of Australians.
(Laughter)
JAMES MASSOLA, FAIRFAX:
Indeed, PM. Can I ask do you believe that Menzies’ legacy, and indeed that your governments agenda is in danger of being hijacked by the conservative wing of your party? Why have you made this point?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I think it’s very important as I said in my remarks - and indeed using the phrase Tony Abbott, the first person I heard use in our party anyway, the sensible centre - the path for our party was set by Menzies when he brought together both the liberal and conservative traditions and of course these labels will be most debased in social media outrage cycle of today, but he brought together those traditions. John Howard described it as a broad church. They are brought together and indeed they are shared by most of us, share both traditions, they are not exclusive. But the important thing was to set the party as a party of progress, indeed of innovation. Menzies gave a speech in 1966 I recall where he talked about innovation even more often than I normally do, James, so there is nothing new about Liberal Prime Ministers talking about innovation. But the focus has got to be on delivering for the people you represent and pretty much in any policy area and when I often talk about this in the area of energy, ideology is a very poor guide of policy. The focus has got to be on getting results so that is why I say in respect of energy for example my best guides are engineering and economists, not ideology and politics.
MICHAEL HOWARD - THE RT HON. THE LORD HOWARD OF LYMPNE CH QC, HOUSE OF LORDS:
Michael Howard, House or Lords.
PRIME MINISTER:
Michael, good to see you again. Thank you so much for coming.
MICHAEL HOWARD - THE RT HON. THE LORD HOWARD OF LYMPNE CH QC, HOUSE OF LORDS:
You are in an unrivalled position to assess the role which China wants to play in the world and the way in which we should respond. What insights can you share with us?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think Michael, that’s a big question – let me deal with the first part of it. Chinese people and Chinese leaders, including obviously Xi Jinping see themselves as being restored to the level of pre-eminence that is really the natural order of things. And Deng Xiaoping summed it up very well when he went south – he had a southern tour in the late ‘70s - as they started to open up China to the world.
If you go back 40 years, China wasn’t a closed economy but it represented only a few per cent of global GDP. And he went down there and he talked about the great Chinese navigator, Zheng He I think in about 1500 who set off on these great voyages across the Indian Ocean and you know through what we now call Indonesia and India and so forth, all around that area. And subsequent emperors closed China to the world. And Deng Xiaoping said in the days of Zheng He when we were open to the world we were strong, when we closed ourselves off we became weak and subject to foreign domination and oppression, invasion and so forth.
And so what the leaders have been doing is seeking to restore China to the prosperity that gives it naturally the preeminence that its population, nearly a quarter of the world’s population inevitably entails.
In terms of how Britain should deal with China, it should deal with China as we do - honestly, frankly, openly. We have an honest engagement, a very candid engagement. There are some areas of, well some areas where we would like China to do more. The obvious one, that both Theresa and I talked about today is with North Korea. You know that reckless and dangerous regime is putting the peace of the region and the world at risk, and while we don’t suggest that they’re doing China’s bidding at all, I mean it is not like East Germany was to the Soviet Union, this is a very unruly neighbor but nonetheless, China has the greatest leverage, the greatest ability to bring that regime to its senses without military force, and we are strongly urging Chinese leadership to do that.
ROBERT WRIGHT, THE FINANCIAL TIMES:
Prime Minister, Robert Wright from the Financial Times, you are currently seeking free trade deals with the UK, which I think is a very small proportion of your GDP and can’t do a deal immediately and a deal with the European Union which is one of the world’s two great trading blocs. I wonder how you think about how you allocate resources in the sense of urgency between doing these two deals?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I met with the Presidents of the European Council and Commission, Mr Tusk and Mr Juncker just in Hamburg a few days ago and we agreed that we will do all we could to reach agreement on Australia-European free trade agreement before Brexit. In fact, the aim is get to done before 2019.
Those people who are skeptical about the efficiency of bureaucrats and negotiators may feel that’s ambitious but that’s what we’re going to seek to do.
So that is the first priority but then when Britain is free to deal, after it leaves the European Union, we’ll be negotiating as quickly as we can. And we can, I can assure, negotiate multiple free trade deals at one time. We’ve demonstrated that. I mean the China, Korea, Japan free trade deals of the last few years were all under, they were all being negotiated simultaneously and we have quite a few others on the go at the moment.
Indeed, again at the G20 the President of Indonesia Joko Widodo, or Jokowi as he’s generally known, he and I agreed that the trade deal that we’re negotiating between Australia and Indonesia which is called the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, or CEPA, that our goal is to get that done by the end of the year. Now that’s a very strong commitment and leadership on his part and my part, but I think it gives you an indication that we just want to forge ahead.
Again, I make no bones about this, the more doors to more markets I can open for Australian business to enter the better. That’s my goal. Free trade and open markets are a big part, a huge part of our 26 years of uninterrupted economic growth.
ANDREW MACLEOD, KINGS COLLEGE:
Thank you Prime Minister, Andrew Macleod – Committee for Melbourne – sorry, used to be Committee for Melbourne. Kings College I should say. You talk about opening up markets. Now Australia was a leader in creating APEC, the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation, one of the great positives from that is the APEC Business Travelers Card. Now that Britain will be leaving the United Kingdom is there a role that we could perhaps look at creating an APEC Business Travelers Card system in the Commonwealth to encourage trade in the Commonwealth and is that something that Australia and Britain could perhaps do?
PRIME MINISTER:
It is something we’ll certainly put on the agenda. But again, we want to do everything we can to facilitate trade and trading opportunities for Australian businesses and of course for foreign businesses to do business with us Australia. That is our position. It is very, very clear. The more opportunities the better.
HARVEY ODZE, THE BOROUGH OF HACKNEY:
Harvey Odze from the Borough of Hackney. Firstly, I’d just like to say that my youngest son is one of those people you mentioned in your address who is an Australian citizen with foreign parentage.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well he’s not Robinson Crusoe.
(LAUGHTER)
HARVEY ODZE, THE BOROUGH OF HACKNEY:
When you spoke about the importance of combatting extremist Islamic terror in many ways, in your role as a neighbour and a fellow member of the Commonwealth of New Zealand, next time you meet Bill English, do you think it would be possible to persuade him that his governments action in UNESCO are undermining that role?
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you, I will as Chris Uhlmann’s friend at the ABC Tony Jones would say, I’ll take that as a comment and I’ll reflect on it. I don’t know enough about the matter you’re referring to. Thank you.
QUESTION:
I’m from the Chinese Embassy, good evening Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good evening.
QUESTION:
It seemed to me that the British Government is pretty receptive to the Belt and Road Initiative and that the Chancellor said that China and the UK are natural partners because China is the eastern side, and the UK is the western side of the initiative. So what is the position of the Australian Government? I feel that you’re a little bit hesitant. Do you consult each other on how to work together with China or with the World on the Belt and Road Initiative? Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
There was a big conference in Beijing recently - Belt and Road Conference. Our Trade Minister Steven Ciobo attended it. There is a lot of investment, Chinese investment in Australia. We have a very strong relationship with China. It goes well beyond economics as you know, there is a lot of Australian business in China. Lucy and I more than 20 years ago now actually established a zinc mine in China. So I’ve been an investor in Chinese mining actually. Most mining investment is coming the other way.
From our point of view we assess all foreign investment on its merits. It is much easier to invest in Australia as a foreigner that it is for example to invest in China as a foreigner. We are a very open economy. We welcome investment and we look forward to deepening ties and links in that regard and in other respects as well. So I think the relationship is very strong and getting stronger.
RORY BROOMFIELD, FREEDOM ASSOCIATION:
Rory Broomfield from the Freedom Association. You mentioned immigration in your speech with reference to security but given that we are leaving the European Union, the United Kingdom is leaving the EU, another freedom that we’ll have is reframing our immigration policy to the rest of the world. I wondered what thoughts and recommendations you could give to our Home Secretary on reframing our new immigration policy?
PRIME MINISTER:
Everyone gives me advice how to run Australia – I’m not going to tell anyone else how to run their country. But look, I just repeat, I just refer you to what I said in my remarks that I think controlling your borders is absolutely critical.
John Howard summed it once when he said we decide who comes to Australia and the circumstances in which they come. It is absolutely demonstrably the right thing to do. You have to be in a position where whoever comes across your border, whether they be a business migrant, whether they be a student coming to do a course at a university, whether they are a humanitarian entrant, a refugee, the government must make that decision on behalf of the people whose country it is. It is a fundamental incident of sovereignty so when you outsource your borders, you outsource your sovereignty. And that enables you, if you control your borders, as we have - there has not been one successful people smuggling venture to Australia in more than 1000 days - if you can control your borders and maintain that integrity then you have the social license to have a generous migration program including a generous humanitarian program as we do – one of the largest on a per capita basis. This is not a theoretical proposition.
Kevin Rudd, no relation to the Home Secretary, actually did drop Howard’s policies and we know what happened. So there is no question - you’ve got be able to control your borders. Different countries and geography and so forth can make that more or less difficult but it is absolutely critical and I think that’s, I know that, well I’ll let the Home Secretary express her own views on this but I have no doubt that she believes that Her Majesty’s Government in right of the United Kingdom should determine who comes to this country, these islands and nobody else.
MATT CHISHTY, COMMANDER OF THE METROPOLITAN POLICE, RETIRED:
Thank you very much Prime Minister. Matt Chishty, a recently retired Commander with the Metropolitan Police. Not deliberately trying to take the debate away from free trade or immigration but I just want you to return to terrorism. What really struck accord with me was your description of these terrorists have got nothing to offer in this life and that is why they’re focused on the afterlife. I think those sort of messages need to be driven home and there needs to be more focus and concentration, especially with the establishments like mosques to talk more about the life and their responsibilities here. But sometimes we get from a small minority quite a disproportionate response back into the public which frightens a lot of middle mainstream Muslim communities in particular. How has your message been received in Australia and what’s the response been from your communities across your nation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Every time I talk about this issue I talk about inclusion. The points I’ve made tonight, the Australians in the audience have heard many times. The terrorists are the ones that want to divide us. We must not become amplifiers for their poisonous propaganda. They have to be called out. You know, this Islamist terrorist extremist movement or, I’m not sure whether that’s a philosophy - hardly much philosophical about it - ideology is probably the best word – this Islamist extremist ideology is as we know, it is blaspheming and destroying Muslim societies, or seeking to destroy Muslim societies and the vast majority of their victims around the world are Muslims, as you know. So we have to support those who make the case for inclusion, we have to give them the solidarity that they deserve and they need. And that’s why I am always delighted to be with Joko Widodo. Jokowi is the democratically elected leader of the largest majority Muslim country in the world and he stands there and says, he’s got plenty of critiques of course as all politicians do, but he says Indonesia proves that Islam, moderation, tolerance and democracy are compatible. It is a very, very powerful message and I always encourage him to speak more on the world stage. Jokowi is one of the great leaders of our times, believe me. He is such an extraordinary example. In this particular battle, he is a really powerful advocate for the values that we all share and that you I know in your service in the Metropolitan Police for which I know everyone thanks you, and I do too, that you’ve always embodied too.
So thank you very much indeed.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you very much and Bibi thank you so much for your warm address and your warm welcome. Thank you, joining us here with Sara and the leaders of Israel. Thank you to the Governor-General of New Zealand representing our Kiwi brothers and sisters and of course, I'm here with Dan Tehan, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs and the Minister Assisting me on Cyber Security, which has been a key priority of his visit here. Lucy and I are joined by Bill Shorten and Chloe Shorten, the Leader of the Opposition and his wife and so many other Australian parliamentarians.
The leaders of our three nations are here assembled and we are here assembled because we are honouring an extraordinary battle, an extraordinary campaign, which made history, which fulfilled history.
A tale of incredible courage, of men and horses. Horses that came, many of them, from a part of New South Wales that Lucy and I know very well; the Hunter Valley. Indeed the horses were called Walers, I think there’s some of the Murrurundi team up there, I reckon. A few Haydons in the stands, I would say.
And the horses you know, the horses were as legendary as the men that rode them.
Bill the Bastard - that was a horse, that was a horse, I hasten to add - he was un-rideable. He was a rogue and one Michael Shanahan managed to ride him, managed to break him in. After he was wounded at the Battle of Ramadi, Bill the Bastard returned Shanahan to the Australian lines, carried him back, returned him - so legend says - not to the medical officer, but to the vet.
[Laughter]
And then of course, Guy Haydon, who like so many of the young Australian bushmen, came with his own horse, Midnight, who was killed at the Battle of Beersheba, leaping over a Turkish trench. The Turk fired up through the horse, wounding and killing the horse, killing Midnight and wounding Guy Haydon. But so much courage from these animals.
You know, I recall as a young boy listening to the First World War stories of my grandfather who was not in the Light Horse, I hasten to add. He served on the Western Front, but one of the most bitter, heartfelt stories of those old soldiers was of the fact that the horses did not come home. Banjo Patterson who was also in the Light Horse, one of our greatest poets, wrote beautifully about that; the horses that didn't come home. Shooting the horses was, for so many of those men who had seen horrors beyond imagination, the worst moment of that war.
Now you mentioned Bibi that the soldiers knew that they were walking in lands filled with history and of course, it was a generation that was perhaps much more familiar with the Bible than perhaps our generation is. Every place was a household name. Mind you, there was a limit to how much biblical education one could absorb on campaign. One of the Troopers in the Light Horse Ion Idriess wrote a diary and turned it into a book, the Desert Column. He talks about a Bible enthusiast in his troop who was regularly giving them lectures about wherever they were. When they reached Ashdod, the Bible enthusiast became very, very, very motivated and he climbed on top of an empty German beer barrel. Idriess lamented that it was empty, of course with the Australians, it wouldn't have remained full for very long - but it was empty.
He told them the history of Gaza, Ashkelon, Ashdod, Gath and Ekron and just as he had got to the 29-year Siege of Psammetichus, Idriess concludes;
"A shell has just burst above The Bible enthusiast and he ended his lecture abruptly, five shrapnel bullets whizzed right through the barrel."
One gets the feeling he’d had enough history lessons. The battle of course, was in effect a defiance of the norm, a defiance of history.
The Australian Light Horse were not meant to fight on horseback; they were mounted infantry and they were to ride to the battle, dismount, one man would hold the horses, three others would go in and fight like infantry. But on this occasion, water was short, they had no choice. General Harry Chauvel ordered that afternoon that they had to charge and he said:
"Put Grant straight at it."
What William Grant and the men of the 4 and 12th Light Horse Regiments achieved that day was astonishing. They charged six kilometres into Turkish fire. Their determination was unstoppable.
Idriess wrote - who watched it, he was on an observation post – he said: 
"At a mile distance, their thousand hooves were stuttering thunder, coming at a rate that frightened a man. They were an awe-inspiring sight, galloping through the red haze, knee to knee and horse to horse, the dying sun glinting on bayonet points."
And he went on to say that:
“Captured Turkish and German officers have told us, they never dreamed that mounted troops would be madmen enough to attempt rushing infantry redoubts protected by machine guns and artillery.”
‘The mad Australians,’ was a common description. Not so mad. Brave, heroic, turning the tide of history, making history, fulfilling history.
The horses, as I said, they were stock horses. Now, the Australian stock horse was looked down on by some of the English officers, we're told. They weren't purebreds, but Australian stock horses, as we know, are bred for their intelligence, their agility, their ability to work in all sorts of country and particularly from the Hunter Valley, in steep country, their ability to anticipate, often better at mustering than the stockmen that rides on them.
They are the best of horses, the most intelligent of horses and the most hardy of horses, as were the men that rode them.
This battle, you know, has become part of our history, part of our psyche. It is an extraordinary episode in our national story.
Imagine these young men, so far from home, out of the Australian Bush with their own horses, in a completely alien landscape, the only familiarity being the names of the places and that from their Bible lessons.
Of course, General Sir Harry Chauvel commanded the Desert Mountain Corps but it was his nephew Charles Chauvel that made an extraordinary movie in 1939, 40,000 Horsemen.
You can imagine, Bibi, how Australia, how isolated Australia felt in the Second World War; Hitler sweeping through Germany, Japan a looming threat. The protection of Mother England seemed a long way away.
40,000 Horsemen was a film that inspired a nation. It was a story of Australian victory, of courage, of determination and it etched this battle permanently in our national story.
As a young boy at boarding school in the early 1960s, I have to say we watched it again and again and again.
All of us imagined that we could be there, spurring our horses over the Ottoman lines, fighting all the way up through the lands of the Bible, taking Jerusalem, liberating Damascus.
As you know, that was done by a couple of Australian officers who got lost in the narrow streets, found their way to the town hall and being not particularly concerned about what orders they'd been given, promptly accepted the surrender from the Mayor.
Their feats will never be forgotten. Their memory will never fade. The tradition of man and horse is part of us. It's part of Australia. It always will be. This was the last great cavalry charge in history.
There were more men and horses in this charge than there were in the Charge of the Light Brigade. It was a bigger charge and it was successful. They spurred their horses through that fire, those mad Australians, through that fire and took the town of Beersheba, secured the victory. That did not create the State of Israel, but enabled its creation.
Had the Ottoman rule in Palestine and Syria not been overthrown by the Australians and the New Zealanders, the Balfour Declaration would have been empty words.
But this was a step for the creation of Israel and with their courage...
[Applause]
It was. It was. And this, while those young men may not have foreseen, no doubt did not foresee the extraordinary success of the State of Israel, its foundations, its resilience, its determination, its indomitability against overwhelming odds, their spirit was the same. Like the State of Israel has done ever since, they defied history, they made history and with their courage they fulfilled history.
Lest we forget.
[Applause]
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Welcome one and all, James welcome to ACCI – the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
Now I’m here with Michael McCormack, the Minister for Small Business and as you know our focus, our commitment is to ensure that we create the right environment for you to succeed and for you to be able to invest and grow your businesses. Because we know that investment brings jobs.
Now I’m sure you’ll recall that from time to time during the election campaign, which of course was quite a long one, I used to say ‘jobs and growth’ was our objective.
Well it’s not just a slogan, it’s an outcome. Business conditions according the NAB are at an all-time high, right now, and as we know, 356,000 new jobs have been created in the last year and about 84 per cent of them are full-time.
Now that is a mark of the success, the economic leadership we’ve provided. It is a mark of the effectiveness of our commitment to reduce business taxes on small and medium companies - as you know up to $50 million turnover - we’ve achieved that through the Senate.
$50 million turnover businesses is not a huge business, but businesses that turnover $50 million a year or less, employ half of the entire private sector workforce, so it’s a lot of Australians. So it’s the big end of town, which is very important, but half of Australians are working for businesses that turnover $50 million or less.
Now as Michael and I and like so many of our colleagues come from a business background, and we know that cash flow is king. Cash is what it’s all about, and you need to make sure that your bills are paid on time, that your customers are paying you on time.
So today we have announced the government will mandate that by July 2019, all non-corporate Commonwealth entities must pay all invoices for contracts, up to a total value of a million dollars within 20 calendar days - which is more or less 15 business days.
That will mean that around 95 per cent of invoices are paid in 20 calendar days, and that is a huge win for the nearly 7,000 Australian small businesses that work with the Commonwealth each year.
Now we’ve already cut $5.8 billion in red tape. We’ve put $300 million on the table to encourage the states to partner with us. To further cut red tape for small business, because as you know, much of it, if not most of it is at the level of state government and indeed local government.
Now I want to just touch on trade, you know we have seen with the big free trade deals that we’ve opened up, China, Korea, Japan and more – Peru just signed just the other day in Da Nang in Vietnam – and of course we are still working away on the TPP.
We’re seeing enormous opportunities for Australian businesses, small and medium businesses, family businesses – often mum and dad businesses - micro businesses. And that of course is because of the power of the internet. The ability to get into these markets that previously, you would always have to deal with one of the big guys to be able to access, and that’s absolutely changing that opportunity.
I want to touch now on energy, you know vitally important for every business. For some businesses it’s the largest single overhead item.
Now what we have done is, right across the board, is every lever of government to reduce energy prices. We’ve got the retailers in and urged them and persuaded them to go out to their customers and tell them that they’re on the wrong plan, to get onto the right plan. Families, small businesses are getting savings of hundreds of dollars a year.
We’ve had a gas shortage in eastern Australia. It beggars belief that we ever did given how much gas Australia produces and exports but again, it was a failure of the Labor Party. You had a Labor government federally, Labor government in Queensland – I’m not trying to make a specially partisan point but it’s just a historical fact - and they allowed exports of gas from the east coast without paying any attention to protecting the domestic market.
So we’ve got to the point where we were foreshadowing restrictions on gas exports – an unlikely course of action for a Liberal Government you would think, but we needed to protect Australian jobs, we needed to protect the jobs you provide and the businesses you lead.
The good news is the energy companies, the gas companies came to the table, we’ve reached agreement with them – we now have enough gas into the east coast market and you’ve seen wholesale prices coming down.
But I want to talk about what the modelling that’s come out today on the National Energy Guarantee and this is a critically important next step.
For the first time, it will end the subsidies, end the picking winners in terms of technology and ensure that we have a market instrument that requires retailers to have the necessary levels of despatchable or reliable or baseload power – call it what you will – and of course meet the emission reduction obligations that we’ve signed up to globally as our obligations to meet.
This came from the Energy Security Board. We’ve spent a lot of time working with them, it’s their submission, these are the experts in the field. And they went out to seek independent modelling to confirm or not whether their assessment was right.
Let me give you a couple of numbers – what this will result in, the National Energy Guarantee, if it is accepted later in the week by the states and the territories - it will lead to significant falls in residential and business electricity bills. Up to $400 for households compared to 2017 prices, as of now.
And of course, it will keep the lights on, so it will be more affordable, and more reliable.
For high energy using households, such as a four-person family in New South Wales with a pool, could save around $170 a year, after 2020, compared to business as usual.
A large energy user such as a chemical factory can save about $1.4 million a year.
A café in regional Queensland would save about $230 a year, versus business as usual.
A dairy farm in Gippsland could save about $1,120 a year compared to business as usual.
A supermarket in South Australia can save about $445,000 a year compared to business as usual.
And according to the Energy Security Board – this is their words, not mine or Josh Frydenberg’s – they’ve said: “The modelling results show that the Guarantee meets the policy objectives of reducing emissions while retaining a reliable system and improving affordability.”
So the evidence is in. The National Energy Guarantee will deliver, generate significant savings for Australian families and businesses. The savings are in fact greater than have been originally estimated by the Energy Security Board.
So our plan, the Coalition’s policies on Energy, together with what we’ve done on tax and what we will do in the future, puts more money into the pockets of Australian families and businesses.
Our plan will cut power bills and keep the lights on. Keep the lights on, very important. Those from South Australia will understand the significance of that perhaps more than others, a keen awareness of the challenges of reliability or lack of it.
Keep the lights on and put Australian families and businesses in a position to be able to afford to keep the lights on.
So we’ve had widespread support, I have to say, Josh Frydenberg is a very powerful advocate. There was a joint statement put out last night supporting the National Energy Guarantee, by groups as diverse as AI Group, the Australian Energy Council, the Clean Energy Council, the ACTU, ACOSS, the National Farmer’s Federation and the peak steel, cement and aluminium lobbies.
So this new modelling is a wake-up call to Labor and the states. It’s time for them to get on board and work with us to help households and businesses. Because we know, as you know, that it is your enterprise, your entrepreneurship your preparedness to have a go - and if it doesn’t work out, dust yourselves off and have another go – that delivers and is delivering right now, the jobs and growth Australia needs.
So it’s great for Michael and I to be here with you today, we’re looking forward to having a very good discussion.
Thank you. 


PRIME MINISTER:
Yanggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngunawal dhawra. Wanggarralijinyin mariny bulan bugarabang
We are all meeting together today on Ngunawal land, Ngunawal country and we acknowledge and pay our respects to their Elders.
Now thank you Julie and thank you Steve and thank you Frances, thank you for all of DFAT. Ministers Keith Pitt, Connie Fierravanti-Wells, for the enormous effort that has been put into preparing this White Paper. Frances well done, great, fantastic job. Richard Maude, great work in shepherding all of that intellect into this.
It’s wonderful to be joined by our parliamentary colleagues here, but also of course Senator David Fawcett who is the Chairman Joint Standing Committee of Foreign Affairs Defence &amp; Trade and who will no doubt carefully consider the White Paper and give it a grade, one way or the other in due course. I want to acknowledge the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, Ambassadors, High Commissioners. Distinguished guests one and all.
Australia’s foreign policy must advance our values and our national interests. It must do so clear eyed and pragmatic, in a time when the pace and scale of change is unprecedented in all of human history.
But in the midst of all of this change the formula for our success - the most successful multicultural society in the world, 27 years of uninterrupted economic growth – that formula is timeless.
It is the values of freedom, democracy, the rule of law, mutual respect; timeless values indeed, but never more timely than they are today.
Now you will read a lot in the White Paper about the importance of the international rules-based system of norms, rules and institutions, which requires nations big and small to play by those rules and to respect each other’s sovereignty. This has not just enabled our security and prosperity for the entire post-war period but its extension after the Cold War to almost all corners of the Indo-Pacific, has generated the greatest burst of economic growth, innovation and human advancement the world has ever seen.
However we cannot take any of it for granted.
Now the Chief of the Defence Force is here Mark Binskin and he understands as does the Defence Minister Marise Payne and the Defence Industry Minister Christopher Pyne, as do all our defence leaders; they all understand that we live in times, yes, of uncertainty and indeed times that are more dangerous, then we’ve seen for a very long time. That is why we are investing in the largest revitalisation of our armed forces, in the air, on the land and on the sea, in peacetime history. Security and prosperity, they go hand in hand.
The Foreign Policy White Paper we’re delivering today presents a framework for facing the challenges of an uncertain future with confidence.
Uncertainty is a fact. Rapid change is a fact. They’re realities. The challenge for us is not how to resist them, let alone deny them, but how to prosper with them, how to hedge against the risks and seize of the opportunities the times offer us.
Now, the White Paper is clear-eyed and hard-headed. It sees our world, and our region, as it is, not how we wish they could be, or fondly imagine they once were. Prosperity and security, I repeat, go hand in hand and you can’t have the former without the latter. If the Minister for Finance were here, he would remind us you can’t afford the latter without the former.
The simplicity of the Cold War is long gone. The world is a much more complex environment.
It’s a world in which over the last 30 years we have seen the greatest rise out of poverty in all of human history, but in which the number of civil wars tripled between 2007 and 14. Conflicts and lawless spaces have generated 65 million displaced people, more than at any time since the Second World War.
This, the localised breakdowns in order have spread through terrorism and broken borders. The technology which enables a child to access all of the knowledge of the world from a smartphone, to communicate around the world in nanoseconds, also gives terrorists and criminals a reach and a lethality that in years past was only available to nation states.
So the digital technologies that have brought us together, are also being turned to theft, to sabotage and division.
The economic forces that have delivered prosperity and opportunity, are also generating - because of the rapid rate of change - political uncertainty, military capability and strategic ambition. Political alienation is feeding populism and protectionism and providing opportunities for foreign interference. We are navigating a rapidly changing multi-polar world in which each of the major players are testing their relationships with each other, while undergoing rapid change themselves. In the past we could safely assume that the world worked in a way that suited Australia. Now power is shifting and the rules and institutions are under challenge. We are experiencing unprecedented prosperity and opportunity, but the liberal rules-based order that underpins it all, is under greater stress than at any time since its creation in the 1940s. This is the first time in our history that our dominant trading partner is not also our dominant security partner. We must see this as an opportunity, not as a risk.
Now there was a view that we should not lock down this Foreign Policy White Paper - only the third in our history - at this moment of unprecedented change. But Julie Bishop and Steve Ciobo and I took a different view. Change presents us with new opportunities and this is the time not to be deflected by the risks, but to focus on prudent hedging, focus on that security but also seize the opportunities as unprecedented as the change which is the tenor of the times in which we live.
Now the genius of Australia is that we define our national identity not by race or religion or ethnicity, but rather by a commitment to shared political values and institutions which are accessible to all. Rarer than you might think, if you reflect on that.
The success of our multicultural society is the envy of the world and our people - magnificent in their diversity, harmonious because of our values and the mutual respect which they entail - are our greatest asset.
With over a quarter of us born somewhere else and more than half of us with a foreign-born parent, we demonstrate that an open, diverse and integrated society is not only compatible with security, but indeed a prerequisite. This is a strength that we take to the world as we show our credentials as a regional power with global interests and global influence.
Now my government’s foreign policy settings are true to our values not because of unconditional altruism, but because they align with our interests. We are pragmatists, not ideologues. Being true to ourselves is a hard-headed investment in a fairer, more stable and prosperous world.
Now Australia’s vision for our Indo Pacific region is optimistic and born of ambition. It is for a neighbourhood that is defined by open markets and the free flow of goods, services, capital and ideas. Where freedom of navigation goes unchallenged and the rights of small states are untrammelled. Where our shared natural bounty, our land and water and air, is cherished and protected and disagreements are resolved by dialogue in accordance with agreed rules and established institutions.
Our objective is an Indo-Pacific that is secure, that is open and prosperous.
Now the rules, norms and institutions that enable freedom and opportunity have been painfully difficult to build.  Australians know this, because we have contributed to the building of so many of them. But they are easy to break.  There is no better example than the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which took 150 countries, including all the major powers, nine years to negotiate after several previous failed attempts. UNCLOS has brought stability and security and these have in turn delivered enterprise, trade and sustainable development. With the world’s third largest maritime Exclusive Economic Zone, Australia has more at stake than most. That’s why we have been unwavering in our support for the dispute settlement processes of UNCLOS - regardless of the outcome. The resolution of our boundary dispute with Timor Leste is a very good example.  That is why we unapologetically advocate for all countries to respect the umpire’s decision, as this goes to the integrity of the whole international legal system.
Now our White Paper argues that today’s challenges require Australia to take more responsibility for our own prosperity and security.
We must secure our own future.
Now this does not mean being less vigorous in upholding international law, let alone degrading our Alliance with the United States.   It means pursuing our interests just as much in San Francisco as in Shanghai and always on our own terms. Our Alliance with the United States reflects a deep alignment of interests and values, while never being a straitjacket for Australian policymaking. Our friendship and partnership with China enriches our economy and society, while not preventing us from vigorously advancing our own interests.
I have always enjoyed a frank and warm relationship with the leaders of the United States and indeed with the leaders of China, with whom I have now spent many hours in conversation, mostly about economic and security issues but in the case of Premier Li stretching more recently to Australian Rules Football and its’ growing following in China. You could not imagine in fact, modern Australia without our over one million strong Chinese community, any more than you could imagine it without our more than half a million strong and rapidly growing Indian community. We admired, and envied a little, we politicians, the enthusiastic welcomes received by Prime Minister Modi and President Xi and Premier Li during their recent visits.
Now there is no more important bilateral relationship in the world than that of China and the United States.
I have seen firsthand that Presidents Trump and Xi respect and understand each other, both on the issues on which they agree and those on which they differ.
Those who like to focus only on difference or disagreement, should reflect how China has gone much further than many imagined, or indeed predicted, in the application of tighter and tighter economic sanctions on North Korea. Indeed the unanimity of leaders at the East Asia Summit recently in Manila, in condemning North Korea was genuine and determined.
Equally, China, the United States and Australia have, in different ways, provided vital support to the armed forces of the Philippines in their courageous battle to suppress the ISIL-backed insurgency in the Southern Philippines. Indeed, when I was at a Camp Aguinaldo in Manila recently, the Chief of the Philippines Defence Force General Guerrero described our surveillance and other assistance as a “game-changer,” his words, not mine, a game-changer, that enabled them to retake Marawi as swiftly as they did. I want to again honour the 165 armed force Philippines servicemen who were killed and the 1,700 wounded in that operation. They were defending all of us in that struggle and today our soldiers are in the Philippines. In fact, I met with them at Camp Aguinaldo, training young soldiers in the Philippines in urban warfare and counter-insurgency.
Personally I remain very confident about America's long-term commitment to the rules-based system in this region and the extended visit and presence of President Trump in his North Asian and South-East Asian tour, attending both APEC, ASEAN and the East Asia Summits, underlines the commitment, the enduring commitment. But it is also - leaving aside one administration or one president - it is also manifestly in America's long-term national interest today, tomorrow and as it has always been. If I could paraphrase John Howard; “Those who celebrate the possibility of American retrenchment, should be very careful what they wish for”.
In the global ocean, there is always a risk, as Lee Kuan Yew observed: “The big fish will eat the little fish, and the little fish will eat the shrimps”. Or as the Athean ambassador said to the Melians: “In the real world, there is justice only between equals. As for the rest, the strong do as they will, and the weak suffer as they must”.
So whether it's in Lee Kuan Yew’s words or Thucydides’, we will never agree that might is right.
The rules-based order protects us all and it protects us, in particular.
It is manifestly in our national interest to advance it and defend it.
Now, this Foreign Policy White Paper provides a framework for securing our own future, while sharing the burden of collective leadership with trusted partners and friends. It shows how we are taking a far more active role in shaping the future of our region in five important ways.
First, we are pursuing economic opportunity with our Indo-Pacific partners as Steve Ciobo described. We're preparing the way for our businesses to connect with markets and consumers in those dynamic regional economies. We pursue market integration wherever we can do so, on the basis of strong, transparent rules, fair and open competition, predictable and non-discriminatory regulation. You will have seen that together with Prime Minister Abe of Japan, we have worked tirelessly to revive the Trans-Pacific Partnership, despite the withdrawal of the United States. We're pursuing negotiation for a high-quality, Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, RCEP, a partnership centered in ASEAN that draws in India, China, Japan and Korea, and several other agreements which we hope can build towards a larger free trading system.
Believe me; protectionism is not a ladder to get out of the low-growth trap. It is a big shovel to dig it deeper.
Free trade means jobs.
Steven mentioned a number of the statistics which we've talked about. It is manifest that our national interest is advanced, the jobs and the opportunities of Australians are advanced, by making sure that markets are free, trade is free and that we have the biggest playing field possible for Australian exporters of goods, of services, to run on to and compete. Because when we do, we are the best in the world.
More opportunities, more trade, means more jobs.
Now, the second way we're shaping our region, is by seeking every opportunity to link with partners who share our interests and commitment to rules-based institutions. A good example is when officials of Japan, India, the US and Australia met in the margins of the East Asia Summit in Manila earlier this month. I discussed the importance of this initiative with Prime Minister Modi in Manila at our meeting. Another was my meeting with the Prime Minister Phúc in Vietnam earlier this month, where we agreed to work towards signing a strategic partnership. Of course, our trilateral leaders' meeting with Prime Minister Abe and President Trump.
Now, third, we are elevating South-East Asia into a top priority for Australia. Now, that's why we did not hesitate to deploy ADF assets and personnel to the Southern Philippines, as I have described. But we will need to do more in our region to assist our neighbours in the battle against global Islamist terrorism. Believe me, we do not want to have another Raqqa or Mosul in our region. The front line in the battle against terrorism in this interconnected world, is everywhere. Everything is connected. A terrorist in Syria can provide instructions to an agent in Sydney or Melbourne. We've seen plenty of evidence of that. We need to be constantly alert, constantly working with our neighbours in the region. Marawi is a place most Australians would not have heard of. If it was pointed out, they would say: “It's a long way away”. Nowhere is far away.
We have a very clear national interest in doing more to protect our security, our collective security, in this region and we do.
We're seeing strong voices for the cause of moderation. President Joko Widodo is the democratically elected leader of the largest Muslim-majority nation in the world. Within 20 years, some forecast that our close neighbour to become the fourth-largest national economy.
President Jokowi’s message that Indonesia demonstrates that Islam, democracy and moderation are compatible, is a compelling one. It resonates across the region and the world. His charisma, his authenticity and commitment are powerful voices for peace and stability. Early next year I'm looking forward to hosting the leaders of South-East Asia for summit-level discussions on our relationship with ASEAN and hosting dual-track talks on terrorism and business opportunity.
Now fourth, our greater commitment to South-East Asia will be matched in the Pacific. If we're honest, we'll acknowledge we've not always lived up to our aspirations here, with our immediate neighbours. This White Paper will come to be seen as an irreversible and permanent step-up in our commitment. Earlier this month, we announced a significant investment in a new under-sea telecommunications cable, which will bring new opportunities for our neighbours in PNG and I hope, the Solomon Islands too. It's part of a broader program to enable our Pacific neighbours to take advantage of the productive power of greater connectivity and to integrate into the Australian and New Zealand economies insofar as they choose to do so. We'll step up our assistance in monitoring and protecting their vast maritime domains.
These are defining commitments. They're essential to the long-term resilience and economic prospects of the Pacific. They are commitments of a regional power with global interests.
Now, fifth, resilience and autonomy are new themes that run strongly through this White Paper and wider program of Government. To ensure we always remain open to ideas, capital and people, we must restore integrity and trust where it is broken and ensure our security and regulatory systems are up to the task. We are committed to protecting the autonomy and integrity of decision-making in the face of foreign interference and coercion. This is particularly important in cyberspace. We will guard against all attempts to use cyber to interfere in Australian domestic affairs and democratic processes. There is nothing that we will guard more jealously than our autonomy, than our sovereignty. Australian sovereignty is our commitment.
Now, the Foreign Policy White Paper is premised on the belief that we cannot afford to turn in on ourselves and close our doors to the flow of people, capital, imports or ideas. If we're to maintain the openness, dynamism and prosperity of our region, we must preserve those strong, transparent rules, fair and open competition, non-discriminatory regulation. In shaping the region in this way, leveraging our significant national assets, our economy, our people, our institutions, we ensure our strategic security and economic interests converge. Security and prosperity depend on each other. You can't have one without the other.
These all converge around the universal values and institutions which sit at the heart of our Australian sovereignty. The Foreign Policy White Paper shows how we're lifting our ambition, sharpening our strategic focus, redoubling our commitment to ensure we continue to benefit from an Indo-Pacific that is open, prosperous and free.
We should all be ambitious; as individuals, in business, and as a nation. We'll achieve our objectives of security and opportunity by living up to our status as a regional power with global influence.
Now, I should just note - my final observation - that while we are committed as a regional power, with global influence, we are not entirely without ambitions of global dominance.
Good luck, Steve Smith. Go, Australia! Reclaim the Ashes, beat the Poms!
[Laughter]
Thank you.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Adrian is here and Peter Dinham and Dave Sabben, veterans. And Adrian and Dave, Dave was a Platoon Commander and Adrian you were a Troop Commander and we were talking about the way in which 50 years on, long after the war, the relationship between Australia and Vietnam gets closer and closer.
And it is a tribute to these men and their generation. Ken it’s a tribute to the service and sacrifice of the men who were sent to Vietnam at the direction of their Government, in a war which was unpopular in Australia and that unpopularity was so wrongly visited on the servicemen.
That was a matter of great shame. The politicians, Bill, all of us, we should always get the blame for decisions like this – it’s their call.
Young men that go and wear our nation’s uniform, under our nation’s flag, they’re doing their county’s service.
Whether the conflict is regarded as well conceived or not, their service should always be honoured and Kerry and Brendan, you do this magnificently here at the Australian War Memorial.
But I refer to Father Christmas here, because Adrian, we were talking about the friendship and the empathy that his generation has shown, understanding what a tragedy this war was, what a colossal tragedy it was for the Vietnamese people and how complex issues like the services at Long Tan can be for the people in Vietnam. But how understanding Vietnamese people are, how warmly they welcome Australians and the great empathy that Australians show.
Of course Adrian was saying one of his very good friends is a Vietnamese called Khan who affectionately calls him Father Christmas. One could never imagine why, why he’d call Adrian Father Christmas and of course, he responds by calling him Genghis Khan, which I think is probably a bit tough, but anyway.
[Laughter]
Nonetheless, it shows the good humour and the empathy that you have.
Now we’re here, all your nation’s leaders, to honour and thank you for your service and sacrifice.
And we’re joining you as we remember the 521 Australians who laid down their lives in the service of our nation, at the direction of our government, to Vietnam.
After more than 50 years, the original Long Tan Cross—a tribute to Australians who fell at the Battle of Long Tan and the centrepiece of Australian remembrance in Vietnam—has returned to Australian shores, forever.
This comes through a great act of generosity on the part of the Vietnamese Government. I want to thank Prime Minister Phuc and the Vietnamese Government for this great act of generosity.
The Battle of Long Tan holds a very sacred place in our history.
In August 1966, a small band of Australian soldiers—D Company, 6th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment—crept through the rubber plantation at Long Tan, vastly outnumbered, in unfamiliar terrain, against a hugely superior and very well-armed force.
In a midst of a tropical downpour, a furious battle ensued. The 100 men, aided by Australian, New Zealander and American support from the air, held their ground.
It would be the most costly single engagement for our forces in Vietnam.
We remember that battle, the Australians who fought there and died there, and indeed Ken, all Australians who served in what was an immensely difficult and divisive war, we remember them and honour them for their service and what they embodied.
Bravery, resilience, tenacity, mateship.
Values which have carried the ANZAC spirit before and since, from the landing at Gallipoli more than a hundred years ago, to the work being carried out by the men and women of the ADF in the Middle East and Afghanistan today.
We also remember the unthinkable cost this conflict imposed on Vietnam and its people—as many as two million Vietnamese civilians lost their lives, almost one and a half million Vietnamese fighters lost their lives as well.
It was a shockingly costly conflict.
And we acknowledge that suffering, and we pay tribute to the Vietnamese people’s resilience and optimism for the future.
The gifting of the Long Tan Cross to the Australian Government and people today is a very humbling expression of that commitment, that shared empathy. It is remarkable that older men now, the generations of fighters on both sides bear no grudges against each other.
They understand that each of them as young men are doing their service in accordance with the directions of their leaders.
They fought and they died and they served and now they are friends.
And it represents the bond, which as new, modern nations, as neighbours and friends, we’ve all worked hard to develop.
The Cross was erected by members of the 6RAR three years after the battle’s end, the photographs are here in this showing. The Cross being delivered by helicopter to the rubber plantation and then being erected.
It was a tribute for their fallen mates.
Now, sometime after the fall of Saigon and the end of the war, the Cross was retrieved from the site, and then was repurposed as a memorial - as a grave marker - for a Catholic priest.
But in 1984 it was uncovered and it was added to the collection at the Dong Nai Museum in Bien Hoa Province.
Today, on Australian soil, on Australian soil forever, the Cross gains new meaning. It becomes a symbol of wounds healed; and the friendship our two nations now share.
Our Strategic Partnership, which Prime Minister Phuc and I agreed to in Da Nang last month, promises to carry that friendship forward.
So on the cusp of this new chapter, in Vietnamese-Australian relations I want to thank the Vietnamese Government for their goodwill. I look forward to deepening our relationship over the years to come.
But above all, the honour, the sacrifice, and the service of the men who served, the men who died and the extraordinary character and empathy that they’ve carried throughout these years and understanding of the courage that soldiers show as they serve their nations call.
Forgiveness, comradeship, courage.
This Cross, speaks volumes in its rough simplicity, it speaks of values which are eternal. And I believe Kerry and Brendan it will be here in the War Memorial, forever.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]


Today I'm introducing legislation to counter the threat of foreign states exerting improper influence over our system of government and our political landscape.
When I initiated a report into this in August last year, through my department, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation had made significant investigative breakthroughs and delivered a series of very grave warnings.
But our agencies lacked the legislative tools they needed to act. And it's fair to say that our system as a whole had not grasped the nature and the magnitude of the threat.
The findings of the report are necessarily classified.
But I can say the reasons for initiating this work were justified and the outcomes have galvanised us to take action.
Our Principles
The policy outcomes—including the legislation I am introducing—will all be shaped by the following principles.
First, we are focused on the activities of foreign states and their agents in Australia and notthe loyalties of Australians who happen to be from a foreign country. There is no place for racism or xenophobia in our country. Our diaspora communities are part of the solution, not the problem. To think otherwise would be not only wrong and divisive but also folly—in a nation where most of us come from migrant families and one in four of us was born overseas.
Second, interference is unacceptable from any country whether you might think of it as friend, foe or ally. Nations and their representatives will be judged by their behaviour in Australia, not who they are.
Third, we will not tolerate foreign influence activities that are in any way covert, coercive or corrupt. That is the line that separates legitimate influence from unacceptable interference.
We are not concerned with 'soft power', as the term is properly understood, as an attractive force. If another nation has cultural or economic gravitational pull then it suggests they are doing something right and we would all benefit from being involved.
We will always assert our national interests, and we expect other countries to do the same.
But we do insist that all players engage openly and within the rules.
Finally, and most importantly, our rejection of covert, coercive or corrupting behaviour leads naturally to a counter-foreign-interference strategy that is built upon the four pillars of sunlight, enforcement, deterrence and capability.
What does this mean?
This means that if you are acting to further the interests of a foreign state in ways that are clandestine or deceptive then we will shine light upon your actions and, where necessary, we will shut you down.
It means that if you use inducements or threats to manipulate a political process or public debate then we will unleash the full force of powerful new laws and defend our values and democratic institutions.
And it means that foreign actors who would do us harm are now on notice: we will not tolerate covert, coercive or corrupting behaviour in our country.
Protecting our Democracy
Media reports have suggested that the Chinese Communist Party has been working to covertly interfere with our media, our universities and even the decisions of elected representatives right here in this building.
We take these reports very seriously.
Our relationship with China is far too important to put at risk by failing to clearly set the terms of healthy and sustainable engagement. Modern China was founded by the statement that Chinese people have stood up. And today, and every day, the Australian people stand up and assert their sovereignty in our nation, with our parliament and with our laws.
Anyone who has glanced at the international media over the course of this year will see that questions of foreign interference are not all about China—far, far from it. Globally, Russia has been wreaking havoc across the democratic world.
There are credible reports that Russia was actively undermining the integrity of the Brexit referendum, this year's presidential elections in France and last year's presidential election in the United States.
And other nations are reportedly conducting interference operations outside their borders, including Iran and North Korea.
In some cases, authoritarian states have been literally manufacturing public opinion in order to hijack political discourse and tilt the decision-making landscape to their advantage.
These are their aims but it is up to us to determine whether they are successful.
And now these methodologies have been turbocharged by cyber.
The very technology that was designed to bring us together, the internet, is being used as an instrument of division.
Russian agents seeking to sow discord in the United States reached 126 million users on Facebook, published more than 131,000 messages on Twitter and uploaded over 1,000 videos to YouTube, according to the belated admissions from those platforms.
We are witnessing the mass production, the democratisation if you like, of disinformation.
George Orwell portrayed a post-truth dystopia, where, 'The past was erased, the erasure was forgotten, the lie became the truth.'
His dark prophecy is not our present reality but nor is it entirely fantasy.
Listen to the recently retired US Director of National Intelligence, James Clapper, in his testimony to the US Congress in May:
If there has ever been a clarion call for vigilance and action against a threat to the very foundation of our democratic political system, this episode is it.
This is not just a call for action in the US. It is a clarion call to open societies everywhere.
We must ensure Australian democracy is resilient to all threats, from any country, now and in the future.
Australian Resilience
We in Australia have good reason to be optimistic.
We have a strong economy, labour market and welfare system.
We have strong borders which support the most successful multicultural society in the world.
Our institutions are robust, including the rule of law and vibrant independent media.
Our system of compulsory voting ensures that mainstream political parties must compete for the middle not the poles.
We are as well placed as any democratic nation to face the global threat of foreign interference—but it would be reckless to assume we are immune.
I quote from ASIO's most recent annual report:
The harm caused by hostile intelligence activity can undermine Australia’s national security and sovereignty. It can damage Australia’s international reputation and degrade our diplomatic and trade relations … inflict economic damage, degrade or compromise nationally vital assets and critical infrastructure, and threaten the safety of Australians.
So when the Director-General of ASIO, Duncan Lewis, says the threat from espionage and foreign interference is 'unprecedented' then we know that we must act.
The Director-General is telling us that the threat we face today is greater than when Soviet agents penetrated the federal government during World War II and the early years of the Cold War.
The Legislation
The legislation I am introducing today is designed to reinforce the strengths of our open democratic system while shoring up its vulnerabilities.
I mentioned earlier that our Counter Foreign Interference Strategy has four pillars: sunlight, enforcement, deterrence and capability.
Of these, sunlight is at the very centre.
To ensure activities are exposed to sunlight, following an extensive review by the Attorney-General, we are introducing a new Foreign Influence Transparency Scheme.
The principle is quite straightforward.
If a person or entity engages with the Australian political landscape on behalf of a foreign state or principal then they must register accordingly.
This will give the Australian public and decision-makers proper visibility when foreign states or individuals may be seeking to influence Australia's political processes and public debates.
The link could be a financial relationship or some other form of arrangement.
Registration requirements are carefully structured so that the closer you get to the heart of Australian politics, the more likely it is that you must register.
Being registered under the scheme should not be seen as any kind of taint. And certainly not as a crime.
To the contrary it is applying the basic principles of disclosure to allow the public and policymakers to assess any underlying agenda.
But if you fail to disclose your ties to a foreign principal then you could be liable for a criminal offence.
This is not about shutting down legitimate debate, but rather enabling it.
Interference, espionage and sabotage
Sunlight is the most reliable disinfectant but it will not be sufficient on its own.
We are also introducing, for the first time, offences for acts of foreign interference. Addressing a clear gap, we will criminalise covert, deceptive and threatening actions by persons acting on behalf of, or in collaboration with, a foreign principal aiming to influence Australia's political processes or prejudice our national security.
Acts of foreign interference are often intertwined with espionage.
But our espionage laws are so unwieldy they have not supported a single conviction in decades, even as the threat reaches unprecedented levels.
So we will also introduce a range of carefully structured espionage offences as well as new provisions for secrecy, sabotage and treason.
Any one of these three pieces of legislation—the foreign donations legislation, which Senator Cormann will introduce into the Senate, transparency, and interference-related criminal offences, would mark an enormous improvement in our ability to counter foreign interference.
Together, they add up to the most important overhaul of our counterintelligence legislative framework since the 1970s.
They should be seen as interlocking components. All are important and none will fully succeed without the others.
Finally, we need a central hub to not only enforce the law but do so in a way that maximises deterrence.
This is where our new Home Affairs portfolio will come in.
There is no national security threat outside war time that demands an integrated all-of-government capability like this one.
By enacting this legislation, and building the capability to properly use it, we are sending an unmistakable signal:
We will not allow foreign states to use our freedoms to erode freedom; our open democracy to subvert democracy; our laws to undermine the rule of law.
Conclusion
The purpose of our counter-foreign interference strategy is not to close our borders to people, capital and ideas but the very opposite.
We are dealing surgically with the risks so that we can sustain the enormous benefits that flow from our openness to the world.
I give personal thanks to my Attorney-General, Senator George Brandis, who has applied his Queen's Counsel's mind methodically and creatively to tailor our legislative framework.
Our vibrant civil society will soon be reinforced by a groundbreaking transparency regime and our enforcement agencies will soon have the legislative tools they need.
These new laws will help the Leader of the Opposition manage any issues inside his party, I should note.
I must also thank Duncan Lewis and his investigators at ASIO.
The breakthroughs you have achieved are as important as any your organisation has made in 60 years.
Our job is far from finished. To the contrary we have arrived at the beginning of a long program of strengthening our democratic resilience.
I am filled with optimism about our nation's future—the most successful multicultural society in the world—not just being resilient to challenges, but thriving on the opportunities they present.
We are open. We are optimistic. But we are not naive. This legislation will ensure we continue to be secure and free.


PRIME MINISTER: 
It is wonderful to be here at North Bondi. It is my surf club. I’ve been associated with this surf club since I could barely walk. My dad was a member and I used to come down here as a little boy. I learnt everything, I learnt a lot of things about life in this surf club.
They are amazing institutions. They are characteristically Australian. Totally egalitarian.
Everyone is the same when they are in their swimming costume on the beach and it is a great, it is absolutely the epitome of Australian values, the surf lifesaving movement. It is about service, it is about community, it is about partnership, a solidarity and it has just got bigger and bigger.
Graham talked about 45,000 volunteers and nearly 11,000 rescues last year but there is also the way in which the lifesaving movement, the surf lifesaving movement connects with the community. Think of all the thousands of the Nippers and Bridget is a lifesaver as well, she understands this.
In fact, Bridget and Greg – come up and join me. It’s New Year’s Day, right? We’re relaxing! Bridget McKenzie, Minister for Sport. Greg Hunt, Minister for Health.
And we’re committed to keeping Australians safe in the water. And we know that the work of Surf Life Saving Australia of which Graham has spoken, the Royal Life Saving Society and of course AUSTSWIM are vitally important.
You know, nearly 300 Australians died of drownings in the last year, in the last year to 30 June. And it has grown to over 18 in the month of December.
So water safety is never been more important.
Now what we have done is over the last 5 years we have provided $15 million. We are extending that now to another $3 million for the year through to June 30, 2019.
And what that will enable, is as Graham said, for surf clubs to fund additional equipment including drones which I think is very exciting.
You know, there is one very good way to find out what is going on out the back past that break, whether there is somebody out there is struggling, is to be able to send the drone out to have a look. That’s a great example of technology.
And of course Graham and I are old enough to remember the joys of rescuing people in belts. You needed the line, didn’t you Graham, because by the time you got to the patient you were so exhausted, you were almost in as much trouble as him.
So, anyway, all of that technology is vital.
But in addition, the work that the Royal Life Saving Society does in terms of teaching people how to swim, teaching people all of the first aid techniques, AUSTSWIM’s programs, are critically important.
And I just want to emphasise the message that Graham has given about safety on the beach – swim between the flags, follow the directions of the lifesavers that you’re getting.
They are there to keep you safe and as Graham said, if they can’t see you, if the lifesavers can’t see you, they can’t help you. So it is really important to be critically aware.
I mean, as I said, I spent much of my young life on this beach. It looks very placid today and it generally is – it’s a safe beach, I would say, compared to many others, but you can get into plenty of trouble here at Bondi.
I remember as a kid out just of Ben Buckler here, falling off my surfer plane, and getting into a lot of, I was in plenty of trouble and I can still see – it’s hard to talk about this without being a bit emotional – but I can still see my father swimming through the surf, swimming through and he got me.
That is what lifesavers do. And that’s what we have to do to look after each other here, particularly with kids. Particularly with kids on boogie boards, surfboards, because often they are out for a long time, they get very tired, they fall off their board or they lose their board they can get into plenty of trouble.
So that is why it is important to take the advice of the lifesavers, swim between the flags and above all make sure that you know how to swim and your kids know how to swim and they’re alert to the dangers of the water.
It is so enticing, particularly on a hot day. It just looks like heaven out there and it is but it can very rapidly becoming a dangerous environment.
So it is wonderful to be here. This club, I mean it looks, I can tell you it hasn’t been this flash for a very long, it was only recent years we’ve had this new club. It used to be a rather interesting old place, old structure. Probably should have been condemned long before it was replaced. But this is the heart of the Australian spirit. It is about service, it is about mateship, it is about looking after each other. And what better place to start 2018 than here at the very heart of everything that makes us Australians here at this surf club, North Bondi Surf Club, at a surf club like all of the clubs around the country that keep Australians safe every year.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well, thank you very much Richard.
Yorihiko Kojima Vice Chair of the Japan-Australia Business Cooperation Committee, His Excellency Mr Sumio Kusaka, the Japanese Ambassador to Australia, Richard Court and his wife Jo, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
What a great honour it is to be welcomed so warmly again by the JABCC on this visit, together with the Australia New Zealand Chamber Commerce in Japan and the other supporters of this event.
It’s a credit to our long-standing commercial ties that the JABCC has been contributing so actively for 55 years. Almost as long as the Tokyo Tower has graced the skies just alongside the hotel. 
And it’s a credit to Australian exporters that we are able to feast on great beef, seafood and wine so economically here today, courtesy of our historic Free Trade Agreement which came into force three years ago this week.
Now, when I last spoke here in Tokyo, I urged our two countries to lead the way in strengthening innovation and the free flow of people, capital and ideas. But I do worry now that you took my message more literally than I intended.
You had already poached our national Rugby coach, Eddie Jones and turned his ideas and innovations against our own Wallabies.
[Laughter]
And then, not only did you defeat our Socceroos in last year’s World Cup qualifier at Saitama Stadium, but our Socceroos coach Ange Postecoglou, has packed his bags to join the J-League, with the Yokohama Marinos and I see that they’ve stolen his assistant, as well!
Now, I believe in a free and open Indo Pacific every bit as much as my very good friend, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, but we’re going to have to set some boundaries.
[Laughter]
But seriously, who could blame some of the world’s best and brightest being drawn to the world’s biggest and richest city, in the lead up to the Rugby World Cup and the Tokyo Olympic Games, at this moment of national reform and revitalisation.
Over the past five years, Japan has become a beacon of political and economic stability in a world that is not well endowed with either.
Prime Minister Abe is on track to becoming Japan’s longest serving post-war prime minister.
The Japanese economy is growing faster than what many people thought possible; Abenomics is working. 
You have a stock market at 20-year highs, corporate profits at record levels and an unemployment rate so low that I have to confess, I asked to have it double checked. How many countries in the world can boast an unemployment rate with a ‘2’ in front of it, at a time when labour force participation is rapidly expanding?
The economy has been boosted by 2.4 million more women in work in the past five years. That’s a phenomenal achievement and the ranks of women in the workforce will soon be boosted again by more places in childcare, early education and greater workplace flexibility.
If that is what they call stagnation, then I think the rest of the world would like some.
Now the bigger reason I am here today of course, is that your country is leveraging its’ new foundation of political and economic stability to reinforce the international rules-based system, at a time when it is needed most.
This liberal rules-based order - the remarkable system of rules, norms and institutions which requires nations big and small to play by the rules and to respect each other’s sovereignty - has enabled our collective security and prosperity for the entire post-war period.
In our part of the world, it has generated the greatest sustained rise in incomes, innovation and human advancement the world has ever seen.
Our two countries have benefited and contributed in equal measure.
But as we set out recently in our Foreign Policy White Paper, the international system is under greater stress than at any time since its’ inception in the 1940s.
So it was with this in mind that Prime Minister Abe and I spent the day together in Sydney, almost exactly a year ago, when the United States was poised to pull out of the Trans Pacific Partnership and we discussed the need for regional leadership. And we decided that the most important contribution that we could make was to keep the TPP alive.
Now, many said that the Trans Pacific Partnership could not happen without the lure of the US market. But both Prime Minister Abe and I see the agreement as being about much more than market access, notwithstanding its considerable importance for those gains.
The TPP is a down-payment on the sustainability of free and open markets, at a time they are under pressure from the combined forces of populism, protectionism and geo-economics.
The TPP promises greater transparency and stronger rule of law in a world which is too often short of both.
The TPP brings our trading system into the digital world, it levels the playing field for non state-owned companies, it defends and extends the freedom to explore, share and capitalise on new ideas and it creates rules of the road to match the new economic journey upon which we are embarking.
Now in the margins of the APEC meeting in Da Nang last November with Japan in the co-convenors’ chair alongside Vietnam,  most TPP negotiating parties showed they saw the significance of the TPP in the same way that we did. They see this as the most important contribution to the rules-based system that is on offer in the world economy right now. 
Our strong preference is for all 11 countries to join the first wave. But our focus is on bringing the new TPP agreement into force as soon as possible with those who are ready to move.
Prime Minister Abe and I are personally committed to having this deal signed and sealed by March. Crucially, one of the design features of the TPP is its’ flexibility as an open platform. I believe its logic - the logic of cooperation - is so compelling, that others will want to be a part of it once it’s up and running. Indeed, that’s what we are seeing already.
Importantly, we are consciously setting it up to enable and encourage the United States to dock in should it choose to do so in the future.
At the same time we are pursuing several other deals that are designed to be component parts in a larger free trade system that draws the region together.
That’s the vision that is driving Australia's participation in negotiations for a Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, the RCEP. A partnership centered in ASEAN that draws in India, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea, a high-quality RCEP agreement would improve governance standards and spur reform in member countries.
Australia and Japan are also working together in APEC to prepare the ground for the longer-term goal of a free trade area of the Asia Pacific.
Our approach - pursuing deals that will transform trade and investment in our region while also moving forward on specific issues with coalitions to develop global trade rules - demonstrates a new way forward for trade negotiations.
Whatever else might be said about the WTO’s negotiating function, it is the bedrock of the global trading system. Its dispute settlement mechanisms are critically important for constraining arbitrary and unfair behaviour by big countries to the disadvantage of small ones. That’s why we continue to provide leadership, creativity and perseverance in order to reinforce it’s authority and inject it with new life.
Now, last month, at an otherwise challenging WTO ministerial meeting in Buenos Aires, Australia, Japan and Singapore adapted our TPP negotiating approach to lead a large group of countries to work together to promote an open, transparent and non-discriminatory regulatory environment for e-commerce. Looking ahead we intend to draw on our TPP negotiating approach to promote high quality global trade outcomes. WTO Director-General Roberto Azevêdo applauded what he called "an outbreak of dynamism".
It is a pity that it had to be described as an “outbreak”, but nonetheless, more dynamism is very positive. And indeed that’s exactly how the US Trade Representative, Robert Lighthizer, described it as a "positive way forward for the WTO".
Now, while there have been flickers of hard-fought progress in the economic arena, the security outlook remains fraught.
We face a more complex and uncertain regional outlook than at any time since the early years of the Cold War.
And there are few places in the world where the existential risks from Kim Jong Un’s rogue regime are more apparent than here in Japan. And brought home that very thing at the Narashino base with Prime Minister Abe today, when we inspected the Bushmaster vehicles and the Patriot Missile batteries.
In September the regime conducted its most powerful nuclear test - probably a hydrogen bomb - and it fired several advanced ballistic missiles including two over Japan.
Tonight I’ll be discussing with Prime Minister Abe what more we can do - together with the United States, China and the Republic of Korea and the whole global community - to enforce and enhance economic sanctions and show this rogue regime that it is utterly isolated in its pursuit of its destabilising and illegal nuclear weapons program.
Our 2016 Defence White Paper and our recent Foreign Policy White Paper clearly set out the growing importance of our Special Strategic Partnership with Japan.
And the strategic logic that is driving our countries to work more closely on defence and security is only getting stronger as the regional environment becomes more dangerous and challenging.
We’re looking to deepen our engagement not reduce it.  So we will continue to seek every opportunity to link with partners who share our interests and commitment to rules-based institutions.
Now the foundations of our great partnership were set in the 1950s, dating back to Prime Minister Abe’s grandfather Kishi and Sir Robert Menzies.
We are all-weather friends. Our six decades of close and trusting collaboration are etched into the skyline of Tokyo and the landscape of the Pilbara - as all in this room know so very well.
But there are many others who may not fully appreciate the importance and extent of our collaboration in the resources sector today.
The importance of trust and reliability of supply cannot be overstated here in Japan where 94 per cent of energy and resources and 61 per cent of food requirements are imported.
Australia supplies a large majority of Japan’s iron ore and coking coal needs. We will supply a majority of the iron ore and metallurgic coal that will go into the high-quality steel being used to build the facilities for the 2019 Rugby World Cup and the 2020 Olympics.
We are Japan’s largest supplier of liquefied natural gas, and Japan is our biggest customer.
And the links are broadening and deepening all the time.
Australians are flocking to Japan in record numbers. It’s not just rugby and soccer coaches but also students, professionals, investors and tourists.
Next year up to a hundred students will commence their new dual degrees with the Australian National University and Ritsumeikan University. 
Our trade relationship is thriving in the wake of our free trade agreement.
Exports of both beef and sugar jumped by a third last year.
Honey and mandarin exports are up by two-thirds and bulk wine by a half.
The fact that more than 97 per cent of Australia’s exports now enter Japan duty free, or under preferential tariff rates, mean there are many more opportunities for Australian businesses and Japanese consumers.
And there are more wins to come, with a fifth round of tariff cuts on 1 April 2018.
As I was saying today in my press conference at the Narashino base, we’re seeing the benefits of our free trade agreement with Japan, and with other countries in our region in strong jobs growth in Australia.
403,000 jobs created in the last year, 403,000 – the equal longest run of monthly job growth in Australia sine 1978. That’s really a remarkable achievement. And we’re seeing – we know that free trade and open markets mean more exports, more opportunities, more investment and that means more jobs both in Australia and of course in Japan.
Now Japanese investments in Australia are again growing, recently overtaking the UK as our second largest source of direct investment.
We’ve moved quickly to address regulatory concerns about skilled labour because your investments are bringing cutting edge technology and raising the productivity of our most vital industries, including the LNG sector.
A few months ago Japanese technology helped Rio Tinto to trial the world’s first fully automated train. At 2.5km, these are the longest and the largest robots in the world.
Australia has as much to learn from Japan’s integration of renewable energy sources as we’ve been discussing at our table during the lunch, including smart-grids and energy storage systems that flatten price spikes, reduce volatility and ensure security.
And I want to note with particular interest how the objective of energy storage has been built into your current Strategic Energy Plan. Energy storage is a very big part of our energy strategy as well.
Japanese investments are diversifying, opening up a plethora of new business opportunities.
How many Australians outside of this room know that some of our most popular life insurance products, and some of our most iconic brands of beer, are brought to us by Japanese firms?
And the flow of capital and know-how is certainly not just one way.
Tomorrow, at the embassy here in Tokyo, the Australian medical device company Resmed will launch a revolutionary new medical device for treating Sleep Apnea Syndrome.
Over the next few months Thales Australia will ship another tranche of four Bushmaster Protected Mobility Vehicles from Bendigo. These are the vehicles of which there are four already in service of the Self Defence Force, Ground Self Defence Force and Prime Minister Abe and I inspected one of them at the Narashino Base today.
This is a great example of Australian technology, of Australia’s defence industry and a great example of exports that technology here to Japan, as indeed its been exported to a number of other countries, many other countries and saving hundreds of lives.
Now our burgeoning defence cooperation will have commercial and technological pay-offs, for both countries and I’ve asked my Minister for Defence Industry, Christopher Pyne, to make sure of it.
After all, it was Japan that pioneered the modern international supply chain - the “flying geese” that helped spread technology and sustained development throughout the region.
Increasingly, I expect our companies will be joining forces to make third country investments - such as we’re seeing with Macquarie and Mitsubishi UFJ Lease as they invest in semiconductor manufacturing equipment in South Korea and elsewhere in the region.
There will be similarly exciting opportunities with collaborative investments in infrastructure.
The regional demand of which is obvious.
Australia will support all infrastructure projects - from all countries - that are transparent and fair, meet the market need. We will firmly back Australian companies engaging in projects that uphold those values, and the principles and institutions of the rules-based system.
If there is one thing that unites our two countries it is our commitment to the free flow of goods, capital and ideas within clear and effective rules.
Even when those rules may seem to work occasionally against us - even when we lose the best coaches from our national sporting teams, we respect the rules-based framework and we always respect the umpire whenever the application of those rules is in dispute.
Together, over many decades, we’ve worked hard to contribute to the liberal rules-based system because we’ve seen how well it has worked for our two countries and indeed the entire region the Indo Pacific.  We’ve seen how it has worked for our businesses. 
The acronyms may not always sound like much - UN, WTO, IMF, OECD, the DAC, BEPS, G20, APEC, ADB – it’s a long list, but Japan and Australia have been instrumental in creating or sustaining all of them.
APEC would not exist without the leadership of our two countries.
The same will be true for the TPP.
Our joint investment in the TPP and regional security shows how Japan’s been raising its level of ambition, just as we have been raising ours. You are a regional power with global interests, and that’s how we see ourselves.
Our joint investment in shaping and sustaining the regional order is an illustration of our shared values and interests but it is also more than that.
It is a product of the constancy and certainty and reliability that we’ve baked into our bilateral relationship - our “special strategic partnership” - through all the geopolitical and economic ups and downs.
By investing in each other’s security and prosperity, we’re also investing in our own.
Together, we are redoubling our commitment to ensure we all continue to benefit from an Indo-Pacific that is secure, that is open and that is prosperous.
Thank you all very much indeed.
[ENDS] 


PRIME MINISTER:
Well thanks Paul. Well Paul, thank you very much, thank you Penny, thank you Russell.
Can I just say how appropriate it is, how wonderful it is to be here at the Australian Institute of Marine Science, because science is at the heart of everything we are doing about the Great Barrier Reef. Science is at the heart of the solutions to all of the great challenges we face.
We’re talking - focusing very much on the challenges that climate change poses to the Reef.
Now Josh Frydenberg, the Minister for Environment and Energy, his Assistant Minister Melissa Price is here. Everything Josh does, whether it’s on the energy front - ably assisted by Alan Finkel, the Chief Scientist, who’s also here - or on the environmental front, everything is about science.
So it is great that we have here, Michaelia Cash, the Minister for Jobs and Innovation, the Cabinet Minister with the principal portfolio responsibility for science.
But you know what? We are all committed to science. Great science, which we’re seeing here today and I want to thank you Paul and thank you David Mead – where is David? – for taking us through on a great tour through the laboratories, talking to your researchers there. Line Bay’s work on evolution, you’re enhancing the evolution of corals to find those corals that are more resilient in warmer temperatures. Vital work and just seeing all of those tanks there and I know you’ve employed a few fish to keep them clean, that’s very good as well. But great work, great scientific work and you can see in the eyes of the young researchers you have there, how enthusiastic they are. So Paul, you’ve come to be head of a really exciting scientific organisation.
Now let me say too, that we’re at the heart of the Reef, Russell said it’s the centre. But you’ve got no more committed, persistent and persuasive advocate for the Great Barrier Reef than Senator Ian Macdonald - who of course is here, based in Townsville and over so many years has ensured that there is a strong local voice to support continuing federal government investment in the research and the management in all of the work that ensures that the Great Barrier Reef remains regarded by the authorities in the world, the UN agencies, as the best-managed coral reef in the world.
Now however, there are very big challenges that are faced and it is vital that we deal with them.
This is the largest living creature, organism in the world, the Great Barrier Reef. It is extraordinary and it is under challenge. But it is resilient. There is a lot of doom-saying about the Great Barrier Reef. It’s really important that we take up this challenge positively, recognising that just as we have with so many other areas, technology and science will provide the answers. You need great scientists to do that, and of course you need the resources to support them.
The Reef supports 64,000 jobs. 64,000 jobs, $6.4 billion economy, of course it’s priceless you can’t measure it in dollars, but nonetheless, we shouldn’t be blind to the fact that this is a massive environmental asset and a massive economic asset.
So what we are doing today is announcing the bringing forward over the next 18 months of nearly, just under $60 million of new funding. $6 million of that is going into the type of research we’re seeing today, and we’ll hear about that further from AIMS and from the CSIRO and from Alan Finkel - the type of cutting edge research that is going to be critical for the Reef’s continued help into the future.
Another $10 million is going into the Crown of Thorns Starfish Eradication Program, we’re substantially increasing the culling program. I know there’s been some criticism of that, but David we were talking about this as we went through – in fact inspected some of the Crown of Thorns Starfish that you have in a tank, and Colin we talked about it last night – and the great work that you’re doing and how important that culling is. And again good example of science, the use of bile salts – single shot destruction of those Crown of Thorns Starfish, making the work so much more efficient.
Of course there’s over $36 million going to support the number of programs that we have here to prevent run-off into the Reef. In particular run-off of nitrogen and other new, other fertilisers and other nutrients into the Reef, which as I was discussing with Penny Wensley as we walked through here, that creates the environment which is so damaging to the Reef’s health, but of course it also creates the environment that encourages the Crown of Thorns Starfish.
So all up, this is just under $60 million. It is an example of my government’s commitment to the health of the Reef. The health of the Reef and our commitment to science. Absolutely critical, the solutions for these challenges we face; whether it is in mitigating climate change, reducing emissions, dealing with the challenges on the Reef today, all of them are well informed by great science.
We’re honoured to be here, my parliamentary colleagues and I in the presence of so many great scientists. You can’t have great science without great scientists, and we’re glad to be able to provide the additional financial resources to see that you do even more outstanding work over the next 18 months and of course for many years and decades to come.
Thank you very much, it’s great to be here.
[ENDS]


Yoonggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngoonawal dhowrrra. 
Wanggarra lin jin yin marunn bulaan boogarabung.
We’re gathered here tonight in the Great Hall of the Australian Parliament on the land of the Ngunnawal people and we pay our respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
It’s wonderful to be here on the eve of Australia Day, when we celebrate all that is great about our nation and its people.
Our Australian of the Year State and Territory recipients are shining examples of our best selves.
All of them are outstanding and brilliant achievers and driven to succeed by a determination to help their fellow Australians and make Australia an even, better, brighter place to realise your dreams.
Whether through science or philanthropy, medicine or mentoring, their lives have made our lives better.
And they are as diverse as the nation they represent.
Our nation is ancient and modern; as old as the 65,000 years of continuous Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander civilization and as young as the baby in the arms of its migrant mother.
Tonight’s Australian of the Year State and Territory recipients remind us yet again that our diversity is our strength.
They include First Australians, migrants and refugees.
They range from 17 years of age to 94, reminding us that Australia’s generosity, leadership and ingenuity are not confined to one generation, but rather fostered from one generation to the next.
And they cross the spectrum of endeavor, from sports, education and the arts to community, business, science and medicine and much more.
Tonight they’re rightly celebrated, but this moment of glory has often taken years of hard work and dedication.
Our 2017 Australian of the Year, Professor Alan Mackay-Sim spent 20 years—20 years—researching nasal stem cells before he led a successful world-first human clinical trial in Brisbane. Alan is a man who has battled injury and illness in his own life and stretched the boundaries of science to cure it in others. Thank you Alan, for using the platform as Australian of the Year to travel the country and advocate for science and innovation. From classrooms to boardrooms, you have done a marvelous job putting a spotlight on these vitally important subjects, so critical to meeting and beating the challenges of the future.
All our 2017 winners share that spirit of patience and persistence.
Senior Australian of the Year, Sister Anne Gardiner, Young Australian of the Year, Paul Vasileff and Australia’s Local Hero, Vicki Jellie.
All our finalists tonight have that spirit in abundance too. But above all, you remind us that we are at our best when we work to help others.
On behalf of our nation, I congratulate you all and I wish everyone a very, very happy Australia Day for tomorrow.
[Ends]


Thank you very much.
Yoonggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngoonawal dhowrrra.
Wanggarra lin jin yin marunn bulaan boogarabung.
We’re here gathered together on the land of the Ngunnawal people, and as Paula has just done, we acknowledge their country. We acknowledge all first Australians here and around the country, and we honour their elders, past and present and emerging.
So good morning. On behalf of Lucy and I welcome to The Lodge. It’s great to be here with you all, and I want to acknowledge Danni Roche, the Chair of the National Australia Day Council, the National Australia Day Council Board. Its Chief Executive, all gathered together here.
It’s really a great honour to host you all for this year’s remarkable Australian of the Year, State and Territory recipients.
Each of you embodies the best of the Australian spirit. Each of you have shown courage and resilience, selflessness and sacrifice.
Your achievements have been driven by great passion. For some of you they’ve also been driven by great pain, and you’ve turned that pain into great love for your fellow Australians. You’ve shared your experience so that others can be spared your heartache.
I want to thank you all for your courage. The diversity of your stories reflects the diversity of our nation. You come from every walk of life. We have first Australians here among our recipients and we have people who have come to Australia as migrants or indeed as refugees.
You cross the entire spectrum of endeavour; from sports education and science to the arts to business, community work and medicine.
What you all have in common is a commitment to changing Australians lives for the better. That is a love of country and a love of the people that make up this remarkable nation. The most successful multicultural society in the world.
United and harmonious in our extraordinary diversity, in a world which is racked by so much conflict, so much division, so much lack of respect and intolerance. But here in Australian we are united and it is because of that commitment that love of each other.
You’re all leading us to a brighter future, shining the way for us.
I want to thank our 2017 Australian of the Year, Professor Alan Mackay-Sim – where is Alan? There he is. Thank you, thank you so much. You, as Australian of the Year, that’s a great honour of course, but also a great responsibility. And you’ve travelled the country, you’ve visited classrooms and boardrooms to argue passionately and persuasively for the future of science and innovation.
And everything we do, everything my government does, everything our nation seeks to achieve is going to be informed by science. Science, innovation, constantly pushing the frontiers of seeking to do everything we can better. Whether it is in the realm of computing, or medicine, or JT whether it’s on the football field.
In every endeavour we’re pushing those boundaries to excel, and that of course is what makes us the dynamic, always young Australian nation that we are.
But we are of course both ancient and modern, this is the remarkable thing about our nation. We are 65,000 years old. Here in this country, our first Australians embody the oldest, longest, continuous human civilisation, and yet we are as new as the little baby in the arms of her migrant mother. Who will be getting a citizenship certificate tomorrow.
This is a remarkable country, remarkable people, and you are men and women with remarkable achievements.
So congratulations to all of you on what you’ve done so far, you’ve got so much more to do. I wish each of you the very best of luck tonight, and Lucy and I are so proud to host you here.
Many of you as you came in, I might note, those in the medical profession, Professor Mackay-Sim, note that Lucy and I were setting a good example standing in the shade, so being sun safe. But as we welcomed you in, so many of you said it’s an honour to be here, believe me the honour is ours.
Thank you for honouring us, and by your service of Australia, your love of Australia, your commitment to ensuring that your fellow Australians have even greater prospects, greater opportunities in the year ahead.
Thank you so much, happy Australia Day we look forward to talking with you further today, and of course as I said, the very best of luck tonight.
Thank you.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Thank you Eloise, of course better known on Instagram as @newtown_treblemaker.
So – this is what happened – on the 2nd of October, at about 10 o’clock in the morning, Eloise chained this bike up to a ‘No Standing’ sign outside our house and quickly escaped. The Australian Federal Police inspected it and quickly satisfied themselves it wasn’t a threat to Lucy and my or anyone else’s security.
We were absolutely entranced by it. We fell in love with your bike.
But of course it was chained to the street sign and it didn’t belong to us, so what business did we have moving it?
So Lucy put a picture of it on her Instagram account - and I’ll read what Luce said. She said: “Everyone is having their say, but not many say it in crochet or as lovingly and beautifully as the artist who created this bicycle we saw today. Whatever the outcome of the postal survey I hope this bicycle becomes part of the public collection for posterity #VoteYes #LetsGetThisDone”.
And then a little later she added, because there were some comments on it, she said: “I think it might be knitted not crocheted” - you were right the first time, yes - “Apologies to the very talented anonymous creator”.
And then Luce said: “Hope she or he makes sure it is sheltered from weather and doesn’t become a poor stop for the local dog population”.
So our concern was for the safety of the bike.
And then a few days passed and you can still the remnants of the paper on the other side there, the ever officious officers, or efficient officers of Woollahra Council put a notice on the bike which said something along these lines: “Under Ordinance 84 (Z) (3) (A) (J2) (1) – if this bike is not removed within three days, the Council will dispose of it”.
Grrrr – be afraid.
[Laughter]
So we saw that, and we thought we can’t possibly allow that to happen.
So we cut the chain and brought the bike inside, where it was kept out of the – protected both from dogs, weather and council inspectors.
And then after the marriage equality vote was passed, we put another picture of it up on Instagram and I put it up and I said we don’t know who made it, please let us know, perhaps its home should be our national museum or gallery to commemorate this extraordinary day. Put that up on the day, same- sex marriage was legalised in the Australian parliament. A momentous day indeed.
And that’s when @newtown_treblemaker broke cover.
[Laughter]
Unknown, this anonymous crotchetier broke cover and we got – and it turned out we actually share a really good close mutual friend, as you always do I guess. And so the rest I guess is history.
Eloise thank you so much for this extraordinary work of love. It was created in love. It is about love. And I think for many of us, it will always be an enduring symbol of that extraordinary day when marriage equality was achieved and what an extraordinary process, every Australian had their say. 80 per cent chose to have their say, and 62 per cent voted ‘yes’. It was a very, very big hug.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]


Yoonggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngoonawal dhowrrra. 
Wanggarra lin jin yin marunn bulaan boogarabung.
Thank you, Warren for your very, very warm welcome to Ngunnawal country. We are gathered here on Ngunnawal land and we acknowledge, as Danni did before me, their elders, past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge the presence today of His Excellency, the Governor-General, Sir Peter Cosgrove and Her Excellency, Lady Cosgrove, Chief of the Defence Force, Air Chief Marshall Mark Binskin, Chair of the National Australia Day Council, Danni Roche, so many distinguished guests, Australians one and all.
And to those about to become Australian citizens, welcome.
Along with 13,000 other people in ceremonies all around our country, you'll soon pledge allegiance to Australia. You will join us as holders of the highest office in our democracy; Australian citizen.
Our nation's story began 65,000 years ago with our First Australians, the oldest continuous human civilisation. No pyramid in Egypt, no Palace in France, no church in England or Rome precedes our First Australians.
Our sense of identity is strengthened by their stories and songs, dance and art, practices and ceremonies. We honour their resilience and survival, respect and cherish their continuing contribution to our nation.
It's a heritage of which we are proud and which we celebrate.
It is uniquely Australian.
We haven't always recognised this truth as we should've done, but all of us, including our newest citizens, are heirs to this history.
It is our duty to learn, embrace and help preserve it. On Australia Day, we welcome many new migrant stories. Each one began with an arrival on our shores - hope buoyed by optimism - that a new life would be build in this new home.
My family's story is no exception. My forebears including a sailor on the Sirius landing at Sydney Cove; staunch Scots building a church on the Hawkesbury in the days of Governor William Bligh and the Rum Rebellion; a pair of actors in the touring cast of a showboat, run aground in Melbourne during the Great Depression.
All had faith in this new land, and they, like you, chose to stay.
Australia is a nation united in our diversity. We do not define our national identity, as so many other nations do, by race, by religion, or by a particular culture, but by shared values.
Democracy and freedom.
Mutual respect and equality for men and women.
A steadfast commitment to the rule of law.
We come from close to 200 different countries. At this ceremony alone, we have 32 new citizens from 19 different nations.
In a world of conflict and tension, and in many respects growing intolerance, our success as a peaceful, prosperous harmonious society, is a beacon of hope.
As our Australian of the Year Professor Michelle Simmons said last night; here in Australia there is no better place to realise your dreams. This nation, our nation, Australia, where she chose to realise her own.
Nowhere, if you stumble or fall behind, are you more likely to get a hand up. Fairness, a fair go, mateship, looking out for each other, those values are in our Australian DNA.
The Diggers of a century ago, the servicemen and women of today and right now, in this hot summer, the firefighters and the lifesavers and so many others keeping us safe.
Our remarkable nation is the work of all of us and the generations that came before us.
By defending and sustaining our Australian values, we will forge an even brighter future for the generations that come after us.
I wish everyone a happy Australia Day and to all who become citizens today here in Canberra, and around the nation; you honour us because you have chosen us.
Those who were born here, became Australian citizens involuntarily. We arrived squalling and screaming into the world as Aussie citizens.
You made a choice to join our family.
Welcome.
[Applause]
Now, as a requirement of the Australian Citizenship Act 2007 and of course, in the presence of the Secretary of the Department of Home Affairs, Michael Pezzullo, I will now read the preamble:
"Australian citizenship represents full and formal membership of the community of the Commonwealth of Australia, and Australian citizenship is a common bond involving reciprocal rights and obligations uniting all Australians while respecting their diversity.
Persons on whom Australian citizenship is conferred, enjoy these rights and undertake to accept these obligations by pledging loyalty to Australia and its people, by sharing their democratic beliefs and by respecting their rights and liberties and by upholding and obeying the laws of Australia."
I will now call on the candidates who have indicated they wish to make pledge number one, which is the pledge containing the words "under God", to stand. If you wish to make the pledge on a holy book, please hold it your hands now.
Please repeat after me, line by line, this pledge:
"From this time forward, under god, I pledge my loyalty to Australia and its people, whose democratic beliefs I share, whose rights and liberties I respect and whose laws I will uphold and obey."
Congratulations.
[Applause]
I will now call on the candidates who indicated they wish to make pledge number two, to stand and repeat after me.
"From this time forward, I pledge my loyalty to Australia and its people, whose democratic beliefs I share, whose rights and liberties I respect and whose laws I will uphold and obey."
Thank you, congratulations.
Ladies and gentlemen let’s welcome our new Australian citizens.
[Applause]
[Ends]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you very much, Barnaby, thank you so much. Thank you John for your very warm introduction. Thank you Uncle Darby for your welcome to country, really warm and generous. Thank you all so much. It's great to be here, back in the garden city, back in Toowoomba and the Mayor has given me the Toowoomba city pin, so I've got that now.
Now my friends, Professor Michelle Simmons, our 2018 Australian of the Year, said she left the United Kingdom to come to Australia because she believed our nation was the best place in the world to realise her dreams.
And while her dream of building the world's first quantum computer stretches our imagination as much as it does our comprehension, she spoke for all of us and she set us a challenge; to ensure that Australia remains the best place to realise your dreams, raise a family, build a business and when work is done, retire in security.
In a world that is changing at a pace and scale unprecedented in human history, leaders in government or in business will need to steer a course through many challenges, but in doing so, never lose sight of that goal.
The best compass for that course will always be our Australian values;
Freedom, democracy, mateship, a fair go, mutual respect, the equality of men and women, the rule of law, a fair go to get ahead and the certainty of a helping hand if you fall behind.
Now, these values are not unique to Australia, but the combination of them is uniquely and especially Australian. We must defend and cherish them and never take them for granted. After all, we are the most successful multicultural society in the world, a world which for all of its science and technology, seems to be becoming less respectful and less tolerant, where diversity is all too rarely matched with harmony, as it is here in Australia.
Now, these are the values that guide me as I work to create more opportunities, greater prosperity and economic freedom for all Australians.
The task I set when I became Prime Minister in 2015 was to provide the economic leadership that Australia needed. We've set out to build a stronger economy that will enable us to seize the opportunities of these remarkable times. The reason we talk so much about economic growth and more and better-paid jobs, is because that is how we become an even greater place to live, work and raise our families, to realise our dreams.
A strong economy is the only way to secure the quality health and social services we need, to pay for the generous welfare system that we want and to afford the standard of education that our children deserve.
And it's the bedrock on which businesses have the confidence to invest. And the more businesses invest, as we know, the more jobs are created.
That's why our policies are designed to drive confidence, investment and growth; the ingredients for more and better-paid jobs.
Now, creating more jobs was our focus during the 2016 election campaign. Over the eight weeks of the campaign, you may have heard us mention jobs and growth from time to time.
[Laughter]
Some of us were saying it in our sleep. But it was at the heart of the 2016 Budget and all our policies since.
Our Enterprise Tax Plan, building an advanced local defence industry with the high-tech jobs to support it, more export opportunities through our free trade deals, record infrastructure investment, reducing youth unemployment.
2016 and 2017 were years of reform and this is the year we really start to see the rewards of that hard work.
In 2018, lower tax rates will kick in for businesses with a turnover up to $50 million. Genuine, needs-based funding begins for our schools for the first time in our history - national, consistent, needs-based funding.
Childcare will be more affordable for low and lower middle-income families from July.
And we’ll continue to put downward pressure on energy prices.
Now, we're starting to see what happens when government policies are all pulling in the same direction to build a strong and resilient economy that gives every Australian the opportunity to pursue their dreams.
Business and consumer confidence are both up.
There's been more investment and record jobs growth.
We've seen the manufacturing index up again today.
Our business tax cuts in 2017 helped create a record 403,100 jobs in that year, 75% of them full-time and a quarter of those were in Queensland, 102,000 new jobs in this state alone.
Our free trade deals are boosting the economy, especially in regional Australia. By opening the doors to markets around the world we're creating more export opportunities and more jobs.
Our Innovation Agenda is building confidence by helping businesses be more competitive. And it's not just about start-ups, it's about businesses in every sector, new and old, constantly looking for ways to improve, to do things better, faster, more efficiently and to create more jobs
Despite the naysayers, of which there are many, it's delivering.
Last year, there was a record $1.32 billion in venture capital raised in Australia for Australian innovation and technology. Think about that, a massive amount of money that would have been unthinkable only a few years ago
Of course Toowoomba has always been a centre for innovation, as we discussed in the trivia night at the Spotted Cow last night, John. The Southern Cross Windmill, not to speak of the Lamington, was invented here a century ago. Today John McVeigh and I visited Gary Gardner’s Pulse Data Centre, the first of its kind, the first Tier-3 data centre in regional Australia.
Last year, moving on to the industrial scene, we protected workers by making sure that unions can't do corrupt or secret deals with employers. Can you believe the Labor Party opposed that tooth and nail? That they opposed a law which did no more than say that workers - members of unions - should be told the truth about what was going on between the union and the employer.
Anyway, we got that through, by improving accountability, transparency and integrity for both unions and employers. Workers will now know exactly what deals have been made when they're considering enterprise bargaining agreements.
We passed laws to protect the 1 million workers and 300,000 small businesses from bullying and lawlessness in the construction industry. Again, the Labor Party opposed that tooth and nail. We had to have a double dissolution to get it done.
That industry is now booming, with another 101,300 workers finding jobs.
We're also investing record amounts to reequip our armed forces. And we're not just building ships and planes and armoured vehicles but we're creating a new cutting-edge defence industry that's already delivering thousands of high-tech jobs and with massive spillover benefits for the broader economy. Ensuring the safety of our nation and its people today and into the future is the most solemn responsibility of government.
Whether it's giving our Defence Force the 21st century capabilities they need, defeating terrorists at home and abroad, or ensuring our political and public affairs are free from foreign interference, we are relentless in keeping Australians safe. There is no place for ‘set and forget’ or complacency in national security.
Now, we've also begun the biggest federal infrastructure programme in the nation's history, all designed to improve our lives and create jobs.
The Western Sydney airport, completing the NBN, duplicating the Pacific Highway, investing $6.7 billion in the Bruce, and of course as Barnaby described, building the Inland Rail.
I know Barnaby is limbering up to lay the first new tracks, personally; 165 metres each, made from Australian steel in Whyalla. He'll be doing that in the next few months.
Now, naturally, these projects will bring enormous benefits for Australian companies who are preparing to bid for the work. From local road projects like the Warrego Highway Upgrade I visited this morning with John, to the biggest road, rail, energy and airport projects in a generation, including Toowoomba's and Ian Macfarlane's own $1.6 billion Second Range Crossing.
We've also taken action to make energy more reliable and affordable. Now, 12 months ago, I said that pumped hydro needed to be a vital part of our energy plan; the storage that makes renewables reliable. The feasibility study for Snowy 2.0 proves the project is technically and financially viable. Work is on track to start later this year. This, again, is nation-building infrastructure that will bring thousands of jobs to regional Australia.
Now, we've already reduced wholesale energy prices. With the help of the competition regulator, those savings will be passed on to customers. Longer term, the National Energy Guarantee will lock in those gains. Independent analysis commissioned by the Energy Security Board predicts that wholesale electricity costs will fall by 23% over the decade. Those actions, along with Snowy 2.0 and others, will cut the average household energy bill by $400.
So 2017 was a year of delivery, a year in which we worked hard to deliver on all of our promises and on the issues that matter to Australians.
Everywhere I go, I meet people who are making the most of those new opportunities. Only last week, just a few hours down the road at Narangba, north of Brisbane, I met Tom Eckersley, who runs Eckersley Print Group, a great Australian family business. He told me that, year after year, they ploughed their retained earnings back into the business.
That's what family businesses do; investing in growth, creating more jobs.
So with our tax cuts for small and medium businesses, he and thousands of other businesses like his, can invest more and employ more.
He's also used our PATH Program to train and hire two young Australians, John and Jarrod, who had been struggling to get into work, potentially facing a future on welfare. Both have now started apprenticeships.
That's why we've introduced programs like PaTH and ParentsNEXT, which help parents of young kids get back into the workforce; to ensure that everyone who wants to work, to get ahead and support themselves and their family, can share in the record jobs growth we're experiencing.
So we're seeing growth, investment and employment right across our country, not just in the big cities.
Our first City Deals for example have been established in regional cities. They'll harness the attention and resources of all three levels of government to pursue common development and investment goals for cities. The Mayor Paul Antonio and I were talking about this just a little while ago; how rare it is - Toowoomba is a great exception and Macca, you and your colleagues at state and local government level have really led the way here - it's an exception for federal, state and local government to work hand in hand. Often they're like ships in the night; broadly going in the same direction but not working with each other.
The City Deals are changing that. It's a big innovation at a federal level. We have got two up running in Townsville and Launceston. Last month, I signed a memorandum of understanding, John McVeigh was there, with the Victorian Government, to negotiate a city deal for Geelong. A key focus of those deals and those to come in other centres such as Hobart and Western Sydney, is job creation.
In the past year, 120,000 jobs were created in regional Australia, outpacing growth in the working-age population by nearly two to one. In regional Queensland alone, 49,000 new jobs were created, nearly as many as in greater Brisbane.
Now, the right mix of policies, combined with our commitment to budget repair that will return the budget to balance in 2020/21, means our economy is much stronger.
That means we can pay for the services that Australians expect.
I mean, put simply, a strong economy means better schools, better hospitals, better essential services that Australians use every day.
We've secured Medicare with the Medicare Guarantee Fund. That is the law of the land. We have guaranteed Medicare. And here in Toowoomba, as around the country, bulk-billing is at an all-time high.
We've also ramped up spending on mental health services and medical research and placed a record number of life-saving drugs on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. That's in marked contrast to our predecessors, the Labor Party, when they were in government.
From today, for example, the drug Ocrevus will be cheaper for 5,000 Australians a year who need it to combat Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis, the most common form of MS. By listing the drug on the PBS, we're cutting the cost for those patients from $35,000 a year to $79 or $12.80 a year for concessional patients. That is life-changing medicine.
That is what you can afford with a strong economy and a well-managed budget.
Now, that also enables us to invest in businesses like Vanguard Laundry Services right here in Toowoomba. Vanguard’s mission is to give people with a history of mental illness a job and an employment pathway.
As John reminded us earlier, our government committed $1 million along with business and philanthropic donors, to get it up and running. I want to thank all of those who supported Vanguard Laundry, many of whom are here today, including the Managing Director, Luke Terry.
Luke says that business is now thriving with 83 customers, up from one when it launched only a year ago. Of the 48 employees at Vanguard, 32 had a mental illness that had kept them out of the workforce for an average of five years.
Research by Swinburne University found that after just one year, those workers were much less likely to rely on welfare. A quarter had withdrawn from Centrelink entirely. They were less likely to visit hospital and above all, 80% said they simply felt better. That's something the entire community here in Toowoomba should be very, very proud of.
Of course it's not enough to just have good policies. Those policies have got to work together towards a common goal. Our commitment to free trade is a great example.
Our trade deals have helped Australian businesses export to new markets worth trillions of dollars. We've also cut business tax so they can take advantage of those opportunities, by investing and hiring.
Australian workers, farmers and businesses are already reaping the rewards of our trade deals with China, Korea and Japan. Last year we signed another one with Peru. We have reinvigorated talks with India and this year we're focused on completing a deal with Indonesia. None of this is easy, by the way, as those that have been involved in trade negotiations in the past - and I'm looking at Macca here - know very, very well.
But last week, we agreed to the 11 nation Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Remember all those people who said it was dead when the Americans pulled out?
We stuck with it. Stuck with it and now it's agreed.
That's a deal that opens the door to markets worth $14 trillion, massive new opportunities.
Exports continue to grow apace and in particular agricultural exports are up by 20.3% over the past year, much of that growth from here on the Darling Downs of course.
Barnaby is a former Agriculture Minister - so am I, actually, only for five weeks – but Barnaby always said it was a ‘golden era’. He's being very generous.
[Laughter]
But last night, we landed at the Wagner family's Toowoomba Wellcamp Airport. That airport is an incredible achievement. Really, a remarkable achievement. It's opening up new markets for passengers and products throughout Australia and the region. No Government money in the airport itself, but as John and I were discussing last night at the Spotted Cow, the Second Range Crossing helped make it possible. It's a good example of the way in which public infrastructure supports private infrastructure and vice versa.
But what vision and what timing have the Wagners shown? For more than a year now, Cathay Pacific has been running a weekly 747 cargo service from Wellcamp to Hong Kong, taking up to 60 tonnes a week of Australian goods and produce to markets in China and beyond. As we continue to pursue free trade agreements with our neighbors in the Asia-Pacific, the markets for products that can use Wellcamp as a gateway to our region will continue to grow.
One company that's grasped this opportunity is Oakey Beef Exports, about 30km west of here, as you know. What started as a trial of flying fresh meat from Wellcamp to Hong Kong has now become a regular trade. With new markets opening up, Oakey has invested $30 million and is on track to more than double its throughput to 575,000 head a year, by next year sending Darling Downs produce to 36 countries around the world. The company employs 750 local workers, increasing to about 1,300 over the next few years. As the general manager Pat Gleeson says – and Pat, you’re here today too -  the company and farmers that supply it, are enormously excited about the TPP, which will for the first time, allow them to break into markets such as Mexico, with its population of 120 million.
Now, we know that our plan is delivering for Australians. The challenge now, is to stay the course, follow through in 2018 and beyond.
Everything I know about business and creating jobs comes from experience. All our lives Lucy and I have created businesses and invested in them. Some of them have done well, some of them you'd rather not remember but, you know, we've got to be resilient and enterprising.
We’ve hired a lot of people over the years. We know what it means to invest money and try to build something.
When I travel around the country, I see that same spirit of enterprise everywhere. I see it in the eyes of men and women who are investing their time, their money, their heart, their passion and having a go. I see it in their workforce, in the faces of staff who have just been hired, because the business is expanding. The most important engine for economic growth, investment and employment is business and in particular small and medium businesses, overwhelmingly owned and operated by Australian families.
That's why we work so hard to secure the passage of important tax relief for small and medium businesses up to a turnover of $50 million a year. That's as much as we've been able to get through the Senate so far.
Now, a business that size is not a giant. But those 3.2 million businesses employ well over half of the private sector workforce.
It's those workers who benefit from these tax cuts.
When Parliament resumes we'll again present legislation to reduce tax for all businesses, not just small and medium ones, to 25%.
With the US cutting company tax to 21%, the need to remain competitive is more intense than ever.
We know that if you reduce business tax, you get more investment. If you get more investment you get more and better paid jobs.
Now, you don't have to take my word for it. The IMF, the International Monetary Fund, just lifted global growth forecasts off the back of the Trump Administration's tax cuts.
Let's be very clear about this; the laws of supply and demand have not been suspended.
Wages growth will come, because a stronger economy results in more investment, more jobs and more intense competition between employers for workers.
Now, we won't compromise our return to surplus in 2020/21. But our next priority in terms of tax, is further tax relief for middle income earners. Last year, as you know, we lifted the second highest income tax threshold to $87,000. That kept about half a million Australians from moving into the second highest tax bracket. The Treasurer and I have been working over the Christmas break on how we can provide more tax relief for middle income Australian families and - at the same time - meet our commitment to bring the budget back into balance.
The stronger the budget becomes, the more we'll be able to give back to hardworking Australians.
So 2018 will be about delivery and the dividends of reform; more money in the pockets of more hardworking Australian families.
In 2018, we’ll also continue our important reforms in school funding. We have delivered the biggest reform to school funding in our nation's history, including an extra $23.5 billion to schools nationally. And now David Gonski's second review will make sure that extra money improves results and gives our kids the world-class education that they need.
Funding at schools like Toowoomba State High will increase from $3,315 per student this year from the Federal Government - this is to a state high school - to $4,970 per student in a decade.
Our reforms to childcare will make it more affordable for families and make it easier for mums and for dads to combine family with work.
So let me finish where I began, with our Australian values. Freedom, democracy, mateship, a fair go, mutual respect, the equality of men and women and the rule of law.
We believe in giving everyone the opportunity to get ahead, giving everyone the opportunity to get a good education, to get a good job, to keep more of their own hard-earned money.
That's a fair go.
Our plan will ensure Australians can get a fair go and realise their dreams, whether it's building the world's fastest computer or getting a first job, starting a small business and employing someone or breaking into a new export market.
Despite Canberra being a hothouse which thrives on pessimism and political distractions, we delivered on many of our plans last year and we have more to do now.
And Standard &amp; Poor’s ensured we had a ‘triple A Australia Day’.
We cannot afford to put at risk everything we have worked so hard for together.
If we keep following our economic plan, there is no limit to what we can achieve as a country.
With your support, with your enterprise, with your drive to succeed and to grow, we will continue to deliver the jobs and growth Australians deserve today and tomorrow.
Thank you all very much.
[Applause]
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Yoonggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngoonawal dhowrrra. 
Wanggarra lin jin yin marunn bulaan boogarabung.
We’re gathered today on the land of the Ngunawal people and we honour their elders, past and present.
Speaker Tony Smith, President of the Senate Scott Ryan, Ministers, Leader of the Opposition, Dr Brendan Nelson, Defence Chiefs, Rear Admiral Ken Doolan, Brigadier Alison Creagh, servicemen and women, ladies and gentlemen.
A very warm welcome also to Vice Admiral Denis Beraud, the Deputy Chief of the French Navy and to Lieutenant Gen Paul Wynnyk, Commander of the Canadian Army.
Australians, Canadians and Frenchmen were serving side-by-side 100 years ago, in the trenches of France and Flanders in the First World War. Most notably in the Battle of Amiens, as they do today serving together in the Middle East in the coalition effort to defeat Daesh.
Today, Parliament House is once again alive with the sound of democracy in full flight - that’s not a silent ‘l’ -  it’s ‘flight’, but not a fight - as politicians from around the country return to Canberra for another year.
But we never forget that everything we do across the lake - the right to legislate for our nation, to debate, discuss and decide our destiny - we owe to all those who are honoured here.
The Australian War Memorial's quiet presence reminds us that these freedoms and the values that we cherish today and preserve for future generations, have come at the very high price and have come from the sacrifice of so many.
It’s a high price paid for our freedom.
It’s a high price paid in young lives lost far from home.
You know, when the doors of the Parliament are flung open, from the very Cabinet room itself, you look through the Parliament at the War Memorial, a constant reminder of how hard fought and hard won those freedoms that we exercise there, have been.
Our military history stretches across an epic canvas, a picture of selflessness, courage, love of country and it’s only within each brushstroke that the personal cost of such sacrifice is revealed.
It’s there in the diary entries, the letters home, the keepsakes carried from the front.
It’s in all the lost stories, the unfinished chapters of all our lost men and women.
In the empty chair at the table.
The missing face from the family picture.
Every night, the Last Post ceremony tells the story of just one of our fallen and in doing so we shine a light on another brushstroke in our nation’s history.
This evening we remember Corporal John Arthur Metson, born a century ago.
He was just 21 in 1940 when he volunteered for the Second AIF, the Second Australian Imperial Force.
He served with the 2/14th Battalion in Egypt, Syria and Lebanon and during a short stint back in Australia, married his sweetheart, Betty.
They farewelled each other for the last time when John set sail for New Guinea, as part of the hard-fought effort to hold back the determined Japanese advance on Port Moresby. He was bound for the Kokoda Track.
Within days of their arrival, his Battalion was engaged in brutal fighting and John’s ankle was shattered by a bullet. A withdrawal was ordered, but during the retreat John refused to be carried.
And so, on padded hands and padded knees and in silent agony, he crawled for nearly three weeks through a 7,000 foot mountain range. The wounded stopped to rest at Sengai, in the care of local villagers. All were later killed.
John Metson was just 24. He was his parents’ only child.
He was posthumously awarded the British Empire Medal for courage, tenacity and unselfishness.
His is one story, one life lost.
More than 102,000 names surround us and by telling their stories we honour their service.
And we remember them. 
We do not glorify war. We commemorate the triumph of the human spirit, the patriotism, the sacrifice, the courage and the endurance.
This year we are marking the centenary of the final year of the First World War, the War to End All Wars.
Those values have been present in every conflict since and it is with the same spirit embodied by today's ANZACs who defend our freedom both here and abroad today.
We know that the best way to honour the Diggers of a century ago is by supporting the servicemen and women, the veterans and their families of today.
So all of us here assembled are committed to do that.
We, our nation’s leaders, are reminded here today, as we are every day, that there is no more solemn responsibility than to send Australians into harm’s way.
No greater responsibility than to ensure they are well-led and well-equipped so that they can return home safely to their families, mission accomplished, duty done.
Lest we forget.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Barry Cohen was a born performer, made for show-business.
He loved a stage and for twenty-one glorious years, our Parliament was the venue.
It was here in Canberra, always perfectly well dressed, a natural dandy, well-cut suits always looking the very best.
He courted laughter in all its’ forms.
He did so with an artful and seemingly endless deployment of anecdotes, which he sharpened and improved over time, with his inimitable wit.
He used humour to connect with people, the Australians whose interests he worked tirelessly to advocate and of course, his fellow parliamentarians.
He also used it to stay humble, actually very good advice for all of us politicians. I know former Prime Minister Bob Hawke would agree, it’s always important not to take yourself too seriously and Barry certainly never did that.
When his ministerial career ended in 1987, there was a lot of speculation about him becoming the Speaker. He responded to this chatter in a column for The Bulletin and recounted his valiant attempt as a freshman MP to read the Standing Orders.
At least he started reading them Mr Speaker, you’d no doubt appreciate that.
He said, Barry said he made it all the way to page two.
[Laughter]
And he ended his column with this typical line of self-deprecation:
“The Hawke Government has its problems, but it’s not yet so desperate that it should risk the destruction of the Westminster system by appointing me Speaker.”
[Laughter]
Part of Barry’s appeal stemmed from his ability to blend frivolity with the deepest and most heartfelt sincerity. Behind the laughter was a man who felt acutely and cared profoundly, as Aunty Jannette has reminded us.
He once revealed that John Steinbeck’s haunting The Grapes of Wrath prompted his political career and his advocacy for others was the perfect illustration of one of the novel’s central themes; that we’re at our best when we work together, rather than toiling alone to overcome hardship.
He abhorred discrimination, something he experienced as a young Jewish man in the 1940s. He possessed a fierce desire to combat it. In his maiden speech to Parliament in 1970, Barry spoke against “prejudice based on class, religion or race” and spoke loudly, as again Aunty Jannette reminded us, for our First Australians.
He also believed that Australia’s parliamentarians should never stop learning  and should “obtain every skill possible”.
This was hardly surprising from a man who before politics, enjoyed stints as a ‘first-class’ golfer, postman, clerk and businessman. But for Barry, no vocation was more enthralling - or more rewarding - than writing. He continued to write even after Alzheimer’s cast its long shadow. His writing opened the door on what had previously been the very private pain of those who live with Alzheimer’s.
He fought for greater awareness of dementia and he often did it – again - with his trademark humour.
When former Prime Minister John Howard asked Barry how he found life in a nursing home, his response was quick. “Question time!” he yelled to a roar of laughter from John.
Australia has been richer for his presence and we mourn his loss.
To his beloved wife Rae, and his family, I offer the nation’s deep and sincere thanks and appreciation for a life of public service well served.
Thank you.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you very much Julie and it’s wonderful to be here with so many of my parliamentary colleagues. The Minister for Communications, Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for Sport and so many other colleagues from both sides of the House are committed to a safer internet.
We have all been deeply troubled by the coarsening of discourse on the internet and in particular the impact it has on our children.
Now when we came into government in 2013 we established the Children’s eSafety Commissioner and Julie was established. I was the Communications Minister at the time and the establishment of it was supervised by my Assistant Minister Paul Fletcher, who of course is a lifetime communications industry executive himself.
Alistair MacGibbon was the first Children’s eSafety Commissioner and set it up. Of course he’s gone on to become the cyber security adviser to the government – he’s been succeeded by Julie.
As Mitch will describe later, we really have world’s first legislation and practices in respect of keeping the internet safe for our children. I want to thank Julie for the work you’re doing. You did fantastic work before, keeping the internet safe, doing everything you could on the industry side and now you’re looking after everybody – not just children of course in terms of eSafety but that of course is where our great priority is.
I want to also acknowledge Jono Nicholas the Chief Executive of ReachOut - thank you Jono for you and your organisation’s ongoing efforts to educate Australian kids about online safety. I’m proud that the government supports the important work of your organisation and there are so many others like it - Beyond Blue, Alannah and Madeline, the Kids Helpline, and many others, each providing important and critical services.
Now Safer Internet Day is really part of a broader movement to educate everyone, especially our kids and their parents - our kids being the most vulnerable internet users - about safe online practices and about using the Internet safely.
The internet is, in my view the most transformative, most remarkable piece of infrastructure ever created. Its reach - the pace at which it’s been adopted is utterly without precedent.
It is worth reflecting on the fact, that the internet was only just breaking out of academia into a more commercial environment in the mid-90’s, not very long ago. You know, you look at the iPhone’s we have and our smart phones, many of the iPhones we have in our pockets - the first iPhone was 2007. Facebook, with two billion accounts started in 2005.
So this has all happened very, very quickly on any view. As you’ve probably heard me say before – if you look at some of our great internet companies, giants – if they were human beings, they would still be at school and many of them still in primary school. Now at the turn of the century, well under, less than half a billion people - less than 500 million people used the internet. Today that figure is around 3.5 billion and soon a majority of people all around the world will be connected and of course it is almost completely ubiquitous in a developed country like Australia.
The combination of near universal connectivity and of course the smartphone, has been remarkable and has offered up enormous opportunities. But what it has done, is that it has given the opportunity for bullying to be amplified. What I would call ‘bad old fashioned bullying’ which people of my generation and many of yours grew up with – that then gets amplified onto online platforms and potentially to thousands, if not more people.  The effects can be devastating.
I want to say too, that I share this concern with the UK Prime Minister, Theresa May – that the coarser and more abusive discourse that you far too often see online is also reaching back into traditional forms of communication and discourse, whether it is in the playground or in politics or in a newspaper and coarsening that as well.
And the key to this has to be as Julie said, respect.
That is what all of us as parents, and as grandparents – that is what we must all do – ensure that our children and grandchildren show respect to each other, show respect in particular when you are talking about sons and grandsons, ensure that they show respect to the women in their lives – their sisters, their mothers, their aunties, their grandmothers and so forth.
This is a point that Lucy makes all the time and it bares constant repeating. We can make these changes, think about that great respect campaign tackling the scourge of domestic violence, that Michaelia Cash instigated a little while back – how effective that was, because it rang true – people said yes, I recognise that, we can change this.
So initiatives like this are so important. It’s why we established the children’s eSafety Commissioner as I’ve described and we’ve expanded the role of the office to go beyond children, so it deals with adults as well.
We are working closely with the big social media platforms – Facebook, with Instagram and with Twitter to ensure appropriate safeguards are in place and to remove malicious content quickly.
But our goal must be to stop these images from being loaded in the first place and to stop bullying behaviour online and offline and that starts with education, especially the role of parents.
Don’t be misled into thinking that cyber bullying is something solely the result of the internet or of smart phones. What we are talking about here is what I call bad old fashioned bullying. This is people being disrespectful to each other, being abusive to each other and all too often feeling that if they’re online they can amplify and often amplify anonymously. It’s vital that parents are aware, that teachers are aware – educate themselves about the risks, discuss these openly with their children.
Be aware of what you’re children are doing online, make sure that you understand what they are doing – don’t say ‘oh I don’t understand all that stuff, I’ve got to get my kids to explain it to me’ – as a parent, as a grandparent, you have to be really alert and of course that applies to the classroom as well. The teachers, parents, we must have zero tolerance for bullying.
Now I want to echo the remarks of Simon Birmingham, our Education Minister, who posed a very good question – what role do smartphones have in a child’s hand in a classroom? The answer is – children in the classroom should be focussing on their lesson, focussing on what the teacher is teaching them.
So the Internet is a remarkable, the most transformational piece of infrastructure mankind has ever devised. But it does have consequences, with such rapid change, it does have some darker sides to it.
This issue of cyber bullying and abusive and disrespectful conduct online is a very real one but we must be alert to it – we must be aware of it – which is why this day is so important all of us have to resolve. And Julie congratulations on the pledge you are asking people to make. We must resolve to be respectful online as we expect others to be to us.
We must remember in this most remarkable nation of ours, the most successful multicultural society in the world. In a world characterised all too often by intolerance and division here the glue that holds us together, the key foundation of our success is mutual respect.
That’s the Australian way and we need to do more of it. And make sure our children and grandchildren are alert to it and that parents and teachers are too.
So thank you very much and I look forward to this being a very effective game-changer in making the internet safer for everyone, including especially our kids.
Thank you.
[ENDS] 


PRIME MINISTER: 
Welcome back John Alexander.
Welcome new Senator, General Jim Molan.
Her life is an inspiration. A life lived as she says herself, with liberal values - a life of enterprise, of passion, of love, of self-sacrifice for her family - welcome to the Liberal Party Senator Lucy Gichuhi.
Our Liberal National coalition is the coalition that delivers opportunities for Australians to realise their dreams.
We do not believe that government knows best, as the Labor Party does, we believe the government’s job is to enable Australians to do their best.
And so in 2016 at the election we promised that we would deliver the economic leadership that would create more opportunities and deliver the jobs and growth that Australia needed.
And last year we saw 403,000 new jobs created in Australia.
Over 1100 jobs a day, it is the largest jobs growth in any year since records began, and that is because of confidence, of investment, of small and medium family-owned Australian businesses having a go. Receiving the incentive and the encouragement from government with our tax cuts for small and medium businesses – up to $50 million a year turnover - that’s not a giant international corporation, but do you know what? Those businesses collectively, thousands and thousands of them, employ more than half of all Australians. And they are the ones that are hiring.
And I know all of us over the break have been visiting with those businesses, the length and breadth of the nation – they are filled with confidence. We are seeing job ads growing at 14 per cent over the year. There is an air of confidence. We’re seeing strong economic growth and we’re seeing that jobs growth.
And what we are doing too is ensuring that we’re putting more money into the pockets of hard-working Australian families. The Treasurer has already delivered one middle income tax cut by moving the $80,000 threshold up to $87,000.
And our focus this year is on doing more.
Clearly we’re not going to compromise our return to surplus. So timing will depend on the state of the budget. 
Look at the record – child care reforms are putting child care within the reach making it more affordable for lower-middle income families and lower income families so they’re better able to balance work and family and stay in the work force.
And of course at the same time we introduced for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth, national, consistent, needs-based school funding.
And on energy, what a full court press. We have provided relief in the here and now, getting the retailers to the table and getting them to deliver and ensure that people are on the right plans.  Thousands of families are saving hundreds of dollars a year on their energy bills. We have brought the wholesale price of gas on the east coast down substantially over the year and that of course is saving thousands of jobs and again putting downward pressure on energy prices.
And there is so much more to do - the National Energy Guarantee, Snowy 2.0 - we have a full court press on energy to ensure that energy is affordable, reliable and of course we meet our commitments under the Paris Agreement.
We’ve got a lot to do this year. We’ve got a lot to do to continue delivering that economic growth, the jobs that Australians need and our children and grandchildren are counting on.
This is going to be a year of delivery.
Welcome back to Canberra. Let’s get on with the leadership that Australia needs and is delivering the opportunities Australians deserve.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Can I welcome everybody and right at the outset can I say in the language of the Ngunawal people here in Canberra.
Yoonggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngoonawal dhowrrra. Wanggarra lin jin yin marunn bulaan boogarabung.
Welcome, we’ve acknowledged we’re on Ngunawal country and we pay our respects to their elders past and present and pay our respects to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people here today.
I want to thank everyone for coming to this 45th meeting of the Council of Australian Governments and especially to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander representatives of the Special Gathering. So welcome to all of you.
We met yesterday at the Special Gathering and it was very valuable, we learnt a lot.
Now this year marks the 10th anniversary of COAG’s pledge to Close the Gap and as you know, we have a lot more to do.
We’ve engaged in a discussion, a respectful discussion about refreshing and renewing the Closing the Gap targets. I want to thank you very much for your help there and contribution.
As you know I’m channelling our friend Chris Sarra who gave me some very good advice some years ago. He said we should be doing - governments should be doing things ‘with’ Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, not ‘to’ them. That has been the consistent principle that we’ve sought to follow and today is a good example of that.
Also I want to just touch on some of the other things we’ll be discussing today.
There is no more important responsibility for adults than caring for children. That threads through so much of our discussions.
But today, we are discussing our response to the Royal Commission on Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse and of course the Northern Territory Royal Commission.
The Royal Commission into the Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse had 409 recommendations and they proposed very significant reforms to ensure this national tragedy is not repeated.
As COAG, as Australia's governments, we owe it to the survivors for their courage in telling stories they have kept, they have been too afraid to speak of, often for decades. The average time between the offence, the abuse and people speaking about it is 24 years, think about that. And there were witnesses at the Royal Commission who were children, who the abuse that they had suffered was current. So it’s not simply a historical exercise.
Now, we have a formidable task in responding to those recommendations. As you know, we have a Task Group inside our Attorney General’s Department and we will be discussing our coordinated response in the course of our meeting.
We will be appointing a reference group with survivors and in terms of the parliamentary environment, with representatives from opposition and crossbench to facilitate the delivery of a national apology to survivors of institutional child sexual abuse.
I read yesterday a very touching letter from one of Warren Entsch’s constituents in Cairns - Warren is the Member for Leichhardt, as you know - who had been the victim of child sexual abuse and had written to Warren asking him to pass the letter on to me. He talked about the need for an event which would be an event of national healing and that is really what we are talking about here. 
We’ve got to bring survivors together, honour them, honour their courage and then provide an important healing account, a reconciliation, if you like, by way of that apology. It’s going to be a very important step.
Now, the Royal Commission into the Protection and Detention of Children in the Northern Territory also has very important lessons for us all, around early intervention and preventing children entering into the youth justice and child protection systems. We will be discussing that as well.
Now all of us were heartbroken by the tragic death of Amy ‘Dolly’ Everett.
We are going to discuss further steps that we can take together to prevent bullying and cyber-bullying and our eSafety commissioner, Julie Inman Grant will be coming to speak to us.
All of us have had experiences with families that have suffered from bullying like this. Lucy and I sat down with the Everetts, it’s a heartbreaking story. It’s becoming so widespread.
So this is the time for us to really pull together, to show that leadership, to say no to bullying in every sphere. Whether it’s what I would call bad old-fashioned bullying you know, in the way that many of us would have seen or experienced when we were children, or amplified on the internet and on smart phones.
We’ve delivered, the Commonwealth, a national, consistent needs-based funding approach for our schools, the first time ever. The challenge now is for us to make sure our collective investment improves results.
So I look forward to receiving David Gonski’s ‘Achieving Educational Excellence in Australians Schools’ report shortly and working together with everyone here to make sure our children receive a world-class education.
As a COAG, we agreed to settle long-term hospital funding arrangements this year and we have put forward a generous funding offer that provides stability and certainty. It’s entirely consistent with the current arrangements and it goes out to 2025, with an additional $30 billion. In fact it’ll be more than that, over that period. So I look forward to discussing the reforms we need to undertake to improve patient choice and health outcomes for all Australians, especially in regional and remote Australia.
So it’s a very full agenda, there’s a lot to do. Thank you all for being here in Canberra at COAG and thank you above all again, to our representatives from the Special Gathering.
There is a lot of work, so let’s get down to business.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you all very much. We’ve had a very, very productive COAG meeting. The 45th meeting of the council of Australian Governments.
The meeting began and was enriched by the contribution of the delegates from the Special Gathering of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leaders, which has been going on in Canberra over the last few days.
It demonstrated our shared commitment to do things ‘with’ and not ‘to’ Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. They have a very pithy insight into the right approach, originally described to me by Chris Sarra, who was one of the delegates.
We had a very good discussion. We heard very clearly the desire for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to be equal partners in this work. The desire to have real skin in the game, as we seek to refresh the Closing The Gap targets and that means accountability and opportunity. That the focus should be on a strengths-based approach that enables Indigenous people to thrive, not just survive.
We were reminded that we have made gains and efforts to date have improved the lives of many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. But plainly we have not been able to achieve as much success as we would like.
We need to work harder, particularly in remote areas and ensure that we achieve higher quality outcomes. There was strong agreement about the need for better data and reporting and to hold us more accountable for achieving progress and that includes jurisdictional targets - that is to say targets that are referenced to states and territories, not just national targets - with a more granular focus that forms part of the refreshed Closing The Gap agenda.
Now, we met last night at the special gathering, all of us First Ministers and we heard the need to get the refresh of the Closing The Gap target right. Following feedback from delegates, we’ve agreed to extend the timeframe for concluding this refresh consultation to October this year.
Now, we have to work diligently but respectfully and this should allow us the time to do both.
The special gathering has provided its communique, which is on the public record and the priorities, as you will have noted, include health, housing, economic development and many more.
COAG acknowledged that there is no higher responsibility for adults than keeping our children safe. Keeping our children safe, ensuring they have the best start in life to realise their dreams, is amongst our deepest responsibilities as Governments, parents and for some of us, grandparents.
The Royal Commission into the Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse, as we know was the product of five years of hard work and courageous work for all those involved.
Now, I'm pleased that all the jurisdictions have agreed to respond to the royal commission's findings by June this year.
As you know, we have a task force underway in the Attorney-General's Department dealing with the Commonwealth's responses and that will be done by the June date.
We also considered the Royal Commission into the protection and detention of children in the Northern Territory and that also has lessons for us all around early intervention and preventing children from entering into the youth justice and child protection systems.
We discussed the issue of bullying and cyberbullying. This is rightly described as a scourge. As the Premier of Queensland said in our meeting, the arrival of the smartphone and the internet enabled by the smartphone, means that the bullying does not stop at the school gate. It follows the child home, back home into their bedroom. The amplification of bullying in the cybersphere is something that has is unprecedented in all of our history. There are so many heartbreaking tragedies and all of us are familiar with the tragic death of Amy Everett and as I think I said earlier today, Lucy and I have spent some time with her parents and her sister. All of us assembled here and many people watching this press conference, will have had similar experiences with loved ones and family that have faced the consequences of this shocking bullying.
Mutual respect is a key value that we must ensure our children have, whether we are parents, grandparents, big brothers and sisters, friends, uncles, aunts, grandparents, teachers.
It has no place in Australia, we will take every step to reduce the incidence of bullying, whether online or offline, eliminate it wherever we can. We had an excellent presentation from our eSafety Commissioner, Julie Inman-Grant. I think all Ministers would agree, that she was informed, passionate and demonstrated and described the way in which the Australian Government, the Commonwealth Government, has a world-first office - an eSafety office - with powers that are unique. We're the first in the world to have to powers to force social media platforms to take offending material down. There's civil penalty powers and it is a single place of help for people facing bullying and unsafe practices online.
We're going to continue our work together on this. Again, I want to thank the Premier of Queensland for bringing this to the agenda. It's one that the Commonwealth has been taking the lead on in the cybersphere - as we should, given our telecommunications responsibilities - but it is a very big task. As Julie Inman-Grant said, we have to do much more to engage parents above all, to make sure that they are more aware of, more alert to, what their children are doing online and that their kids talk to them when they are being bullied.
Now, we also discussed schools. We discussed, of course, the Commonwealth's new Gonski 2.0 school funding arrangements, which are putting substantial additional funds into schools on a national, consistent, needs-based model, for the first time ever in the history of the Commonwealth. We look forward to receiving David Gonski's Achieving Educational Excellence in Australian Schools report shortly. We considered the work that has been commissioned from Susan Pascoe and others on early learning and we're looking forward to finalising a national schools agreement by September.
Now in terms of health, we agreed to settle long-term hospital funding arrangements this year. The Commonwealth has put forward a generous offer that provides stability and certainty and I'm pleased to report that New South Wales and Western Australia have today signed an agreement, the heads of agreement that will see an additional $9 billion and more than $3.5 billion flow into their state hospital systems over five years from 2020. I look forward to other jurisdictions securing additional funding in coming months. This deal is underpinned by reform agenda that will improve patient choice and health outcomes for all Australians in particular across regional and remote Australia.
On a separate matter that affects Victoria and New South Wales, we've had productive discussions outside COAG on our proposal to take full ownership of Snowy Hydro by acquiring the shares held by New South Wales and Victoria. Today the Commonwealth, New South Wales and Victorian Governments have reiterated our intention to progress the transaction. Discussions are continuing to confirm the final valuation and associated terms of the deal. We hope to complete it shortly.
I should also note in conclusion that early this morning the northern Australian first ministers and the Commonwealth held a discussion about the progress of development spending across the north especially in roads and water and on Indigenous economic development.
So it's been a very productive COAG.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER:
Yanggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngunawal dhawra. Wanggarralijinyin mariny bulan bugarabang.
Today, Mr Speaker, we meet on Ngunnawal land.  We acknowledge and pay our respects to Ngunnawal elders past and present. We pay our deepest respects to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people here today and right across our nation. I acknowledge Minister Ken Wyatt, Senators Pat Dodson and Malarndirri McCarthy and the Member for Barton, Linda Burney. Thank you for your wise and powerful voices, First Australians, leading the way for many more in years to come.
Mr Speaker, Galarrwuy Yunupingu describes his culture as a ‘gift’; a gift to the nation bestowed upon us all and he’s right. But Indigenous culture is not frozen in time. It’s constantly evolving. It’s dynamic, it is ancient and modern. It is old as the 65,000 year old rocks and tools unearthed at Kakadu last year and as new as Reko Rennie’s “Lighting the Sails” on the Opera House or the hand-painted Rolls Royce he drove across his grandmother’s country—Kamilaroi country—to reconnect with his spiritual home.
Lucy and I recently visited the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies AIATSIS here in Canberra. We learned there, that before European settlement, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians spoke up to 600 dialects of languages. AIATSIS has grouped these into six or seven key language families that are as different, one from the other, as Latin is from Chinese. When we consider that there are just three language families in all of Europe, we get some idea of the enormous diversity and knowledge contained in Australian Indigenous languages. Australian languages, as Galarrwuy reminded us not so long ago. The largest language family in Australia is called Pama-Nyungan from the words for 'man' in the far Northeast and South West and covers about seven-eighths of the continent. The other language families, non-Pama-Nyungan so-called, are found in the far north, from the Kimberley across to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
At the last election the Government promised to protect and help revitalise Indigenous languages. Later this month, we will hold a National Indigenous Language Convention on the Gold Coast to help fulfill that commitment. Language is the great carrier of culture and so much of our Indigenous languages is like poetry – almost impossible to translate. These are complex concepts, enriching us remarkably. AIATSIS is doing formidable work and Lucy and I were so pleased to be there congratulating them on that and I’m so pleased the Government is providing more support.
Now we acknowledge we have not always treated our First Australians with the respect we should have.
In 2018, 10 years on from the National Apology to the Stolen Generations, we have the chance to write a new chapter of history, where indigeneity is embraced and not derided. Where diversity of cultures and language embodies strength. Where individuals, families, governments and institutions operate in a relationship of high expectations.
Now the work of AIATSIS reminds us that far from the stereotypes of poverty and despair, our First Australians are proud peoples who have intimate knowledge of these lands, whose songs date back to time out of mind, who connect all of us - all Australians - to the oldest continuous cultures in the world. This truth should be a great source of pride for all of us. This ‘gift’, in Galarrwuy’s words, should be honoured.
Mr Speaker, Indigenous leaders have written to me saying: “despite some small gains, First Peoples across the nation concede that the Closing the Gap targets were inappropriate and that there was no community buy-in from the outset”. Well, that has to change. 
Last week, COAG hosted a delegation of Indigenous leaders as part of our commitment of doing things ‘with’, not ‘to’ Indigenous people. We heard very clearly the desire for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to be equal partners in this work and in Chris Sarra’s words: “to have real skin in the game,” in terms of accountability and opportunity. We heard the need to take the time to get the refresh of the Closing the Gap targets right and COAG agreed to extend the timeframe for concluding the refresh, to October 2018.
We must work diligently, but respectfully and this will allow us the time to do both.
This three-way engagement—the Commonwealth, state and territory governments and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people - will build more accountability into a refreshed agenda. I welcome First Minister’s representatives and First Ministers here today.
We cannot close the gap if we do not have equal participation in the economy. One of the most effective ways to tackle disadvantage is by ensuring that everyone is included and shares in its benefits. Now, on this side of the chamber we are determined to build a strong economy, where everyone who can work, is able to find employment. Our push for an internationally competitive tax system is designed to enable all Australian businesses, including those owned and operated by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, to invest and grow.
In 2012-13, Indigenous business secured just $6 million of contracts through federal government procurement. Since we set targets through our Indigenous Procurement Policy in 2015, I am pleased to announce Indigenous businesses have now won over $1 billion in government contracts. This program, which is a great credit to the Minister Nigel Scullion, this program has exceeded all expectations. It is being emulated, as you would have seen at the gathering earlier with the BCA.
Now, a new $213.6 million Bayinguwa project – which is the Aboriginal name for Garden Island in Sydney – to design the refurbishment of the Garden Island naval base. It has just been awarded to a joint venture between Indigenous business, PSG Holdings and Lend Lease.
As part of our commitment to do things ‘with,’ not ‘to’, we engaged some 200 Indigenous businessmen and women from across the country to develop the Indigenous Business Sector Strategy, which we’re launching today to help meet the extraordinary growth in the sector. Indigenous Business Hubs will be created across the country, starting with Western Sydney to take advantage of our City Deals and our Government’s record investment in infrastructure, including the Western Sydney Airport itself. These Hubs will be one-stop shops for Indigenous businesses to access the myriad of support services that are out there, all in the one place.
The Indigenous Affairs Minister Senator Nigel Scullion is currently working with the NSW Aboriginal Land Council, the largest Indigenous representative body in the country, on ensuring the hub is designed by, and tailored for, Indigenous Australians. We have formed an Indigenous Reference group to ensure Indigenous people in northern Australia are full economic participants in the Northern Australia Policy.  Indigenous Australians either directly own or have legal rights to most of the North: 66 per cent of Queensland, 80 per cent of the Northern Territory and 94 per cent of Western Australia is communal freehold Aboriginal land, or claimed or determined Native Title land.
My commitment is to do all that I can and the Government will do all that we can, to ensure that Indigenous Australians play a central role in our nation’s success story in every respect.
Just like Lola Greeno, Yvonne Koolmatrie, or Daniel Boyd, accomplished Indigenous artists whose work inspired and challenged us in the Defying Empire Exhibition at the National Gallery mid-last year.
Our Australian of the Year award finalists Dion Devow, Johnathan Thurston, and Dr Tracy Westerman.
Business people like Daniel Jones, who runs his own contracting company in Timber Creek in the Northern Territory.
Thomas Hudson, who is expanding his Indigenous tourism business on the Cape York Peninsula.
Kristal Kinsela, who spoke so eloquently at the COAG meeting last Friday, who said that her Indigenous business went from three staff to 15, also thanks to our Indigenous Procurement Policy.
Dr Kim Isaacs also at the COAG meeting, a GP from Broome with whom we reflected on the deep significance of liyan, a holistic concept of wellbeing and connectedness in the Yawuru language.
Ray Pratt, who has grown his company Dice Australia, into one of our leading technological service providers in the construction and renewable energy sectors.
Mr Speaker, these great Australians and many others like them prove that the solution to closing the gap rests within the imagination, the ingenuity, the passion and the drive of Indigenous people themselves. Government must be an enabler of this success. Too often we are quick to highlight the despondency and deficit, which does nothing to help those who aspire to be like Kristal, Thomas or Raymond, to work hard, contribute and succeed, all the while being proud First Australians, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians.
Today, I table the 10th Closing the Gap report.
Every day we see proof that many people's lives are improving. As part of the Closing the Gap refresh, state by state targets will help give us more granular and specific local insight to progress or lack of progress and more precisely where more focused effort is needed.
Mr Speaker, I can advise the House three of the seven Closing the Gap targets are on track this year, giving us the most promising result since 2011.
The target to halve the gap in child mortality is back on track.
The life expectancy target is not on track, but life expectancy has been increasing and between 1998 and 2016 the overall Indigenous mortality rate declined by 14 per cent.
Up to 51 per cent of low birth-weight births to Indigenous mothers have been attributed to smoking during pregnancy and rates of smoking during pregnancy are still at 45 per cent in 2015.
For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, tobacco smoking is the most preventable cause of ill-health and early death. Among Indigenous Australians, smoking directly causes about a third of the incidence of cancer and cardiovascular disease and around one in five deaths.
That’s why Minister Ken Wyatt has announced $184 million towards reducing smoking rates.
Mr Speaker, I can report that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children aged five are the first cohort of any children nationally, to reach the 95 per cent immunisation target. The target to have 95 per cent of all Indigenous four-year-olds enrolled in early childhood education by 2025, is also on track this year.
Today, around 14,700 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children are enrolled in early childhood education the year before full-time school. We must continue to ensure those children are attending, not just enrolled, in order to receive the full benefit.
The target to halve the gap in Year 12 attainment by 2020, is also on track.
Nationally, the gap has narrowed by more than 12 percentage points over the past decade, but we need to lift the quality of these outcomes. We heard that very powerfully at the COAG Special Gathering of Indigenous leaders last Thursday.
The target to halve the gap in reading and numeracy by 2018 is not on track this year. But the data does show that the gap is narrowing, especially in reading in Years 3 and 5 and in numeracy in Years 5 and 9.
The target to close the gap in school attendance by 2018 is not on track this year. Over the next decade, we will put in place a nationally consistent, needs-based funding system for all schools, with record investment of $249.8 billion, including a $4.4 billion loading for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students. We await David Gonski’s report on how to ensure those additional funds are spent effectively. But we cannot let this opportunity pass to improve the effectiveness of our record level of spending on education.
The employment target is not on track and great challenges remain in community safety, health, incarceration rates and family violence, which we discussed also at COAG last week.
Our new Time to Work program will bring employment services into prisons, so Indigenous people can leave with a focus on work and break the cycle of incarceration.
The Specialist Indigenous organisation, We Al-li, is delivering trauma-informed training to all 14 Family Violence Prevention Legal Services across Australia.
We promised to work in partnership with communities and we listened to the cry for help from leaders, Indigenous and non-Indigenous, in Ceduna, the Kimberley, the Goldfields and Bundaberg. Strong women like Amanda Bennell and Betty Logan who are here in the chamber today. The Cashless Debit Card is not for everyone. But if a community has stepped up and asked us for help, as these communities and their leaders have done, we must put politics aside and listen. We’re committed to stopping the welfare-fueled violence and misery. We will put the rights of children far above arguments that are driven by ideology. We hope that common sense will prevail as we seek support for the Cashless Debit Card for those communities who have chosen to use this tool to make their communities safer for everyone.
Mr Speaker, I recognise good health underpins the Closing the Gap agenda. Our Government continues to invest substantially and to work closely with communities in a wide range of Indigenous health programs.
From July last year, our Government has been supporting the Aboriginal Community Controlled Health sector through a new Network Funding Agreement with the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation. This funding agreement was developed in consultation with the Aboriginal Community Controlled Health sector to inform national policy and support community controlled organisations on the ground. In 2017/18 we provided $20 million to ensure our commitment to working with Indigenous Australians is a reality.
Mr Speaker, the last decade has given us a richer understanding about what works and what doesn’t and the most valuable lesson has come from applying Chris Sarra’s advice to do ‘with’, not ‘to’.
Data that ends up in a spreadsheet at the ABS here in Canberra, is meaningless. Too much is written about communities and not nearly enough is written for communities.
To give effect to doing things ‘with’ and not ‘to,’ data must be local and it must be made available to communities; to local decision-makers who need it to know what is happening on the ground, to track changes and monitor progress.
Now, this is a big shift.
The first step was bringing Indigenous funding into Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet under the Indigenous Advancement Strategy, so we could understand where the money was being spent. Then last year, I announced more than $50 million in funding to strengthen Indigenous research and evaluation so that we know both where money is being spent and what the results are.
As the Royal Commission into the Protection and Detention of Children in the Northern Territory highlighted, the underlying problem was not the level of overall funding, but that investment is not rigorously tracked, monitored or evaluated to ensure that it’s appropriately distributed and directed. Provided the legislation passes - and we call on those opposite to support it - our new Indigenous Productivity Commissioner will work with the Productivity Commission to apply greater rigour to assessing what works and why.
I can announce today, Mr Speaker, that we’ll trial a new Indigenous Grants Policy which will look at how the billions of dollars we spend on Indigenous-related grants might better support growing Indigenous organisations.
Before the Indigenous Advancement Strategy was announced, Indigenous organisations received 30 per cent of the Indigenous programs and activities funding. Now 50 per cent of the value of the IAS goes to Indigenous organisations. We want to lift this even further by leveraging the successes of the IPP.
Mr Speaker, as Andrea Mason puts it: “it’s about us, and anything that’s about us needs to be shaped by us.”
We’re doing more to use local expertise to design solutions to local problems and our best example of that is Empowered Communities. We are hopeful that through the Closing the Gap refresh process, this model can be expanded beyond the existing eight sites to more communities seeking to work in a place-based regional governance approach and one that meets the needs criteria set by the Empowered Communities leaders.
That will require stronger leaders. That’s why we are committed to the Atlantic Fellows for Social Equity Program, who also join us in the chamber today.
Mr Speaker, I’ve said before that our relationship must be based on mutual respect.
We must also seek common ground, guided by the values that make us all Australian.
Values of mutual respect, equality and equal treatment under the law.
Our position on the Referendum Council’s recommendation of a constitutionally-enshrined national Indigenous representative assembly, was not reached lightly. We came to our decision only after very careful consideration. The Government remains absolutely committed however to recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the Australian Constitution.
I wrote to the Leader of the Opposition on the 8th of December last year, concerning our shared commitment to recognition and the establishment of a Joint Select Committee to work on it further, bringing together in its consideration the work of the Referendum Council from last year, a Joint Select Committee on Recognition in 2015 and of course the Expert Panel of 2012.  I was pleased to receive the Leader of the Opposition’s response last Friday. I expect we can now progress this important matter and establish the new Joint Select Committee.
Mr Speaker, last year I was humbled to participate in a Gumatj men’s ceremony in Arnhem Land. Painted in ochre, these men carried traditions and knowledge that are tens of thousand of years old. Yet later that afternoon, Nigel Scullion opened the Gumatj Mining Training Centre that has enabled local Yolngu people to gain skills to work in their own mine. Rather than walking in both worlds, these men and women had made their worlds into one seamless continuum. Participating in ceremony and the economy, is self-determination in action. Just like the 16 Indigenous postgraduates currently studying at the world’s leading universities - five at Cambridge, three at Harvard and eight at Oxford - thanks largely to the Aurora Foundation. So now three per cent of our Australian postgrads at those universities are Indigenous, pro rata to the Indigenous percentage of the Australian population.
These great role models, and so many others like them, remind us and reassure us that as we embrace the diverse, resilient and powerful cultures of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, we will build a stronger Australia for everyone.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Thank you very much Richard.
Yoonggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngoonawal dhowrrra. 
Wanggarra lin jin yin marunn bulaan boogarabung.
So as you know, I’m acknowledging we are on Ngunawal country, honouring elders past and present here on Ngunawal land. Again, thank you Richie for your welcome to country.
As you know, I’ll be tabling the third - my third, Closing the Gap report today.
And I’m even more convinced that we cannot close the gap if we do not have equal participation in the economy.
One for the most effective ways to tackle disadvantage is ensuring that everyone is included in the economy and shares in it’s benefits.
I’m determined to build a stronger economy so that everyone who can find work, who can work, is able to find employment.
And that relies of course on an internationally competitive tax system, that’s designed to enable all businesses, including those owned and operated by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders, to invest and grow.
We’ve seen huge growth in the Indigenous business sector. Since the 2011 Census, the number of Indigenous-owned businesses has grown by 30 per cent. Compared to just a one per cent increase for non-indigenous businesses at the same time.
In 2012/13, Indigenous businesses secured just $6 million in contracts for a government procurement.
Since we set targets for our Indigenous procurement policy, in 2015 – and we’re here with its author Minister Nigel Scullion – I’m pleased to announce that Indigenous businesses have now won over $1 billion in government contracts.
[Applause]
That’s great, that’s progress, but we can celebrate today the new $213 million Bayinguwa Project, which is the Aboriginal name for Garden Island in Sydney, to design and refurbishment of the Garden Island Naval Base. That’s just been awarded to a joint venture between Indigenous business PSG Holdings and Lend Lease.
Now, I know that corporate Australia - particularly the BCA who is here today – has been engaged in Indigenous procurement for quite some time. I want to thank all the corporates and all the Indigenous businesses for the high expectations, relationships you enter into when you enter into, when you engage in these commercial arrangements.
It shows us, that when he have high expectations of each other, and hold each other accountable, we can achieve together.
Now, can I thank Laura Berry who is standing right in front me here and her team at Supply Nation who are ensuring we have absolute integrity in these procurement arrangements. And who facilitated business to business relationships that enable us to be a stronger and more diverse economy.
Great work Laura, let’s give her a round of applause.
[Applause]
Now, as part of our commitment to do things with, not to - we engaged some 200 indigenous businessman and women, many of you are here today, to develop the Indigenous Business Sector Strategy – which we are launching today to help meet the extraordinary growth in the sector.
Indigenous business hubs will be created across the country starting with Western Sydney. To take advantage of our cities deals. And our government’s record investment in infrastructure, including of course, the Western Sydney airport. A gigantic piece of infrastructure, $5 billion plus, there is going to be a big indigenous participation in that project.
Now these hubs are going to be one-stop-shops for indigenous businesses to access the myriad of support services that are out there all in one place.
So can I thank Nigel Scullion, the Minister for Indigenous Affairs once again, who is working with the New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council, there he is, good on you, give you a round of applause.
[Applause]
Now the largest representative body, Indigenous representative body in the country, on ensuring that the Western Sydney hub is designed by and tailored for indigenous Australians.
And we’ll also partner with the Business Council of Australia and Supply Nation to encourage more BCA members to award contracts to Indigenous owned and run companies.
We’ve formed an Indigenous Reference Group to ensure indigenous people in the Northern Australia are full economic participants in the Northern Australia policy.
Now indigenous Australians either directly own or have legal rights to most of the North – 66 per cent of Queensland, 80 per cent of the Northern Territory and 94 per cent of Western Australia is communal freehold Aboriginal land for claim or determined native entitlement.
By 2040, Indigenous Australians will constitute half of the permanent population of Northern Australia. And my commitment is to ensure, that they have, you have a central role in the evolving success story of the nation and our Northern Australia policy and delivery.
Now, I’ve reflected before that the closing the gap challenge is often described as a problem to be solved, but more than anything it’s an opportunity.
If our greatest assets are our people – and they are, if our richest capital is our human capital, and it is, then the opportunity to empower the imagination, the enterprise, the wisdom and the full potential of our first Australians, is an exciting one.
So now thank you all for being here, thank you Nigel.
Thank you all, for your commitment in ensuring we close the gap, that we continue the great progress that we’ve seen in indigenous enterprise and business, business formation.
It has worked very well, the Indigenous Procurement Policy is going to do even better. We want to see it replicated and copied around the country. Remember, plagiarism is the sincerest form of flattery.
The point we make to other governments, we are seeing great progress – we’re working closely with New South Wales and Western Sydney. This is a big opportunity. This is a story of success, of Indigenous success, of Indigenous dynamism.
It’s great to be with so many Indigenous Australian entrepreneurs and business leaders here today.
Thank you.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Thank you Andrew, we’re all still working through the machine analogy and the cogs. I think there are quite a few of us that are more like springs, you know; springing into action, rather than just whirring.
So thank you very much and thank you for your acknowledgement to country. So I will just add in the Ngunawal language;
Yoonggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngoonawal dhowrrra. 
Wanggarra lin jin yin marunn bulaan boogarabung.
So we are here on Ngunawal country and we honour elders past and present.
It’s great to be here with ambassador Chloe Shorten and Bill and Kelly O’Dwyer, the Minister for Women and of course Mary Barry, the CEO. And Natasha. Now I have to say Natasha, I am always happy when I see you and one of the reasons you make me so happy is that you remind me of our daughter Daisy when she was very little. Well, I’m not saying you remind me of Daisy so much, you remind me of when Daisy was little and you were in the Senate. Daisy used to refer to you as Natasha Spot-Destroyer.
[Laughter]
Of course we didn’t correct her, naturally because it was such a terrific name. But I know she has been such an admirer of yours and is just like her mother Lucy - who is an Our Watch ambassador too and sends her apologies - a really dedicated feminist and I think a very natural feminist.
I’ll tell you a practical story – you talked about sport - about our grandson Jack, who is four and a half and full of beans. He said something to Daisy about, you know, boys being better than girls at sport, or something like that. Daisy teaches at a girls school, she is a high-school teacher and a lot of her girls play in the local Australian Rules competition.
So she didn’t say anything to Jack, she just took him to watch the game and he became entranced. He sort of basically ended up becoming the person who carried on the oranges and water and so it was quite some time before we took him to a Swans game and he actually realised that boys played Australian Rules football.
[Laughter]
So it was a very, very practical, canny approach and it’s a point that Lucy makes. She is the first person I heard make it and is so right; we have an obligation as parents and grandparents to make sure our sons and grandsons grow up to respect the women in their lives right from the very start, whether it’s their sisters, their mothers, their aunties, their grandmothers and so forth. It is critically important.
That is something where we can make change one step at a time. You quoted Lucy already Natasha and I quote her all the time too on it, she said: “disrespecting women does not always result in violence against women but that’s where it all begins.”
That is absolutely true and that’s why the ‘Stop it at the Start’ campaign that Kelly’s predecessor Michaelia Cash launched, was such a great success.
I don’t know how many of you saw it, but it’s one of the best government advertising campaigns I have ever seen, because it really cut through.
It reminded us of all of those unconscious stereotypes that you see that disrespect women basically in one way or another or underestimate women. It was so good and you know 67% of ‘influencers’ - that means parents, teachers, coaches can remember the campaign and actually changed their behaviour as a result.
So we are working on the next phase which will help move the conversation forward and show that change is really possible. So you kindly said, Andrew, reminded us that my first announcement as Prime Minister was to announce the $100 million Women’s Safety Package.
We’ve improved the training of frontline workers, enhanced service delivery and made sure we’ve got the best education and resources to change attitudes on domestic violence. Again a term I really dislike, because I think it underestimates the gravity of what we’re talking about in that dreadful description: “Oh it’s a domestic.” I mean, it is violence. I guess we’re stuck with the term now but this violence against women and children, is what we are focused on. It is a crime full stop.
But obviously we are rolling out a number of specialised domestic violence units, they bring together legal, financial, housing, counselling, employment services. There’s got to be a holistic approach. We’ve provided more than 9,000 individuals services to around 4,000 clients.
In the law reform area, since last November, domestic violence orders will be automatically recognised and enforceable nationwide under our National Domestic Violence Orders Scheme. This year we also intend to pass the Family Violence and Other Measures Bill to improve the interaction between the family law system and state and territory systems so that victims of domestic violence don’t have to navigate through multiple court systems.
We’ll also criminalise the breach of personal protection orders issued under the Family Law Act, reinforcing the point I made earlier that domestic violence is a criminal offence and not a private matter that occurs behind closed doors.
So there’s a lot that we’re doing to combat the scourge of domestic and family violence but underpinning all of it – and it’s so important – is that cultural change. That’s where Our Watch is so critically important. There are so many people working to change these attitudes and I just want to thank you Natasha and Mary and all of your team, your ambassadors like Chloe and others here tonight for your work in supporting this big cultural shift.
You know, there are a number of things that have been the subject of a taboo for a long time. You touched on the #metoo movement Andrew, being a good example of that. Perhaps not #metoo, perhaps not a taboo, but things where people look the other way.
That’s changed, this is changing. We are really changing Australia for the better and in doing so we are respecting the women and children that we love, the women and children that represent more than half of Australia, that we should protect.
That change, that respect, that will make this a safer and a better country.
So I’m delighted to be here and again, Chloe, your fellow ambassador Lucy sends her apologies for not being here, but her very best wishes to everyone in this great exercise.
Thank you.
[Applause]
[ENDS] 


PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much Joe. And I want to thank you and your team at the embassy working together with the Business Council of Australia putting together this great delegation.
This is the most substantial delegation of Australian business leaders, joined of course by Premiers and Chief Ministers. The only absentees are those that are fighting elections and of course as we all know that is always the highest priority. So, they are not here but everyone else is here and it is a demonstration of the depth and breadth of the Australian-U.S. relationship in in economic terms and of course in the terms that we normally spend most of our time in this city talking about which is national security, defence, strategy and so forth.
But this economic partnership is one that sometimes gets overshadowed or overlooked by the all of the big national security issues that we focus on.
We know that there are nearly 200,000 Americans working for Australian companies here and a huge - about one in 12 jobs in Australia - private sector jobs in Australia are working for U.S. owned companies. The United States is the largest foreign investor in Australia and the United States is the biggest destination for Australian foreign investment.
The reality is that we have an economic partnership that is unsurpassed but of course it all depends on people bringing people together and that is why it's so important that you're all here today.
It's also very important that our Premiers and Chief Ministers are here today as well and meeting with, the Governors, the National Governors Association also. As we all know, just like there is more to America than Washington and New York, there's more to Australia than Canberra or even Canberra and Sydney where Gladys and I both live. But both countries are big countries and it's very important to engage across the breadth and length of our nations.
I want to say how inspired we have been and encouraged by the tax reforms here. You know, it used to not be contentious actually even in the contentious environment of Australian politics that if you reduce business taxes and increase the return on investment you get more investment. It's kind of obvious, and if you get more investment you get more jobs.
We're starting to see the benefit of that. What we've done already in Australia. I think as you've heard me say many times 403,000 jobs were created last year. That is the biggest number ever and the longest run of monthly jobs growth since people started counting them, well back as far back as the 70s. There is no period as strong as what we're seeing at the moment and it is being driven by business and a 90 per cent of people work in the private sector and it is critically important that everything we do as governments and as leaders, just as President Trump in his administration are doing here, is designed to encourage investment which of course has the consequence of growing businesses and growing jobs and employment.
We've obviously one of the issues that been a matter of concern in both countries has been, while we have seen strong jobs growth we have seen lower than desirable, if you like, or lower than expected growth in real wages. But, as I've observed from time to time and many others have too - the laws of supply and demand have not been suspended.
And if you continue stronger economic growth you get more demand for labor and you will start to see growth in real wages and we're starting to see the signs of that now beginning in Australia. And of course we've seen a very strong sign of that here in the United States in response to the tax reforms.
So, this is a great time to talk, to work out new opportunities. We want to make this a year, the centenary of our partnership our security partnership if you like, 100 years of mateship. Great campaign the Joe and the embassy has been undertaking here, 100 years since John Monash led Australian and American troops into battle at the Battle of Hamel and we've been fighting together side by side ever since.
But you know the economic partnership which is enabled by security and then in turn enables us to afford our security.
You can't have one without the other security and prosperity go hand in hand. And what we need now is to ensure that we push the envelope and do everything we can to create more opportunities on this side of the Pacific and in Australia, to generate that investment and jobs and growth.
There are so many of you are doing such great work with the US Navy is going to name a new littoral combat vessel, the USS Canberra. That is a really signal honour but do you know that ship is built in Alabama by an Australian company by an Australian company with thousands of Americans work in the shipbuilding industry here in the United States.
But this ship is built by an Australian firm in Mobile, Alabama and of course you know Anthony Pratt whose leadership and dedication to both investment in Australia and America is so well noted and applauded it's making big capital commitments both in Australia and in the United States creating more jobs in both markets so it's not it's not a zero sum game.
What we can do is be partners in commerce as we have been partners in security and we're looking forward to another hundred years of mateship. Thank you all very much and look forward to a good discussion.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much Joe. And I want to thank you and your team at the embassy working together with the Business Council of Australia putting together this great delegation.
This is the most substantial delegation of Australian business leaders, joined of course by Premiers and Chief Ministers. The only absentees are those that are fighting elections and of course as we all know that is always the highest priority. So, they are not here but everyone else is here and it is a demonstration of the depth and breadth of the Australian-U.S. relationship in in economic terms and of course in the terms that we normally spend most of our time in this city talking about which is national security, defence, strategy and so forth.
But this economic partnership is one that sometimes gets overshadowed or overlooked by the all of the big national security issues that we focus on.
We know that there are nearly 200,000 Americans working for Australian companies here and a huge - about one in 12 jobs in Australia - private sector jobs in Australia are working for U.S. owned companies. The United States is the largest foreign investor in Australia and the United States is the biggest destination for Australian foreign investment.
The reality is that we have an economic partnership that is unsurpassed but of course it all depends on people bringing people together and that is why it's so important that you're all here today.
It's also very important that our Premiers and Chief Ministers are here today as well and meeting with, the Governors, the National Governors Association also. As we all know, just like there is more to America than Washington and New York, there's more to Australia than Canberra or even Canberra and Sydney where Gladys and I both live. But both countries are big countries and it's very important to engage across the breadth and length of our nations.
I want to say how inspired we have been and encouraged by the tax reforms here. You know, it used to not be contentious actually even in the contentious environment of Australian politics that if you reduce business taxes and increase the return on investment you get more investment. It's kind of obvious, and if you get more investment you get more jobs.
We're starting to see the benefit of that. What we've done already in Australia. I think as you've heard me say many times 403,000 jobs were created last year. That is the biggest number ever and the longest run of monthly jobs growth since people started counting them, well back as far back as the 70s. There is no period as strong as what we're seeing at the moment and it is being driven by business and a 90 per cent of people work in the private sector and it is critically important that everything we do as governments and as leaders, just as President Trump in his administration are doing here, is designed to encourage investment which of course has the consequence of growing businesses and growing jobs and employment.
We've obviously one of the issues that been a matter of concern in both countries has been, while we have seen strong jobs growth we have seen lower than desirable, if you like, or lower than expected growth in real wages. But, as I've observed from time to time and many others have too - the laws of supply and demand have not been suspended.
And if you continue stronger economic growth you get more demand for labor and you will start to see growth in real wages and we're starting to see the signs of that now beginning in Australia. And of course we've seen a very strong sign of that here in the United States in response to the tax reforms.
So, this is a great time to talk, to work out new opportunities. We want to make this a year, the centenary of our partnership our security partnership if you like, 100 years of mateship. Great campaign the Joe and the embassy has been undertaking here, 100 years since John Monash led Australian and American troops into battle at the Battle of Hamel and we've been fighting together side by side ever since.
But you know the economic partnership which is enabled by security and then in turn enables us to afford our security.
You can't have one without the other security and prosperity go hand in hand. And what we need now is to ensure that we push the envelope and do everything we can to create more opportunities on this side of the Pacific and in Australia, to generate that investment and jobs and growth.
There are so many of you are doing such great work with the US Navy is going to name a new littoral combat vessel, the USS Canberra. That is a really signal honour but do you know that ship is built in Alabama by an Australian company by an Australian company with thousands of Americans work in the shipbuilding industry here in the United States.
But this ship is built by an Australian firm in Mobile, Alabama and of course you know Anthony Pratt whose leadership and dedication to both investment in Australia and America is so well noted and applauded it's making big capital commitments both in Australia and in the United States creating more jobs in both markets so it's not it's not a zero sum game.
What we can do is be partners in commerce as we have been partners in security and we're looking forward to another hundred years of mateship. Thank you all very much and look forward to a good discussion.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER:
As I said to Joe on the way up ‘thanks mate’. It's great to be here.
What an incredible celebration. One hundred years of mateship. This is a partnership, an alliance that is built on shared values. Values which are all too rare in the world today. But values which Australians and Americans understand more keenly than most. Freedom, democracy, the rule of law, the opportunity to have a go. The determination, the enterprise to have a go and then if it doesn't work out, dust yourself off and have another go.
That is the enterprise that drives the spirit of our two great nations and it's why, together with the Governors of the American states and the Premiers and Chief Ministers of Australian states and territories. I have to say governors, there are two premiers that are not here, and it is because in the great race of life you always back self-interest because you know it's trying, and they are running in elections.
So there's nothing more important than surviving as politicians know. But the commitment is there. It runs so deep.
I want to talk a little bit about the subjects I discussed with the President in a moment. But you know we are both great federations and there are often frustrations in federations. Sometimes there are issues about whether the federal government should be doing more or less where the state should be doing more or less.
We have annual, well actually we have several of them every year as the Premiers here, Daniel Andrews is there I can see, the Premier of Victoria, meetings between the Premiers and the Chief Ministers and the Prime Minister and they're called COAG meetings or Council of Australian Government meetings.
And you know, Governor Sandoval, we have so much fun at these meetings, they are such a blast! We thought we should go on the road together! So that's why we're here.
That's why we're here. We wanted you, we wanted you to share the love. We wanted you to have all of the fun of those COAG meetings, all of the reinforcing commitment to solidarity that you see in a federation.
But again I have to quote one of my own cabinet colleagues who has had experience in both state and federal government and he says, he said to me when someone was complaining about the Constitution or the Federation or vertical fiscal imbalance or various other issues that we grapple with, he said very wisely, "Complaining about Australia's Federation is like complaining about Switzerland's mountains," And I guess the same is true here.
But you know we modelled our constitution on yours. It is a combination of the British parliamentary tradition and the American federal tradition and, although compared to the United States, we are a relatively young democracy. We are in fact and this is why those values we share are so precious, we are in fact one of the world's oldest with our Federation having begun as the Commonwealth of Australia 1901.
So I want to thank you Governor Sandoval and Governor Bullock for being here today. I want to thank Joe and the embassy, I want to thank the Business Council of Australia for assembling this extraordinary gathering.
Thank you so much for inviting us to join your National Governors Association for your winter session reception. Steven Ciobo, our Trade Minister, has been welcomed, acknowledged by Joe and I just want to say that Steven and I have been labouring in a cause that was I would say less than popular. I wouldn't say popular but seen as a rather bleak endeavour a year ago and that was to keep the Transpacific Partnership alive.
But next month the TPP-11 will be signed in Chile. And that is a great outcome for Australia and for those countries. And you know it's a great outcome for the United States because at some point in the future if the US decides, it is going to be there it'll be functioning and it will be something that the US can return to if it so wishes.
And that is a very, very, if you like it's a very important option. And had it not been for the leadership that we were able to share with Shinzo Abe, the Prime Minister of Japan whose dedication to this was unrivalled that option would not exist. Very important.
We are a trading nation. We are committed to free trade. We are not protectionist. We believe that more trade, more exports means more investment and more jobs. That is our absolute commitment and we know it because we're proving it.
Do you know last year, in Australia, we saw the creation of 403,000 jobs. That would be like five million being created in the United States. That is a lot of job – 60 per cent of them were taken up by women. The female participation rate is at the highest in our history. We have had 16 months of continuous monthly job growth.
Again, that is unprecedented and that is in no small measure driven by being an open exporting economy, open to the world. Recognising and believing in our people and our businesses, that we can play best when we run onto the biggest and widest fields because that is where there are the greatest opportunities.
That is our commitment. Competition, openness, trade. And I know that here assembled leaders of business from the United States from Australia the Governors of the American states, the Premiers and Chief Ministers from Australia, all committed to expanding on this extraordinary economic partnership that we have.
A hundred years of mateship, a hundred years of absolutely dependable, reliable, I've-got-your-back-and-you've-got-mine solidarity, depend based on all of that commitment. Is a stronger and stronger economic partnership. Because the US and Australia are each - the United States is our most significant and substantial economic relationship.
We have, and the President of course is very pleased about this, you have a trade surplus with us, but we're not complaining. But I want to tell you though, the United States is the largest single source of Australian foreign investment. There are hundreds of thousands of jobs in the United States, working for Australian companies and, of course, 1/12th of workers in Australia in the private sector work for businesses that have American ownership.
So, it is an extraordinary partnership. It's built on families, it's built on relationships, on commitments over all of that time and the foundations we are reinforcing tonight and our meetings with the President today, and his Ministers and his defence chiefs and intelligence chiefs that's building the foundation for an even stronger relationship in the years to come.
I said earlier that the values we share are precious and we have to be very careful not to take them for granted. They're under threat everywhere in the world. People are challenging democracy in many different ways. We have the values that are right. They've been proved by time. Old constitutions, deeply ingrained values. That is what Australians and Americans have fought for over so many years.
Let me conclude with an image for you all that Kerry Stokes, who is here with his wife Christine, will understand very well as do all the Australians, Kerry is the chairman of our Australian War Memorial.
Now Canberra, as you know, is our national capital. And the reason it is there is because it's neither Sydney nor Melbourne. Does this sound familiar? Neither New York nor Philadelphia. There's not a lot new under the sun in the foundation of federations.
Our national capital was founded there and great American architect Walter Burley Griffin designed it and he designed a beautiful lake in the middle of the city. And on one side of the lake is our Australian War Memorial which was consecrated in the darkest days of the Second World War. Imagine that. Imagine a generation that had decided to build a memorial to the Australian dead who had fought and died in the war to end all wars, and then consecrating that memorial in the midst of another war, as dreadful as the one they were remembering. Hard times.
That memorial sits there on one side of the lake. And on the other side of the lake, on Capital Hill, sits our parliament. And when you fling open the doors of the parliament you fling open the door of the Cabinet room and the doors the Great Hall. You look from the cabinet table - where the decisions of government are taken - you look straight through the Parliament and you see the Australian War Memorial. And you are reminded there as a Prime Minister, as Ministers as legislators that every freedom we enjoy was paid for by the heroism, the courage, the sacrifice of the men and women that fought to keep us free.
And those were the same men and women we honoured, Lucy and I, honoured yesterday at the National Arlington Cemetery. Again, we met there with some veterans in their 90s, one veteran Mr. Prince from the Vietnam War, but the others were Lucy's Dad's generation who had fought in the Second World War, the greatest generation and they had fought to keep us free. They'd fought as Australians did, to keep each of our nations free, just as our young men and women are serving in the Middle East, in Afghanistan to keep us free today.
So this is a 100 years of mateship and the foundations that we are building today and tonight deepening our commitment, strategic, security, economic will ensure that we have in 200 years, we will be celebrating an even greater second hundred years of mateship and achievement and commitment to those values to which our nations and our peoples are so committed.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much NGA Vice chairman Steve Bullock.
Governors of the United States of America my Trade Ministers Steve Ciobo, our Australian premiers and chief ministers, our Ambassador Joe Hockey. Chief executive of the NGA, Scott Patterson. Friends, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great honour for me to be here at the heart of the American Federation. I want to thank you for your hospitality as we thank President Trump and First Lady Melania Trump and for the very warm welcome and hospitality accorded Lucy and me during our visit.
Now both our countries are federations and indeed our federation and our Constitution were in no small measure inspired by yours. It's why some political scientists describe our system of government - which is a parliamentary system as you know - as being "Washminster" a combination of Washington and Westminster.
It works very well but as I said to some of you last night I don't know whether this is true here but complaining about the Australian Federation is like complaining about Switzerland's Mountains. So work with it.
And we're joined by our counterparts, your counterparts the Premiers and Chief Ministers of our states and territories. Now our two nations are Federations of great states and each is so much greater than the sum of the parts.
As it says on the Great Seal the United States, on the scroll carried in the beak of the American Eagle. E pluribus unum - out of many, one. And looking around the room I am struck by the sheer diversity of ties that bind our two countries.
Governor Herbert of Utah where an Australian mining company Rio Tinto's Kennecott Bingham Canyon Mine has generated more exports income and employment than any other private sector operation. And Chairman Sandoval, in your state, Australian graduates are setting up an unmanned aerial vehicle delivery service through a company called Flirtey working with the University of Nevada.
They've made the first regulator approved deliveries of emergency medical supplies and retail goods for 7-Eleven and I'm told they're working with NASA to sort out the details of air traffic control.
Now as you said, Governor, our relationship as proud and independent federations really came of age 100 years ago on the battlefields of the Western Front in World War I. You can read in the letters and diaries of our battle hardened soldiers, our diggers, how they marvelled at the arrival of the Sammies as they called them with their enthusiastic faces and extraordinary looking equipment. And your Sammies did not take long to win respect and admiration from the Australians. They fought their first true offensive together with Australian troops at the Battle of Le Hamel.
At the time this was arguably the most sophisticated joint operation in history involving air drops, artillery and a line of British tanks. It was the first time American soldiers had served under foreign command in an offensive operation and under the leadership of our greatest General John Monash. Monash Planned for them to take the village of Hamel in 90 minutes. They did it in 93 minutes and he chose the Fourth of July to do it.
America's decisive intervention in the Great War marked its arrival as a global superpower with both moral and realist global interests.
President Woodrow Wilson proclaimed this was the war to make the world safe for democracy. A doctrine of principled realism. The Battle of Hamel was a turning point that put the German army on the defensive right up until Armistice Day and for our two nations it was the beginning of a hundred years of mateship. A hundred years in which we fought alongside you in every significant conflict forging unbreakable trust through the act of defending each other's liberty and guarding each other's backs.
We think of the personal bonds that were formed as a million American troops crossed our shores during World War Two. Layers upon layers of institutional ties that have been forged and strengthened since we sealed our alliance with the ANZUS treaty of 1951.
In more recent times, in the skies over Syria our combat pilots have fought together under the leadership of American commanders with the shared objective of defeating Islamist terrorism.
We've been side by side in Afghanistan for 16 years, our longest military commitment, and in Marawi, in the southern Philippines, our forces provided game changing support to the armed forces of the Philippines to subdue an ISIL backed insurgency in that city.
And every day our intelligence agencies are demonstrating the deepest possible commitment to each other by sharing sensitive information saving American and Australian lives. Just last year in Sydney, our intelligence agencies, our respective intelligence agencies and police working with our friends in Israel, enabled us to disrupt an ISIL plot to bring down a passenger aircraft. An A380, hundreds and hundreds of people would have died.
I can tell you that our intelligence cooperation with the United States and other partners save lives right around the world where ISIL has had similarly dark intentions.
That's what the alliance means today.
It is a means for maximizing our manoeuvrability and independence not constraining it. Networks of personal trust strengthened and expanded over generations and all underpinned by the deepest possible alignment of shared political values and this is the genius that really unites our two nations.
We define our national identities, Australia and the United States, we define our national identities, not by race or religion or ethnicity but rather by commitment to shared political values of freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law, mutual respect.
Patriotism is not tribalism or nationalistic chauvinism, it's not about demonstrations and power and prestige and subjugation.
As George Orwell so brilliantly observed in 1945 true patriotism is a shared commitment to a way of life that is guaranteed by the institutions of democracy and the rule of law - institutions which are accessible to all.
But as Governors Bullock and Sandoval and I were discussing earlier, rarer around the world than you might think.
Now since the Second World War the United States has spread these liberal norms and principles to build an international system which has tempered the exercise of raw power and guided global cooperation.
This remarkable system which obliges nations big and small to play by those rules and to respect each other's sovereignty has enabled our collective security and prosperity for the entire post-war period. The extension of the system after the Cold War ended has enabled the greatest burst of economic growth, innovation and human advancement the world has ever seen. Australia has supported and reinforced and occasionally led this process at every step of the way.
But we know we cannot take any of it for granted.
Our path the Indo-Pacific region has enjoyed so much peace and prosperity for so long that there are some who forget that none of it would have been possible without the sheet anchor of American commitment and strategic power.
And that commitment is as important now as it has ever been. American commitment has come at a cost, paid in blood and treasure, and we understand that the American people expect others to pull their weight, as we do and always have.
My government is investing in the largest revitalization of our armed forces, in the air, on the land and on the sea, in the cybersphere in peacetime history.
Our defence spending is on track to reach two per cent of GDP by 2020. And in these uncertain times we should all be thinking about what more we might contribute. And we acknowledge the sense of frustration felt by many Americans that not all countries are contributing to efforts to reinforce and strengthen the open trading system that the United States has helped create for our collective benefit.
We have no objections to WTO consistent enforcement actions against behaviour that flouts and thereby undermines agreed international trade rules.
We want to work with you to improve the WTO and make it a more effective forum for driving trade reforms and ensuring full compliance with the rules. And we will maintain a dialogue on how our respective systems protect technologies and facilities integral to national security while ensuring our markets remain open and transparent.
Now the rules, the norms, the institutions that enable freedom security and opportunity have been painfully difficult to build. But easy to break.
At the Shangri-La dialogue in Singapore last June, I warned that we cannot allow the framework of international law to be undermined. In November, I outlined an ambitious trade policy agenda and committed our nation, unreservedly, to the principles of open markets, economic freedom and the rules-based trading system.
We entirely understand and respect the President's decision to honour his election pledge to withdraw from the Trans-Pacific Partnership. But Prime Minister Abe of Japan and I were determined to keep that project alive and the TPP-11 will be signed next month in Chile.
We do not expect the United States to return to the TPP any time soon. But by keeping this important trade pact on foot we have created a live option which would otherwise not exist for a negotiated US return in the  - a possibility which the President himself has referred to.
Late last year, my government released a foreign policy white paper which commits us to a far more active role in shaping the future of our region. We'll work with all our partners and friends to promote an open, inclusive and prosperous Indo-Pacific in which the rights of all states are respected.
And on December 7, I introduced into our parliament far reaching reforms to protect the integrity of our political processes from foreign interference.
Now whether it is terrorism, transnational crime or foreign interference the primary responsibility of government, all our governments, is to secure the safety of our people and our way of life. Security and Freedom are frequently presented as binary opposites as if there exists a universe which you could have one without the other.
These two principles are not mutually exclusive. They can be, in fact they must be, mutually reinforcing. The question is not what freedoms to forego for security, it's what security is required to enable our freedom.
Maintaining our security ensures we do not have to close our borders to people, capital and ideas but rather the very opposite. Maintaining our security allows us to sustain the enormous benefits that flow from our openness to the world.
Now our shared commitment to open markets, transparency and the rule of law has generated an enormous reservoir of trust between our businesses, consumers and regulators and trust enables commerce to flourish. We like your movies, services and capital equipment so much that our bilateral trade accounts are tilted deeply in your favour. In fact we haven't turned a bilateral trade surplus with the United States since President Truman, before I was born not that anybody's counting.
American companies that count for fully one quarter of all foreign investment in Australia they're contributing to the greatest jobs surge in our history with 403,000 new jobs added last year in Australia.
And it's a similar story on the side of the Pacific. We've just watched the U.S. economy add 2.2 million jobs last year. Unemployment is as low as it's been since the year 2000. Around 180,000 American jobs are the result of Australian investment here. The BlueScope Steel Group, for example, employs around 3,000 people across the United States.
While Austal, Australia's premier shipbuilder, employs over 4,000 Americans and its investment is growing all the time. It was an honour yesterday and a symbol of our alliance when the President announced that the United States Navy would name a future Littoral Combat Ship, to built at the Austal shipyard in Mobile, Alabama, the USS Canberra.
The American and Australian economies are thus helping each other to thrive. You know I will speak for all of the Australians when I say this. We find it impossible not to be constantly inspired by the restless energy of the American people. Always reaffirming the power of optimism, resilience and a relentless curiosity to find a new way and a new idea.
We both know that innovation is the key to productivity which enables economic growth and more and better paid jobs. Innovation and science are key elements in our economic strategy. Your governor from North Dakota, of course, was until recently chairman of an outstanding global Australian technology business operating here in the United States and of course right around the world.
So you understand that we have the same commitment to enterprise but your example is always an inspiration to us.
So many of the technologies that have transformed our lives, and so quickly, from GPS to social media to the hyper platform that has enabled them all, the internet, was developed and commercialised here in the United States.
Australia has made great contributions from Wi-Fi to the technology behind Google Maps. It's a long list, but the United States remains unrivalled when it comes to commercialisation and innovation. Pundits, of course, have been warning - they are very fond of dark predictions as you know - they've been warning that the US is running out of oil for nearly 100 years and yet thanks to innovation in horizontal drilling and fracking and of deepwater exploration, U.S. oil production has nearly doubled in the past decade.
I commend the NGA's focus under Governor Sandoval on the role that state governments can play in preparing the workforce for innovation and transformation.
The signing of a memorandum of understanding between the National Governors Association and the Council for the Australian Federation which is your counterpart will deepen collaboration in this and other areas.
New rounds of company tax cuts in both countries will lead to more investment, which in turn will mean more and better paid jobs. The IMF has lifted its global growth forecasts after the Trump administration cut the US company tax rate to 21 per cent. And we cannot deny the need to be competitive increases the urgency with which we are pursuing similar tax cuts in Australia. In Australia we are presenting legislation to reduce taxes for all businesses to 25 per cent we've already achieved a reform, bringing tax down overtime to 25 per cent for businesses with turnovers up to $50 million a year.
That's not a huge business I might add at $50 million a year but those businesses employ half of the private sector workforce in Australia. But we need to go further as you have done.
Now the flow of investment and technology is not just one way, far from it as you know. Our $200 billion defence capability bill is driving a new generation of Australian defence technology enterprises to integrate into the supply chain of US Primes like Boeing, Raytheon, Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman.
We want the integration of our defence industry supply chains to match the interoperability of our armed forces. So I'm encouraged to see that Australian companies have been awarded over a billion dollars in contracts to supply components for the worldwide strike fighter program delivering 2,400 jobs.
Those figures should double within five years. Our target is to become a top 10 defence industry exporter. I know state business leaders in this room are looking to leverage the Trump administration's commitment to infrastructure and so are our business leaders. Clearly our infrastructure companies thrive in this system of transparency and impartial rules that they enjoy each other's countries. Companies like IFM in Indiana, Transurban in Virginia, Lendlease all across the United States.
I'd like to see US and Australian infrastructure companies working together in other countries too. In places like Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands where there is enormous need for high quality bridges, highways, ports, rail and telecom.
For this to work, however we need to get on with the post-war project of shaping an environment in which the most competitive and rule abiding companies can succeed. We all know that investing in smart infrastructure projects can drive a regional economy. A bridge to a port which connects to hundreds of other ports creates much more than the sum of its parts and in many cases government backing will be vital.
A good example is our recent commitment to build an undersea telecommunications cable which will ensure connectivity and bring new opportunities for our neighbours in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands.
Our vision is for a single inclusive free trade zone of the Indo-Pacific. A region integrated under a common set of rules and norms that connect us all to one another and which will drive growth and job creation. It's vital that strategic competition does not create rival economic blocs. We look forward to partnering with all countries including the United States, Japan and China on those infrastructure projects that meet the criteria of transparency, fairness, accountability and market need.
That's also how we constrain large states from imposing arbitrary barriers and engaging in economic coercion against the small. Security and prosperity, they go hand in hand, but we need to shape the rules that are necessary to make this happen. We need to level the playing field for private sector companies, update the rules of the digital world and ensure greater transparency and stronger rule of law in a world which is often short of both.
And that's why, as I said, we backed the Trans-Pacific Partnership so strongly not just because of the market access it delivers - which is very beneficial creates jobs and investment but because it creates the rules of the road we need to match the economic journey we're embarking on.
Now Governors, honoured guests, it has been all too easy for the rest of the world to take America's exceptional contribution for granted.
If your long and hotly contested debates prompted partners around the world to take greater responsibility for their security and prosperity then they've served a useful purpose.
I know it's fashionable to call the passing of American leadership and condemn democracy into a fate of inexorable decline. Let me tell you that's not what I'm hearing from our trusted partners in our part of the world.
Nor is it what the Trump administration is engraving into its most important policy statements.
Your national security strategy, and its organising doctrine of principled realism, is a manifesto for upgrading a liberal rules based system not breaking it. Your national defence strategy signals a reinvestment in American hard power and the alliance system which amplifies its reach.
President Trump's nomination of Admiral Harry Harris as Ambassador to Australia underscores this message. American leadership in the world is in our interests but it is in yours too. I stand with generations of American leaders and seen its global alliance network not as a burden but as a force multiplier that first and foremost has enabled American prosperity and security.
As President Trump himself reminded us. America first does not mean America alone.
Now so much has changed in the last century in the last hundred years of mateship. We are after all living at a time when the pace and scale of change is without precedent, and I don't doubt that this will continue in the next century but our alliance, our partnership, our mateship. Whether it is a century ago or a century hence will remain built on a foundation of shared values which are timeless but never more timely.
Values as Australian as they are American. Freedom, democracy, the rule of law and the spirit of enterprise which they enable.
Thank you very much.
Q&amp;A at the National Governor’s Association Winter Meeting
QUESTION:
We hear a lot about disruptive technologies. How do they reshape economies together both at the national and subnational level?
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you very much. I think government obviously has to lead by example. It is very critical that we do that. I think we need to ensure that everybody understands that in this age as, I've said of change which is unprecedented both in its scale and its place it's worth reflecting on that. You know, how so many of the technologies which have been so transformational are yet so recent. It's the scale and the pace of change it has no counterpart in our history.
So that means given that reality and that environment we can't change. We have to make sure that we make it our friend. In other words we have to make volatility our friend not our foe and that means that clearly. The job you start when you get out of school or college may not be it for the rest of your life may not be there in 20 years time.
So you've got to be able to keep retraining, reskilling that is a critical point. We have to ensure that growth and the advantages that we get from technology do not leave individuals or regions behind. I think that has got to be the key focus but we have to recognise the tenor of the times in which we live and even if we don't like them recognise we can't change them and say how can we work this to our advantage?
MODERATOR:
Thank you Mr Prime Minister. Governor Bullock has the second question.
QUESTION:
Thank you. Mr Prime Minister, picking up on exactly where you're ending and that's transformative technologies, create so many opportunities for our states and our nations. But there's also challenges both socially, economically and security wise. How's Australia, addressing some of the challenges be it workforce or be it some of the things that are happening everywhere on the one hand we have transformative technologies but on the other hand there are folks that feel like they been left behind.
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you. There's no substitute for strong economic growth. That's the first point. I said the pace and scale of change is without precedent but there have been obviously big technological changes in the past. You know if we go back to 100 years ago when our soldiers were fighting together in France, the very large percentage of Americans were engaged in agriculture.
I'm not sure what the percentage was but a very substantial percentage in that period. Nowadays, it's only a few per cent, as it is in Australia, that's come about because of technology.
So all of these changes occur that you need to have strong economic growth to create the new opportunities. This is where frankly trade has been very important as the Premiers here know particularly Annastacia Palaszczuk from Queensland and Mark McGowan from Western Australia.
We had a huge commodities boom, you know once in a generation I think you said, Premier from Western Australia, Mark McGowan, you said it was a once in a lifetime. Well, maybe, hopefully you'll have a long life and you'll see another one. But the point was however that that caused the great boom and then there were big transitional adjustments there. Some regions were hit very hard.
Having said that because of the opportunities for all of the free trade agreements we have created, we've seen stronger growth in our regions and that has been I think that has been one of the features that has perhaps cushioned the impact of what otherwise would have been a very hard landing.
So having many strings to your bow, having a diversified economy is particularly important.
QUESTION: 
I have the second question and with regard to President Trump he's started a national conversation with regard to infrastructure and I think I speak for all of the nation's governors when we all appreciate the fact, and the Premiers, that infrastructure is a constant challenge with regard to mobility and safety for our constituents. I know that given that's a conversation in Australia as well. How do you work with the Premiers with regard to infrastructure and what is the approach that is happening in Australia.
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well I'm sure all the premiers and Chief Minister's will agree. The Federal Government works with them on infrastructure entirely to their absolute satisfaction. Never have a complaint.
In fact, as I said last night we have meetings every couple of times a year called COAG meetings - Council of Australia Government Meetings between the Premiers and Chief Ministers and the Federal Government and we find these meetings so much fun that we decided to go on this trip together and hang out even more.
Let me answer that question in a way that I think you may find helpful. Firstly, our Premiers and Chief Ministers have an enormous experience in this area. I'm just looking directly at Gladys Berejiklian the Premier of New South Wales. There is an enormous infrastructure boom going on in NSW, the NSW Government and of course her predecessors, Liberal Premiers Mike Baird and Barry O'Farrell really set in train a big infrastructure commitment in New South Wales, which is of course where Lucy and I live as well.
Other premiers have made great achievements as well. So a lot of reservoir of experience there. Historically the Federal Government has made grants, you know just literally written out cheques for contributions to roads. So there are some roads that I was inspecting in Queensland recently in Annastacia Palaszczuk’s state where the Federal Government is contributing 80   of the cost others where it is contributing 50 per cent of the cost and so forth.
But we have to get smarter about the way we invest in infrastructure. We have had a practice which Ambassador Hockey started when he was our Commonwealth Treasurer, Federal Treasurer, of encouraging states to recycle assets and to sell state owned assets.
Dan Andrews from Victoria a reasonably sold a port at a very good price too. And recycle those assets sell them and then deploy the money into new infrastructure.
The State Government is often very well placed to take the construction risk and then having got an asset built and underway, to then be able to sell it to pension funds and superannuation funds that are looking for that kind of reliable return.
But I think we also have to do more to capture value. Now toll roads are fairly straight forward. From a financing point of view. We have a lot to learn in Australia and in many respects the experience in America is very instructive, on how to capture value out of rail. We have to start looking at urban rail generally as a property deal.
And develop the means to capture some of the value or the appreciation of value to real estate that's occasioned by the construction of the rail. Some of your cities have been very innovative in doing that and we've been looking very carefully at that.
In other words we need a lot more infrastructure. We need to be smarter about how we go about it. We need to look at every angle and one of the reasons, that's one of the reasons I've set up a innovative project financing unit in our own federal government getting to make sure that we do everything we can to get the maximum dollar invested. Stretching the taxpayer dollars as far as we can for the benefit of infrastructure right around the country.
QUESTION: 
Our individual states doubtless each state leader and Governor has a keen or intimate of that state's relationship with foreign countries. For example I know between 2016 and 2017 Australians visiting Montana increased 41 per cent. I'm hoping in 2018 that will double so I'd like to invite you there. But also we know, what our trade relationships are like how much state dollars in Montana both exports we have to Australia and imports. Recognising that trade policy is set at a national level but it's the local communities or the subnationals that really see the on the ground impacts trade policy, how in your perspective can we better help local communities understand impacts trade policy and what this does for us.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you Governor. I think the challenge for us as leaders, as political leaders in particular, is to ensure the lure, the easy lure of protectionism doesn't overtake us. The way we make the case in Australia we just say, "Look at the evidence." You know 403,000 jobs last year. Largest growth in our history. Fact. 16 months of continuous monthly jobs growth, the longest for at least 40 years plus. I don't think we found a period where there's been a long continuous jobs growth. All of that is supported by having bigger markets, greater opportunities.
Now we don't presume to give - we're happy to share our experience, we certainly don't presume to give advice. We're flat out - all of the leaders here. Michael Gunner and Andrew Barr and the Premier's I've mentioned. We're all flat out are managing our own states and territories and responsibilities but you know, we're happy to offer you this. I think you have to just make the case that trade, more trade means more jobs, more investment, more exports.
I mean you look at the Northern Territory's experience, I mentioned Chief Minister Gunner a moment ago, you know the massive investment there and U.S. investment and Japanese investment in the oil and gas business. Particularly in the LNG business has created thousands of jobs and high quality jobs. It's exporting yes, it's trade but you can see the opportunities there.
If you go back to Queensland where I was recently giving a speech in Toowoomba which is a regional city to the west of Brisbane up on the Great Dividing Range - beautiful city - and it is at the heart of the Darling Downs which is a big agricultural area.
There is a new airport recently built there by the private sector, by the Wagner family, and that is now exporting the produce of the Darling Downs to put it on the dining tables of Asia. Some of the best produce in the world. Why we able to do that? Because of those free trade agreements. The TPP will enable us to do more of it.
That's what we've got to do.
So we are a medium sized, open economy. Trade is good. It means more jobs more investment for us and that's how we promote it. But other than offering our example we don't presume to give you political advice.
MODERATOR: 
Thank you so much Mr Prime Minister for being with us today. Before you head back on this long journey, back to Australia we're excited to have you preside over the signing of a memorandum of understanding between the subnational leaders of our two great countries.
So we're going to go offstage as we reset. For that and we'll be back with you in a moment. Please again give a big hand to the Prime Minister.


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you very much Adrian and I want to thank Anne for her very warm welcome to country here today. We are on the land of the Gadigal people of the Eora Nation and we pay our respects to them, to their elders, past and present.
Let me also commend the great work Warren Mundine and Tracey Tu Papa who lead the ANZLF’s Indigenous Working Group that is promoting Australia and New Zealand indigenous businesses and communities.
Prime Minister Ardern and I discussed that earlier today at our meeting, it’s a great initiative and we’re all absolutely supportive of it.
So good afternoon and thank you for inviting me and Lucy here and so many of our colleagues and Prime Minister Ardern and so many of her colleagues here to the Australia New Zealand Leadership Forum.
And I acknowledge the forum’s co-chairs, Ann Sherry and Adrian Littlewood and all the participants for your unwavering commitment to this forum - you’re driving our economic relationship.
Now I’ve just returned from the United States where I met the most substantial and influential delegation of Australian business leaders to ever visit there and coinciding not just with our visit to see the President at the White House but also at the National Governor’s Association. And I was reminded again how important it is for government to back business and for business to back our international partnerships.
Yes, governments smooth the way - and in our relationship with New Zealand that has always been a top priority. But ultimately it is you - your enterprise and your connections that make our economic relationship what it is.
And I’d like to particularly thank the Prime Minister of New Zealand, The Right Honourable Jacinda Ardern for being here with us today. Thank you Prime Minister.
Lucy and I were delighted to welcome you and Clarke to our home last night for dinner and it was terrific. It was great to have you both in our home, and I was very pleased to host the Annual Leaders Dialogue this morning.
Now your visit, of course, coincides with a very historic announcement, and indeed a shared interest of our two countries — ensuring that we do more to deliver low emission sources of reliable and dispatchable energy.
And as you know the Commonwealth Government has agreed to acquire the shares of Victoria and New South Wales in Snowy Hydro. So the great Snowy Mountains Scheme, Snowy Hydro, will be wholly owned by the Commonwealth of Australia and that is in preparation for Snowy Hydro 2.0.
The next stage, adding initially 50 per cent to the capacity of Snowy Hydro, with over 40kms of tunnels, building the biggest pumped hydro scheme in the world. And we will need the best tunellers and the best engineers to do that work.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we have today one of the best. We have here today, second-class tunneller - with outstanding experience on the Eucumbene Island Bed Tunnel from 1970, second-class tunneller Winston Peters back again!
He’s ready to go! Prime Minister you might have to give him a little leave. Just occasionally, perhaps he could come over on weekends and do a bit of tunnelling.
[Laughter]
New Zealand, of course is Australia’s most comprehensive relationship.
When we come together as leaders we renew bonds that are over a hundred years in the making. They go back from the very beginnings of the settlements – European settlements in Australia. And indeed as I was saying today, it was Maori entrepreneurs who were selling food and vital supplies to the struggling colony here in Australia. And with that enterprise of course continues and that’s one of the reasons why that indigenous business partnership is so important.
You know a Lowy Institute poll recently asked Australians how warmly they feel towards other countries, New Zealand topped the thermometer at 85 degrees.
This presumably wasn’t co-incidental with a Rugby match but anyway, nonetheless they hit the high point.
We’re separated by a turbulent stretch of ocean but we have the same values.
Those values are the values that the ANZACs of 100 years ago fought for and died for and over that century we fought together to defend. One hundred years ago at Beersheba and at Gallipoli — and today Iraq, where the Australians and the New Zealanders are training the soldiers and the police for Iraq who are securing their freedom.
Now these values have fostered the business connections that have lifted the living standards of both our countries.
And they have inspired us as strategic partners to defend and promote the rules based order, because it is good for our nations, and good for our region.
The rule of law is critical. It is the foundation of the prosperity that we’ve all enjoyed. Peace, security in our region and indeed around the world. We have a vital vested interest in maintaining it.
In the last 20 years, GDP per capita has grown by around 40 per cent in both Australia and New Zealand.
And the extension of this rules based order, the rules of the road, that almost all of us in the Indo-Pacific has helped generate the greatest burst of economic growth, innovation and human advancement the world has ever seen.
Global trade has tripled and more than a billion people have been lifted out of extreme poverty since 1990. GDP per capita has quadrupled in China and nearly doubled in South Korea.
But we can’t take this economic prosperity for granted.
The economic, political and strategic currents that have carried us for generations are increasingly difficult to navigate.
Economic nationalism is on the rise.
And the siren call of protectionism challenges the consensus that a global trading regime—based on openness and clear rules that apply to all—benefits all.
Now Australia is proud to stand alongside New Zealand, staunch partners against these rising tides. We remain committed to market integration, based on strong, transparent rules, fair and open competition, predictable and non-discriminatory regulation.
Free trade and economic integration have benefited our nations enormously.
Trade means jobs and it’s no surprise that our Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement is one of the most comprehensive in existence and remains the gold standard for trade liberalisation.
We’ve also strengthened the Trans-Tasman Single Economic Market agenda. Australia is New Zealand’s largest two-way trading partner and more than 75 per cent of New Zealand’s exporting businesses, derive income from exporting to Australia. In return, more Australian businesses export to New Zealand than to any other country.
And despite its smaller population New Zealand is our sixth-largest trading partner; a nation just a tenth the size of most others in our top ten.
But our relationship is about more than trading in goods and services.
We’re making it easier and more efficient for people, money and ideas to move between our two countries. We need look no further than infrastructure services company, Downer, a shining example of a company flourishing on both sides of the Tasman. Downer maintains more than 33,000 km of road in Australia and more than 25,000 in New Zealand. Downer helped rebuild telecommunications, roads and utilities in Christchurch after the 2011 earthquake, as well as roads and infrastructure after the Kaikoura earthquake in 2016.
Then there’s Woolworths, known in New Zealand as Countdown. We can’t get enough of New Zealand’s fresh produce, you are rightly proud of your reputation for producing top quality food and wine, rivalled only perhaps, by our own.
Now, Woolies and Countdown don't just have great produce in common, they are also breeding grounds for politicians on either side of the Tasman and both sides of the political fence. Countdown helped nurture a future New Zealand Prime Minister in Jacinda Ardern and Woolworths gave NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian her start.
I have to say, that one of my first jobs was only a few hundred metres from here in the days of the fruit and vegetable markets were here in Haymarket, working for a Les J Walters, a banana merchant. So clearly fruit and vegetables are the right foundation for political leaders.
[Laughter]
Now, Woolworths is Australia’s biggest customer for New Zealand food imports, importing more than 50 per cent of the $650 million worth of New Zealand wine sold in Australia last year. And it’s a two-way street; Countdown imports our grapes, watermelons and mangoes and 25 tons of prawns. Since Woolworths acquired Countdown, it has invested $2.4 billion in capital expenditure and plans to invest another $500 million in new stores and upgrading existing stores.  Woolies and Countdown are trading and investing in each other - creating jobs in both our countries.
They’re just two examples, but there are more than 18,000 great stories, one for every Australian business operating in, or exporting to New Zealand as Prime Minister Ardern observed earlier today, most of them small businesses.
The small and medium businesses that are driving the 403,000 jobs growth we saw last year, the 16th consecutive monthly jobs growth numbers that we’ve seen, the longest since we kept records of this. 403,000, the largest job growth in our history, that’s being powered by small and medium Australian businesses, overwhelmingly family-owned and benefitting from our corporation tax cuts which are benefitting those businesses.
You know, companies that turn over $50 million dollars a year or less, they’re not corporate giants. They are not, but they employ more than half of the Australian workforce. Think about it; they’re the firms that are getting the incentives from our Enterprise Tax Cuts and they’re responding with investment and jobs and so many of them are exporting across the Tasman and around the world.
Now, New Zealand and Australia have been staunch supporters of the Trans Pacific Partnership - and I want to pay credit to Prime Minister Ardern for the support she’s shown - but also, to her predecessors John Key and Bill English.
In fact in Lema about 18 months ago, after the election of President Trump it was obvious the United States was going to pull out of the TPP, there were a lot of people who said it was dead; that it was pointless to pursue it. Now John Key and I didn’t think that was right, we didn’t think there was any point letting all that work go to waste and we plugged away at it.
We secured the support of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and with the energy that he and Japan brought to it, we now have the TPP11 being signed on the 8th of March in Chile. For our part, by our Trade Minister Steven Ciobo, who is here today. This is an enormous credit to you.
[Applause]
As I said in Washington, this provides a live option to the United States. The fact is the TPP11 is designed so that other countries can dock in. The US could return at some point, I don’t think they’ll do so any time soon but the UK has expressed interest as many other nations in the region have. But if we had allowed it to die, to wither then, there would have been no TPP for other countries to dock into. That’s been a very important step and a great example of Australia-New Zealand cooperation, promoting the free trade that our economies thrive on.
Now talking about our own country, in Australia about one in five workers are employed in a trade-related activity. Over the last 30 years, because of trade liberalization, real GDP is 5.4 per cent higher than it otherwise would be, real wages are nearly 7.5 per cent higher and prices are nearly 3.5 per cent lower than they otherwise would be.
So that’s why our side of politics always supports free trade and always will. The best way to do that is by backing businesses with policies that support them. Those tax cuts that we have delivered already, are delivering more investment and more jobs. We seek to extend them to all companies, but of course, unlike Prime Minister Ardern who has a single chamber Parliament, we will have to continue negotiating with the Senate and we look forward to support there from the crossbench at least.
Now we are also committed to the conclusion of a high-quality Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, RCEP, which would draw together ASEAN, India, China, Japan and Korea.  A high quality agreement would improve governance standards and spur reform.
Later this month I will be welcoming ASEAN leaders at the first ASEAN-Australia Special Summit in Sydney.
That’s going to be an unprecedented opportunity to reinforce our strategic partnership with our neighbors in ASEAN. ASEAN has been a remarkable regional success and importantly, its used its influence over time to support and maintain the rule of law.
So we Australia – and I know, Prime Minister Ardern will endorse this - we will always have our eyes trained on the world stage.  But we will never lessen the focus on our own relationship and the need to nurture and enhance it. In an increasingly uncertain world, our ability to work together in the pursuit of common goals, will help ensure security and prosperity in the region and around the world.
Our discussions today have reinforced the determination of our countries to work even more closely together, defending and advancing our values and objectives. But after the documents are signed and the politicians and the diplomats have congratulated each other – and even become exhausted with selfies, it is the people of our two nations who make this partnership what it is.
Everyone here knows what I’m talking about; it’s you, your effort, your enterprise, your connections that make our partnership so successful. 
So thank you for the work of this forum and for all you’re doing to continue to bring two staunch allies, two great friends closer and closer in the years to come. 
Thank you very much.
[Applause]
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much Paul and I’m so thrilled to be here with you Gladys, and your ministers and your officials as we are gathered here together with the Commonwealth team; Paul himself of course, Angus Taylor, until recently Assistant Minister for Cities, Craig Kelly, the Member for Hughes. But a phenomenal team that Paul has acknowledged; Steven Kennedy, Clive Mathieson, so many others that have worked together with the eight local governments here to bring together this City Deal. We’re also joined of course by Marise Payne – the Defence Minister but also the Senator for Western Sydney as well – and I want to acknowledge the Chief Commissioner of the Greater Sydney Commission of course, who has already been acknowledged, Lucy, but the Deputy Chief Commissioner Geoff Roberts who together with chief executive Sarah Hill, actually led the Greater Sydney Commission’s engagement on the City Deal, they’ve done an outstanding job. And so many others here today who have worked to bring this agreement together, well done. Thank you too, to Barney Glover and Western Sydney University for hosting us here this morning.
This City Deal is a historic change for the better for Western Sydney. For the first time, working together we are putting a plan and the infrastructure, in place first.
Isn’t that a good idea? Do the planning and the infrastructure and then do the development, makes sense doesn’t it? It hasn’t happened often enough. This is why this is such a big change. 
Now, already home – as we’ve just seen - to diverse, vibrant communities rich in natural beauty, Western Sydney is undergoing enormous change; change that in the coming decades will continue to turn this region into an even greater economic powerhouse than it is today. At its heart of course, is the new Western Sydney Airport, which the Commonwealth is building. We’re building that airport, it’s going to be a catalyst for the 200,000 jobs that will be created in Western Sydney over the next 20 years.
But this agreement between all three levels of government, goes much further than that.
Together, we’ve committed to make Western Sydney one of the best places to live and work in Australia.
We want to help you build the Western Parkland City; a smart, connected and livable city.
A place where you will want to raise your children and that you won’t need to leave, to go to work or study every day.
This City Deal commits our governments to the development of a North-South Rail Link that initially at least, will connect St Mary’s in the north to the Airport and a new Badgerys Creek Aerotropolis in the south. This rail line will be truly city-shaping; linking communities, building new ones and connecting Western Sydney’s residents to the countless job opportunities that will flow from that investment.  
Our joint aim is to have the rail line connected to the airport in time for its opening.
The NSW Government, as we’ve heard, is also promising a rapid bus service that will connect the new airport to the centres of Penrith, Campbelltown and Liverpool.
The Aerotropolis, just south of the Airport, will start on 114 hectares of Commonwealth land – thank you Defence Minister - that will form the nucleus of a world-class precinct of knowledge-intensive industry and learning. It will create tens of thousands of jobs in the aviation, aerospace and defence industries, jobs that will flow into other sectors such as education, agribusiness, health, hospitality and retail. We see the potential for a STEM-focused university, vocational facilities and high schools, all with links to smart industry, growing inside the Aerotropolis.
In the shorter-term we will develop a skills exchange at or near the Airport to teach workers the skills they need to build the Airport. There will be a particular focus on supporting indigenous workers and businesses.
Together with the regional councils, we’ll be investing up to $150 million in community facilities and amenities to improve the livability of Western Sydney and preserve the unique character of each community, from the Hawkesbury to the north, the Blue Mountains to the west and Wollondilly to the south. We all share the Greater Sydney Commission’s vision of the Western Parkland City, where quality of life is put at the centre of any development.
These City Deals represent a major reform of my Government, fundamentally changing the way the Commonwealth engages in urban development and infrastructure.
Too frequently in the past, federal, state and local governments have been like ships in the night; often going in the same directions; sometimes going in different directions, but not working together as they should, as our community, as our citizens, as our constituents expect us to.
The Commonwealth has been seen too often as little more than a passive ATM.
No longer. Under my Government the Commonwealth is working with all levels of governments and communities, as a partner.
We’re reaching agreement on the key objectives, then working together to make sure we direct all of our resources – and do so as innovatively as we can - to achieve the same outcomes.
We’ve signed City Deals in Townsville and Launceston, deals that are already delivering for those communities in terms of investment, jobs and livability.
Earlier this year, we started work on a City Deal for Hobart and we’ve signed a memorandum of understanding with the Victorian Government to develop City Deals in that state, starting with Geelong and surrounding districts.
That is only the start. We are actively involved in discussions with other state governments about future City Deals to realise greater opportunities in other communities.
I want to acknowledge the spirit in which the Western Sydney City Deal was negotiated between our three levels of government. I want to thank the NSW Government and local councils for their commitment to this vision for the region.
I know that we will look back on this deal in a decade’s time - when the airport is operating, when the Aerotropolis is educating and employing a new generation of Australians, when this is one of the most livable and connected communities in the nation - and we’ll recognise that today here in Werrington, we began a great endeavor; to ensure the prosperity, the livability and the sustainability of the Western Parkland City and its people for generations to come.
[ENDS]


It’s great to be here and having arrived at the Convention Centre by water, I can say Barangaroo is looking fantastic, that project is going very well, it’s good to see it close up.
Now, we live in times of change, of unprecedented change both in the scale and pace of it.
That change has of course improved our lives immeasurably, in every respect. Think of all the technological advances, whether it’s in the field of telecommunications, or in medicine, or in science.
The one thing we cannot do however, is turn back that pace of change.
This is the tenor of the times in which we live.
So the challenge for all of us as leaders is to embrace those times and ensure we make ourselves as resilient, as agile and as capable of making the times our friend. You make volatility your friend not your foe, because you’re not going to be able to change the nature of the rapid pace and the enormous scale of change all around us.
That is what our Government is doing. That is what the Coalition Government is doing right now; we’re helping Australians seize the opportunities that come with change, while of course protecting against the risks that it brings.
Now my commitment has always been to provide strong and effective economic leadership. A strong economy is the foundation of our prosperity and our security. It gives every Australian the opportunity to succeed and realise their dreams, to get a job, to get a better job, to start and grow a business.
Creating more jobs is at the heart of all of our policies.
Our Enterprise Tax Plan, building an advanced local defence industry with the high tech jobs that support it, export opportunities through our big free trade deals, the TPP as I’ll come to in a moment, is being signed this week, tomorrow in fact. Our record infrastructure investment, there’s so many programs to get people into work, the PaTH program for example that I know many of you are familiar with, tackling youth unemployment. These policies are working.
We are giving businesses the confidence they need to invest, grow and hire. We’re starting to see stronger confidence from consumers as well.
Last calendar year, 403,100 jobs were created. 2017 is the strongest year on record for job creation. 75 per cent of those jobs were full time, 80 per cent of those were in the private sector.
Jobs growth has easily outstripped population growth.
Female participation is at near record highs.
60 per cent of new jobs last year went to women and the gap between the male and female workforce participation is 10.4 per cent, an all-time low.
The gender pay gap – still too high - has narrowed however, further over the last twelve months to 15.3 per cent. An important point in the week of International Women’s Day.
But there is more work to do.
The challenge is to build on this, to implement the reforms that will enable us to take advantage of the disruption and change in our region.
Now, we recently broke the world record for the longest run of economic growth, 26 years. That’s despite two of the largest shocks in generations, the mining boom - a huge surge in commodity prices that went up and then obviously came down - and of course the Global Financial Crisis itself. Now this wasn’t good luck; it was the social and economic dividend from the reforms of years past, all championed by the Australian Financial Review, in potent editorial after editorial, Michael, well done.
[Laughter]
Yes, maybe not enough of the Labor Party and the Crossbench read it. Maybe that’s the antidote we need.
But we encountered tremendous headwinds — gale force conditions, you might say — but instead of sinking, or being dashed against the rocks, the economy adjusted course. Unburdened by poorly designed regulation, our economy was agile enough to adapt to the conditions and steer a safe course through them.
Our exchange rate is flexible. Overall price growth has been subdued, interest rates have remained relatively low and because of its flexibility, the economy has not responded to recent challenges by shedding hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
Despite improving economic conditions however, we have had modest average real wages growth. I’m sure Philip Lowe has just spoken about that. But when faced with a choice of modest wages growth or longer queues, long queues at Centrelink, only a blinkered ideologue – or the most craven populist – would choose policies that result in higher unemployment.
They are exactly the policies that are being advocated by Mr Shorten and the Labor Party.
Any attempt to regulate our way out of modest wages growth, will put a handbrake on job creation.
The laws of supply and demand have not been suspended. The only lasting answer to slow wages growth is stronger economic growth, creating more investment and more demand for labour leading to higher productivity and higher wages.
And we’re doing this, by creating stronger business conditions which lead to more investment, higher productivity and more competition for the nearly 90 per cent of workers who are employed in the private sector.
Now, a key part of this is ensuring that business has the confidence to invest.
Confidence requires certainty; the certainty that politicians will not withdraw their support for a project, or revoke an environmental license, on a political whim.
Now regrettably, comments from our opponents in the Labor Party and Mr Shorten in particular over the past few days, represent a genuine sovereign risk that would ultimately cost jobs and investment.
So there is no substitute for strong economic growth to create new opportunities.
Now how we manage the economy in the times of unprecedented change of which I’ve spoken, is absolutely critical.
The decisions we make today lay the foundations for Australia in decades to come. So it’s vital that we continue economic reform, not in spite of the challenging times we face, but because of them.
Our Government’s reforms across education and energy, tax and trade, give Australians the best chance of success when they compete.
We want our students to graduate with the right skills for the 21st Century - strong literacy and numeracy, critical and creative thinking and a deep understanding of technology.
A strong level of funding for schools is vital. As you know, for our part we have committed to record levels of funding, but even more important, is making sure that money delivers better outcomes for our students. We want to raise standards and we want to make sure our education system is set up so every child can meet them. So that’s why, as part of our reforms to school funding we commissioned the Review to Achieve Educational Excellence in Australian Schools led by David Gonski, to determine the most effective teaching and learning strategies to improve school results. The report I’m please to say, is on track to be completed by the end of the month. We’ll continue to work with the states and territories to deliver evidence-based approaches to improve outcomes in schools.
Just as our education reforms will make our students more competitive, our energy reforms make business more competitive.
Our predecessors failed to address the challenge of integrating energy and climate policy. That has contributed to distortions in energy markets that have driven up costs and undermined the competitiveness of our big energy users. Although energy prices still remain too high, our interventions are returning order to energy markets which are essential to bringing prices down over time, as Josh Frydenberg observes in a good op-ed piece in the paper today.
Now the Australian Energy Markets Commission forecasts electricity prices will fall 12.4 per cent over the coming two years. Wholesale gas prices, which were heading past $16 a gigajoule, are in single figures now. They should be trading at or around the LNG netback price and they will. But it was a complete failure of the market and the pipeline of reforms of course, are going to bring greater competition. A significant part of this turnaround is the certainty delivered by the National Energy Guarantee, which uses the existing dynamics of competitive markets, its contracts and trading, to deliver reliability and meet our climate commitments.
The alternative would be to impose constraints or taxes that undermine energy markets.
Snowy 2.0 is going to reduce volatility in electricity markets, providing the necessary storage and backup to address the challenges posed by intermittent generation. As you know, one of the big features of the electricity business, is that the cost of generation from wind and solar is getting less every year. The cost of generation is going down, however the sun doesn’t shine all the time, the wind doesn’t blow all the time and that’s not going to change. So the big challenge is storage and storage at scale.
Now, our decision to acquire the states’ shares in the company, announced last week, is not only a big win for infrastructure investment in NSW and Victoria – well over $6 billion – but it gives the Snowy Hydro board and management the added confidence that comes from 100 per cent Commonwealth ownership to deliver this vitally important project.
Turning to company tax, we are committed to further tax reform.
We want all Australian businesses to be able take advantage of our globalised and increasingly digitised economy. There is a great buzz in the US economy right now and growing confidence in the wake of recent tax reforms, which of course included reducing the US company tax rate to 21 per cent.
To be competitive in the global race for capital, we must bring down our own tax rates.  
I gather that Philip Lowe made this point earlier, that whatever you may think in a theoretical world of what company tax should be, we are in a competitive environment. We have to have a competitive tax rate and this has been – at least until relatively recently - absolutely a bipartisan acknowledgement.
I said the laws of supply and demand have not been suspended and they never will be. But the laws of economic commonsense have been suspended among our political opponents, which is why we keep on seeing them saying absolutely different things from one day to the next, whether it’s to meet the demands of one audience or another, or to meet populist political concerns at the time.
So, we need to bring down our tax rates on business, because when you increase the return on investment, you get more investment, you get more employment, you get more jobs, you get better-paid jobs and you get greater productivity.
When I was discussing tax with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin in Washington recently, he reminded me that when you’re taxing corporations, you’re taxing workers. He estimates that 70 per cent of the benefits of those company tax cuts are passed on to workers.
Since the US tax cuts, around four million workers have reportedly received an income boost. Secretary Mnuchin believes the reform package will add 0.9 percent to GDP. That’s an enormous fillip and the benefits are already starting to flow to workers in more jobs and better-paid jobs.
It sent a signal; a call to arms for investors and a warning to competitors.
This year, lower tax rates will kick in for Australian businesses with a turnover of up to $50 million. At the moment, as you know, the progressive reduction of company tax is applying to companies with a turnover of up to $25 million. Now, $50 million is not a giant company or a giant multinational. The overwhelming majority of those businesses for whom we have delivered these tax cuts are Australian-owned family businesses.
But here’s the thing; they employ more than half of the private sector workforce.
They’re not corporate giants, I don’t know how many companies with $50 million turnover or less are represented here today, but half of Australia’s workforce work for them. That’s where you’re seeing this strong growth in jobs at the moment. We’re backing businesses; with lower tax rates, they’re in a better position to compete, invest and of course take the opportunities for people to trade with us. 
Tomorrow is going to be a very historic day in the cause of trade liberalisation, when the TPP-11 is signed in Chile.
Now, the United States is not a signatory, but by keeping the TPP alive, at a time when many wrote it off, Prime Minister of Japan Shinzo Abe and I ensured the door remained open for the US and indeed other countries to join in the future. I was discussing this with PM Abe only yesterday.
You recall how he came down to Sydney not long after the change of administration in the US. We had our discussions about the TPP and we decided then that we were going to keep the momentum going. It’s a great credit to him and his leadership and all the other countries in the TPP-11, that we’ve been able to do so.
Our future lies in open markets and in a rules-based trading system that allows countries to compete on a level playing field.
We know that when Australia competes on its merits, we win.
Openness and flexibility are the keys to prosperity. Australia and the other nations that are signing the TPP-11 will continue to defend open markets and free trade.
History teaches us that there are no winners in a trade war. A trade war is a race to the bottom that makes us all poorer, leaves our citizens with less choice and fewer opportunities.
With our flexible and open economy and strong domestic institutions, we have weathered many economic storms.
That’s why we must maintain a clear-eyed focus on delivering reforms that strengthen our economy for the long-term and ensure that we, our children and our grandchildren, can realise our dreams, their dreams, their opportunities. Our prosperity and security depend on free trade and open markets. That’s why Australia is such a strong voice for trade at home and around the world.
Thank you very much.


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you very much Dan and we are here at Kirribilli House on the edge of Sydney Harbour on the land of the Gadigal people of the Eora nation. We honour them and their elders past and present and all other Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People who are with us today. I want to thank you all for being here today, in particular the Premier of New South Wales Gladys Berejiklian and the Premier of Victoria Dan Andrews, our ministers from the state, the two Attorneys General and of course the Assistant Minister for Children, Dr Gillespie.
Now through the Royal Commission over 16,000 individuals were contacted and told their stories. By the time it concluded, more than 8,000 of those were heard directly in private sessions and over than 1,000 survivors provided a written account of their experience.
Today, we honour the bravery of those survivors and their families.
We also pause to remember those who are no longer with us. Leonie, I know that is what you are doing now. Your passion and your love is so eloquent and is matched by others here today and elsewhere, so thank you.
They’re children, who deserve to be safe, whose lives were shockingly impacted by cruel and evil people who perpetrated violence that is difficult to comprehend. But we have to confront the truth that has been revealed, as difficult as it is.
The Royal Commission validated the stories of the survivors. It enabled survivors to be heard and most importantly, to be believed. “We believe you,” these are the most important things that we must say and we must say them from our heart. Because the survivors, the victims of these shocking crimes, these shocking wrongs over so many years, were not believed. The crime, the assault, was compounded again and again by indifference and resistance, by legal obstacles, by institutional denial. They were covered up and ignored.
Now today, we are seeking to provide redress for those shocking crimes.
I am pleased to be able to announce today that Victoria and New South Wales will both join the National Redress Scheme. This is an historic moment.
[Applause]
This means that over 9,000 people who were sexually abused in New South Wales institutions, New South Wales government institutions and 5,000 abused in Victorian government institutions, will have access to the national scheme. It will also pave the way for churches, charities and other non-government institutions in both states to join the scheme, which would include a further 20,000 people who were abused in those institutions.
Now, we are encouraging the other states and territories to opt in to the national scheme. I know that many of you have also been making representations to those jurisdictions. Gladys and Dan and I were just talking about the representations we have made, very directly and very frankly to the other First Ministers at COAG meetings. We also expect the other institutions, churches and others to sign up to the scheme.
The goal of the scheme is to get everyone on board so there is a national redress scheme and nobody is left out of access to this redress.
Now, I want to thank all of you and so many others around the country, thousands of them who fought tirelessly for these shocking crimes to be exposed. Many of you are suffering your own trauma, yet you’ve still found room in your lives to advocate for and support others.
While bearing your own wounds, you have sought to bind up the wounds of others. That is truly selfless love and we thank you for it.
On behalf of the nation, my plan is to make a national apology and that should in no way diminish the direct apology survivors should receive from the institutions themselves who failed them.
I am pleased the membership of the survivor-focused reference group is being announced today, so we can work together and shape the apology in accordance with the wishes of survivors. Where is Kathleen Daley, where is she? There, hello Kathy. Kathleen, she is from Griffith University and has very recently written a book on these processes of redress and the means of designing and delivering apologies. Kathleen, I thank you for that. It’s going to be an important part of our process in making sure the apology is meaningful. Some of you were there in 2009 when together with Prime Minister Rudd we delivered an apology to the forgotten generations, to survivors of child migrants, childcare leaders. That was a very important, very, very important moment, as you all remember.
This has got to be just as important; a time of acknowledgement, a time of compassion, a time of love, a time of redress and reconciliation.
So thank you all again for being here today. This is very important and a very historic moment.
[ENDS]


/*--&gt;*/
//--&gt;
Skip to main content
Search
Search Label  
Main menu
Home
Your Prime Minister
Your Government
Priorities
Media
Contact
Search
Primary tabs
View(active tab)
Edit
You are here
Home
 
Prime Minister of Australia
The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP
Get updates from the Prime Minister directly to your inbox
Email Address  
First Name  
Last Name  
 
 
 
"We're delivering fairness, opportunity and security for all Australians. Everything we do is designed to ensure that our children and grandchildren have even greater opportunities than their parents did, and can realise their dreams."
Malcolm Turnbull was sworn in as the 29th Prime Minister of Australia on 15th September 2015.
View More
 
 
This Week
Australia and the leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) will work together to shape a more secure and prosperous region.
March 2018
Read the media release
 
Our Focus
Keeping Australia safe from terrorism
Creating opportunities for you and your family
Getting our energy mix right to put downward pressure on your power bills
Read more about these priorities and what other action your government is taking
 
 
In the News
Bega Fire Response Centre, NSW
Transcript
At this stage, but no lives lost and that's vitally important. You’ve just seen a number of families there who got out just in time. They’ve lost their homes, but they’re together. 
19 Mar 2018
Press Conference with His Excellency Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Prime Minister of the Republic of Singapore
Transcript
The Summit has given us an opportunity to confirm Australia’s steadfast commitment to ASEAN 
18 Mar 2018
Enhancing Regional Collaboration to Strengthen Our Security and Prosperity
Media release
Australia and the leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) will work together to shape a more secure and prosperous region. 
18 Mar 2018
View More
 
 
Under the Turnbull Government
 
403100
Jobs created in Australia in 2017
Source: ABS Labour Force data
734760
Australians finding a better power deal on
energymadeeasy.gov.au
Feb, 2018
$247.2 BILLION
Over the next decade for needs-based schools funding
Source: education.gov.au
 
Follow the PM
 
Monday, 19 March, 2018 - 20:37
The PM on the ground in Bega and Tathra today, with the communities impacted by some of the recent fires. For more information go to: NSW @NSWRFS: https://t.co/N5nyKhAzjz 
View More
 
Monday, 19 March, 2018 - 20:13
In times of great need we pull together - and the communities of Bega and Tathra have done just that, providing such great support and love to those around them. Thank you to all the firefighters, volunteers, and emergency workers who have worked so tirelessly over the weekend.
View More
 
Monday, 19 March, 2018 - 19:46
In times of great need we pull together - and the communities of Bega and Tathra have done just that, providing such great support and love to those around them. This afternoon I was in in both towns to see first hand the damage caused by the fires.
View More
 
Monday, 19 March, 2018 - 10:45
Over the weekend the PM hosted leaders from across our region for a special ASEAN Summit in Sydney. Discussions focussed on building a more secure and prosperous region.
View More
View More
 
Galleries
In times of great need we pull together - and the communities of Bega and Tathra have d...
19 Mar 2018
Thank you PM @leehsienloong for your partnership as ASEAN chairman in ensuring the succ...
18 Mar 2018
A few photos from behind the scenes at the ASEAN- Australia Special Summit today....
17 Mar 2018
Thanks @jokowi &amp; Ibu Iriana for joining us for dinner last night!...
17 Mar 2018
Delighted to welcome regional leaders to the ASEAN-Australia Special Summit....
16 Mar 2018
View More
 
 
Prime Minister of AustraliaThe Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP
STAY IN TOUCH
Get updates from the Prime Minister directly to your inbox
Email Address  
 
 
CONNECT
 
Copyright
FOI Disclosure Log
About this Website
Accessibility
Disclaimer
Privacy Statement
 
 


PRIME MINISTER: 
Prime Minister Phuc, today is a historic day. As new strategic partners, Australia and Vietnam have agreed to work together to realise a vision, our shared vision of a secure, open and prosperous region.
As the Prime Minister and I discussed earlier in our meeting with our ministers and I welcome the Australian ministers, Minister Cash, Minister Bishop, Minister Andrews and of course all of your ministers. We have had a very good discussion about the broad and deep cooperation, which covers areas from defence to development.
We have just witnessed the signing of memoranda covering agricultural cooperation, innovation, science and technology, vocational education, and skills.
These are areas of great strength in our partnership and we will work to advance our cooperation in these fields; just as we work to boost trade and investment and all of the other ties that bring Australia and Vietnam closer together all the time.
Our strategic partnership, which we have just signed, brings great benefit for our two countries and peoples.
We’ve talked today about the threat posed by North Korea, and the importance of working together with the global community to confront this threat posed by the dangerous and provocative conduct of the North Korean regime.
We talked about our mutual commitment to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the TPP-11, and I want to commend you again Prime Minister for the leadership you and your whole team in Vietnam have shown on this.  We look forward to working together with Vietnam and the other members of the TPP-11 on its implementation.
We talked about our extensive people to people links, 300,000 Australians of Vietnamese ancestry and the extraordinary warmth that this brings to our relationship. 
I acknowledge that this visit that you are making, Prime Minister, is taking place on the eve of the Australia-ASEAN Special Summit. And I thank you Prime Minister in advance for what I know will be an outstanding contribution to our deliberations.
So whether it is through our membership of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, our cooperation in ASEAN forums, or today’s bilateral announcement, Australia and Vietnam will work together to advance our common prosperity and security.
We have enjoyed diplomatic relations for 45 years, strong community ties and now we are strategic partners.
Today is an auspicious day and we have a bright future together.
[ENDS] 


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you very much, Tamerlaine for that very warm introduction.
Welcome everyone to today’s SME Conference and to the ASEAN–Australia Business Summit — the first of its kind in Australia and a new era in our engagement with Southeast Asia.  
Firstly I acknowledge that we meet on the land of the Gadigal people of the Eora nation and we pay respect to their elders past and present.
I acknowledge ASEAN Secretary General, His Excellency Dato Lim Jock Hoi and of course, as Tamerlaine said a moment ago, we are so fortunate to be joined by our friend, the Prime Minister of Singapore and ASEAN’s 2018 Chair, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong a man who understands, implicitly, the value of hard work, enterprise and from whom we can learn so much.
Prime Minister, Lucy and I were delighted to have dinner with you and Ho Ching last night and I understand that they have done a stellar job already today, with a presentation.
Now, I look forward to strengthening the historic links between our economies and our people during your visit.  
Small and medium-sized enterprises make up 65 per cent of Singaporean employment, and contribute 45 per cent of your country’s GDP.  
In Australia, our small and medium businesses contribute more than $600 billion to Australia’s economy each year – almost half our annual economic activity. They employ two in every three Australians. These businesses are the heart and soul of the Australian economy. We’re proud to have you all representing us on the world stage, competing for the incredible opportunities of the region.
Your passion, your innovation and drive are the markers and the makers, of enterprise.
A spirit of enterprise is at the heart of our prosperous and secure nation.
Individual enterprise, free enterprise, is our present and our future.
Now Australia recently broke the world record for the longest run of economic growth; 26 years. Our economic indicators show more jobs, more growth and more choice for consumers. 403,000 jobs created last year, the largest annual growth in jobs in our history and 16 months of continuous jobs growth. Again, the longest since we started keeping records on that. It’s clear that much of the heavy-lifting is being done by our small and medium-sized businesses.
Our greatest resources are our people, not the minerals beneath their feet. It is us, Australians, 25 million Australians and our SMEs — their enterprise and imagination and the enormous potential they hold — prove this point.
They embrace uncertainty with courage and tenacity, by taking a risk and creating something. They make volatility their friend, not flee from it as a foe.
A great example is the Australian company, Rode Microphones, which is competing on the world stage and winning. I’ve visited the Silverwater factory here in Sydney where they make the most advanced microphones in the world.
They’ve grown their workforce by 30 per cent through the use of technology and an incredible 94 per cent of their sales are exports. Competing with the best in the world, including many markets where labour costs are much lower than Australia. So, they’ve shown courage and taken risks an innovative company, with an innovative product, the future of advanced manufacturing in Australia. It’s the kind of enterprise the Australian Government is backing with policies that give businesses the confidence to invest, compete and create jobs.
A vital part of that is delivering on our commitments to free trade, investment and open markets.
People are at the heart of enterprise and it’s the role of governments to enable, to smooth the way and open doors.
We need to hear from you about the challenges and prospects across the region and how we can improve economic integration and growth.
Forums like this improve our connections, but they are also an opportunity for governments to listen and to learn.
Now, Australia is a nation whose economy is built on trade. Throughout our history, it has delivered for our people and our businesses.
Free trade opens new doors for Australian businesses to millions of overseas consumers, meaning more jobs and more prosperity here at home. 2.2 million Australians are employed in a trade-related activity.
We also know that as a result of trade liberalisation in the last 30 years, our real GDP is 5.4 per cent higher and real wages are 7.4 per cent higher as well.
Open markets together with democracy, have been two of the most powerful forces in human history.
They have led to worldwide growth and prosperity.
That’s why Australia will continue to work with our closest neighbours in the region.
You don’t grow stronger by closing the door to other markets.
Protectionism is a dead end.
It is not a ladder to get you out of the low growth trap, it’s a shovel to dig it much deeper.
We must face the world, not turn from it.
Embrace free trade, not retreat from it.
And do so on the basis of strong and transparent rules, fair and open competition and non-discriminatory legislation.
Australia is fortunate in this regard, our high-quality free trade agreements mean our businesses are competing on a level playing field - large and medium, small and micro — so they all have a chance to grow and capitalise on their ideas. Digital platforms give small and very small businesses the ability to go into markets which hitherto, a generation ago, had really only been available to large firms. So the power of these digital platforms, the ubiquitousness of the internet and smart phones and so forth, is a real enabler for small and medium businesses. So many of them here in Australia are taking on global markets with great confidence and success.
Now, the ASEAN region is already equivalent to the world’s fifth-largest economy. The IMF forecasts its GDP will grow by more than 5 per cent every year for the next decade.
So it’s understandable that Australia embraced the comprehensive ASEAN–Australia–New Zealand Free Trade Agreement. It’s a demonstration to the world of what can be done, sharing our ideas, expertise and new technologies for our mutual benefit.
Of course, ‘AANZFTA’ as it’s described, operates alongside our free trade agreements with other ASEAN member states. Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and, more recently, Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei and Vietnam through the TPP-11, Trans Pacific Partnership.
Taken together, these agreements mean ASEAN is now one of Australia’s top-three trading partners.
ASEAN is currently home to more than 630 million people. That number is tipped to grow by around 100 million by 2030. That means so many opportunities for Australian and regional companies.
One of them is Fibre King, a 91-year-old Australian company that designs and builds automated packaging machinery, which has expanded its manufacturing to Thailand.
Their subsidiary company Oryx Automation, which operates just outside Bangkok, is riding the huge manufacturing growth wave in ASEAN.
I’ve just met Susan Jenkin whose story demonstrates the depth of connections between our people. Susan and her husband Allen have a thriving business, Ironbark Citrus, which exports mandarins to Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and China, to name just some of the countries they access. She has discussed with me just this morning, their social business in Laos, helping smallholding farmers grow citrus on a commercial basis and of course, in the counter season. They offer disease-resistant crops, starter loans and much-needed commercial and nursery expertise. They already have around 13,000 trees growing on 33 family farms.
We can all benefit from the powerful exchange of knowledge across our region, which is home to a young and entrepreneurial population, keen for globally competitive skills.
Almost 100,000 students from ASEAN countries are studying at Australian universities. Tens of thousands are enrolled in vocational education training, English language and non-award courses in Australia last year. Australian companies are also helping train local labour forces in the skills needed to meet the demand from foreign direct investment in the region.
Site Group International trains locals to work in mining, construction and energy projects. They operate in Myanmar, Malaysia and the Philippines, where they’ve trained thousands of workers. Chief Executive Vernon Wills will tell us more about that later today.
These are really good news stories and so is what’s happening in tourism.
Our region has a shared goal to deliver world-class tourism and enjoy a larger slice of what is, globally, a growing sector.
Last year, the ASEAN region was Australia’s largest source of overseas visits; larger in fact than China, despite having half the population.
We’re already seeing the forming of closer links.
Avalon Airport in Victoria for example, has secured AirAsia to operate its first overseas services and we’ll hear from AirAsia Group Chief Executive, Tan Sri Tony Fernandes, later today.
There’s also scope to work together as we navigate the next Industrial Revolution, digital transformation.
We live in a world where the pace and the scale of change is utterly without precedent. It’s an age of disruption, where the ever-evolving trend of digitalisation is turning old business models on their head. As you all know so well, businesses must adapt and invest in new technologies and in their workers. If I may say, both from experience and observation, small and medium businesses are the ones that are most able, most swiftly, to make that adjustment.
Nowhere is the potential for digital trade greater than in our region. Google estimates that almost four million new users from Southeast Asia will come online every month, making it the fastest-growing internet market in the world.
However, the scale and pace of this change that I’ve described, has placed enormous pressure on our existing approach to regulation. It’s moving much faster than legislators, regulators and policy makers to be frank.
Digital trade standards will underpin the benefits of new technologies - everything from big data to artificial intelligence — and harness the opportunities they bring to our region.   
So that’s why I am very pleased to announce that Australia and ASEAN will be working together to develop, adopt and use international standards that promote digital trade. It will mean up-to-date, harmonised standards that make it easier to do business across borders. Standards for business and, most importantly, developed with business.
Together, we will ensure we take advantage of the potential of digital trade to gain greater access to markets and secure a more certain online environment in which you will do business.
It’ll show the world yet again what can be achieved when nations work together.
So that’s why we are here; to point Australian businesses towards the opportunities in our region. To assist businesses in our region with greater engagement with Australia and help them, together, to participate competitively in ASEAN’s economic expansion.
The opportunities on Australia’s doorstep are remarkable. It’s your enterprise, your efforts, that will determine our future and that’s why your Government is backing you. It’s why you can always count on me and the Government I lead, to support Australian enterprise. And above all, the small and medium enterprises whose innovation, whose energy, whose courage will steer us to an even more prosperous future.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Thank you very much Ridwaan and welcome everybody. Now relax, relax.
[Laughter]  
Look, it’s wonderful to be here with you and I join Ridwaan in acknowledging that we are on the land of the Gadigal people of the Eora nation and we pay our respects to their elders past and present.
This is my first official event as part of the ASEAN–Australia Special Summit and as Ridwaan said it’s the first meeting that we’ve held - the first ASEAN-Australia Summit - that we’ve held in Australia.
So, it comes at a really historic point in our engagement with the region, with ASEAN and South East Asia. It’s a time when rapid change is creating new opportunities for Australia and ASEAN to work more closely than ever before. You are the way in which we are going to work, because it is you that are providing the energy and the entrepreneurship and very often the idealism, to make it all happen.
It’s a time which we might characterise by very rapid change. The most rapid change in human history, both in its scale and pace. It’s easy, I think, as we are carried along with all these technological advances, to overlook how rapid that change is. Think about the smartphone in your pocket. The first smartphone was 2007, that is not a very long time ago. A platform like Facebook, with a couple billion customers, started in 2005. Yet again, that’s not a very long time ago.
It’s a time that requires us to all be open to new ideas, to innovation, to mutually beneficial partnerships and, by doing so, secure greater prosperity and security for our nations, our communities, working together.
So I’m really pleased that my first stop at this Summit, is to talk to you; the young social entrepreneurs whose innovative work is a real inspiration.
We need you. We need your ideas, your foresight, your courage and skills.
We need your commitment to freedom and openness and of course the hard work.  
We need your compassion, too.
Enterprise — free, open enterprise — is the source of jobs, growth and prosperity. It brings enormous rewards for individuals and their families. But as each of you have shown through your altruistic efforts, enterprise also benefits societies and makes communities stronger.
Look for instance at the example set by some of you here today. Our own Ashleigh Morris, who co-founded ‘The Circular Experiment’ and is working with small businesses to minimise waste through better planning.
Indonesia’s Samantha Agung, whose organisation ‘The Ketemu Project’ is developing projects to address social issues through artistic expression.
Malaysia’s Redza Shahid, founder of ‘Grub Cycle’, is making surplus food available at low costs in Kuala Lumpur.
Everyone here has a similarly impressive story and I want to congratulate you on your efforts.  
So the Australia–ASEAN Emerging Leaders’ Program asks you to consider some of the region’s most challenging social and economic problems, including gender equality.
Australia has long recognised the value of partnering with the private sector to address global development challenges.
This was acknowledged most recently in our Foreign Policy White Paper, which I commend to you, and our aid program proudly supports many innovative social enterprises. I’ll give you a quick example. In Indonesia, an online marketplace called ‘iGrow’ is connecting underemployed farmers with underutilised land and capital, so they can produce high-quality organic food. To date, they have created work for 2,200 farmers, who as a result, have seen their income increase by 50 to 100 per cent. It’s a wonderful innovation and our aid program is currently supporting iGrow to update its platform. This will help it attract more farmers and investors, and train farmers in new technologies like using drones to manage their crops. It’s the type of initiative that with new leaders like yourselves emerging, I expect we’ll see more of in the years ahead.
When I meet leaders in the coming days, we’ll also discuss how Australia and ASEAN can work together to promote regional security and prosperity.
That includes how to cooperate more closely on countering terrorism and promoting deeper integration between our economies. I believe as your generation takes on the challenges of leadership, your way of working and your particular skills as social entrepreneurs, will be vital in addressing the complex challenges we face.
As I’ve said, these challenges will not, cannot, be solved by governments alone. The people are, without doubt, a nation’s greatest asset. They are the source of ideas and ingenuity and it’s through your enterprise and the enterprise of thousands of others like you - and willingness to work together - that we will secure greater prosperity for our families, our communities and our nations.
So, I am looking forward, very much, to now hearing from you.
Thank you.  
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Thank you very much Dan for that welcome and it’s great to be here. It’s great to be here with the Minister for Jobs and Innovation Michaelia Cash, the very energetic Minister for the Environment and Energy John Frydenberg. Darren Chester, who is the Federal Member for Gippsland and the Minister for Veterans Affairs and his neighbour from Gippsland, Russell Broadbent, the Member for McMillan, Jane Hume, our Senator from Victoria and Tim Wilson, the Federal Member for Goldstein.
Of course, Jaala Pulford, the Minister for Regional Development and Minister for Agriculture is here representing the Premier. Peter Walsh is here, the Member for Murray Plains and Victorian Nationals Team Lead and Russell Northe, the Member for Morwell, the Victorian Legislative assembly is here with us as well.
I want to welcome Mr Daisaku Hiraki, the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry and of course the representatives of the Japanese companies that are our partners in here, Mr Shigeru Murayama, Chairman of Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Hiroshige Seko, who is not attending here, but he’s giving a video message I believe, he’s the Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry. We have Mr Masayoshi Kitamura, the Chairman of J-POWER, Mr Hisato Ueha the Executive Vice President of Iwatani and Mr Shigeru Yamazoe, Vice Chairman of Marubeni.
So it’s great, we’ve got a great set of Japanese and Australian representatives from Government and industry here today. This is a very exciting project and it’s one that I have often discussed with your Prime Minister, Vice Minister, Shinzo Abe. He’s paid a lot of attention to this and he’s very excited about it. It is amazing to think that brown coal here in Victoria is going to be keeping the lights on in Japan.
This is cutting edge technology, this is energy of the future.
It underlines the importance of having a technology agnostic approach to energy. It’s the point Josh was talking about at the Press Club yesterday.
It underlines everything we’re doing to make sure that we have affordable and reliable power, that we meet our emissions reduction commitments and above all, we keep the lights on and that Australians can afford to keep them on.
Of course that’s what the Japanese will be able to do using this very clean fuel of hydrogen.
Now in terms of the local economy – and that’s what the Deputy Mayor has spoken about and I know what Darren and Russell are so focussed on, this project is going to create 400 local jobs for Latrobe Valley workers. We are making, the Australian Government is making, a $50 million contribution for this project, this hydrogen energy supply chain pilot.
Now we know that the region has had a tough time in recent times with closures. This project will ensure there are more jobs for Latrobe Valley workers, not just today but in years and decades to come. It is critically important that we invest in the energy sources of the future and that we affect the transition from older forms of generation to new forms of generation and we do so seamlessly. Getting the transition right is critically important.
Now, we’re focussed on creating the investment environment to drive projects like this one, to create new industries and more jobs.
Just like the National Energy Guarantee provides the confidence for investment into our energy for affordable and reliable power, our strategic support for this fuel of the future, hydrogen, opens up new possibilities for innovation in energy.
As we’ve said, it will see brown coal from here in the Latrobe Valley, converted to hydrogen, liquefied and then exported to Japan. That’s why we’re backing this job-creating project with $50 million.
Innovation, exports, all coming together to create jobs for Latrobe Valley workers and another sign of the stronger and more comprehensive partnership between Australian and Japan. We have never been closer, Ambassador, Vice Minister, our two nations are working more closely together than ever and particularly in these areas of technology, where we know we both have to be at the cutting edge.
It is the brilliance, the technological brilliance, the investment confidence, the optimism of Australians and Japanese working together that will ensure this very ancient resource of brown coal produces one of the critically important fuels of the future.
So I’m delighted to be here with you all and I want to say congratulations to everybody involved in the hydrogen energy supply chain project.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Thank you very much Professor Lambert for your kind introduction. Members of the Bundestag, Excellencies, Minister for Finance Mathias Cormann, our Ambassador Lynette Wood, distinguished guests. It's a great honour for me to be here at the Konrad Adenauer Stiftung, here at the heart of the European project. It's a privilege to reflect upon the legacy of the man who gave his name and his values and his vision to your foundation.
Chancellor Konrad Adenauer guiding principles are as important for navigating the challenging world in which we find ourselves today, as they were at the time of his passing 51 years ago this week. Adenauer was haunted by the memory of the sounds of the Gestapo torture room directly below his own prison cell. Nearly half of his fellow prisoners were hanged or shot. He never forgot the forces unleashed when society “made an idol of the state and raised it to the altar”, as he put it in one of his early speeches as a national politician.
“It sacrificed the individual, it’s dignity and value, to this idol,” he said.
Of course for each day in his 14 years as Chancellor, he was confronted by similar forces on the other side of the Iron Curtain. Konrad Adenauer’s legacy can perhaps be distilled into three principles which have each underpinned a free, secure and prosperous Germany - principles which have renewed resonance today.
First, he believed in reconciliation with France. He knew the West could never be truly united until the continental powers had overcome their grievances to work together.
Second, he believed in the economic integration of democratic Europe as the way to ensure not only prosperity, but also security. His vision of a united democratic Europe was tied to the transatlantic security partnership. He understood that the West could not enjoy the opportunities of liberal democracy without marshalling the power and the will to resist Soviet subversion and coercion.
Third, at the deepest and perhaps the most visceral level, Adenauer knew that democracy needed to be taught. Had to be learned and could never be taken for granted. That lesson applies to our world today, one in which anti-democratic populism, strategic competition, authoritarian resurgence are eroding the foundations of our prosperity and security.
To meet the challenges of our times - the threat to openness, to freedom and to our individual humanity - democracies must rediscover their power and their purpose. Europe is at the heart of this democratic project. It has to be at the heart of this project, just as it was in the aftermath of the Second World War. Just as it has always been since the origins of democracy itself.
Now, I’m here at this place, at this time, because I believe we have a rare window of opportunity. This is a moment where Europe has strong and capable leaders in both Germany and France, who are deeply committed to all three of Adenauer principles. The unprecedented, coordinated expulsion of Russian diplomats that we've just seen in response to Russia's attack on British sovereignty, Russia's contempt for the rule of law, shows that Europe and the wider western world, is capable of acting decisively to protect ourselves in the face of outside threats.
And I congratulate Prime Minister Theresa May for showing strong leadership in collaboration with many others, including in France and Germany and the United States. Significantly, Australia was the only country outside NATO and the EU to join in this action. Now, as we move to negotiate a free trade agreement between Australia and Europe, we have a special opportunity to show what we stand for as well as what we stand against.
Now to understand why we think the EU-FTA with Australia is so important, let me give you some context to show how Australia is approaching the world.
We believe you cannot have prosperity without security. They go hand in hand. Each reinforces and enables the other.
We understand that the liberal, rules-based order - the legacy of leaders like Chancellor Adenauer has underpinned our prosperity and security for all of the post-war era. It certainly worked for Germany.
When Chancellor Adenauer and his Minister for Economic Affairs Ludwig Erhard put their principles into action, introducing a new currency and dismantling price and production controls, they engineered a stunning Wirtschaftswunder or “economic miracle.” Between 1948 and 1963 average real living standards in Germany tripled. The extension of this system after the Cold War to eastern and central Europe and almost all corners of the Indo-Pacific, has generated the greatest burst of economic growth innovation and human advancement the world has ever seen.
Yet the very same economic forces that have delivered prosperity and opportunity are also generating political uncertainty, military capability and strategic ambition.
Political alienation is feeding populism and protectionism and providing opportunities for foreign interference. All of these forces have been turbocharged by technological change at an unprecedented pace and scale.
We are navigating a rapidly changing multipolar world in which each of the major players are testing their relationships with each other, while undergoing rapid change themselves. On the security front, we're seeing this from Syria to Salisbury.
On the trade front, we're seeing rising tensions between the major powers – focused, dirigiste state capitalism in China, rising protectionism in the United States - all of which could test the capacity of the World Trade Organisation to settle disputes based on law and precedent.
In short, the liberal rules-based order that has enabled us all to pursue security and prosperity without compromising autonomy, is now straining under the weight of its success.
How should we respond?
Well, rather than retreat to some imagined island of isolation, we must act. We must actively defend, extend and augment the rules-based structures that have enabled peace and prosperity so far.
This is the theme that I have set out in a series of speeches over the past year, from Singapore to London to Perth. This is the central idea that animates Australia's Foreign Policy White Paper, which my Government delivered in Canberra in November. We found that we have many willing partners.
Over the past six months, we’ve welcomed a new quadrilateral dialogue with India, Japan and the United States.
We've introduced a transparency scheme and counter-intelligence legislation against foreign interference.
We’ve pushed ahead with 11 countries to sign a Comprehensive Trans Pacific Partnership; a free trade deal many - in fact almost all - said it was dead when the United States pulled out.
We brought together the leaders of Southeast Asia to a special ASEAN-Australia Summit in Sydney to advance the cause of security and open markets.
In Sydney, when I looked around the ASEAN Special Summit table just last month, I was struck by the fact that not one of those Southeast Asian leaders was a protectionist. And I have to tell you, I have the very same sense today; I don't expect any populist calls denouncing trade in this room. To the contrary, this is a moment where the people of Germany and France, the essential powers of continental Europe have elected deeply committed democrats, who believe in open markets. Crucially, Chancellor Merkel and President Macron are personally committed to working collaboratively with each other. What better way to seize this moment than to forge a free trade agreement between Australia and Europe? This is our special opportunity to demonstrate our abiding commitment to open markets, transparent rules and free trade. More than that, this is a statement of commitment to the wider rules-based system which underpins open societies; transparent and accountable government and our freedom.
In our region, in the Indo-Pacific, we’re blessed with a world most dynamic economies. But we lack Europe's deeply rooted rules and institutions. An FTA is our opportunity to combine the best of both. The free trade agreement we’re seeking will deliver for Australian producers and farmers, as well as their European consumers. I must also signal to Europe's agri-food sector the huge opportunity for expanded European trade with and investment in Australia.
The agreement must address the very restrictive farm tariffs and quotas that our Australian farmers currently face. But equally, we bring a wide lens to this project. In the modern global economy an Australia-EU FTA offers opportunities to go far beyond market access. We must aim for a modern and ambitious free trade agreement that pursues economic market integration on the basis of strong rules that deliver fair and open competition and a transparent and predictable, non-discriminatory regulatory environment.
It will take aim at those behind-the-border barriers that stifle and discriminate against cross-border trade and investment in services, the fastest growing, most dynamic sector of our economies.
We want our FTA to build a more seamless business environment, including one that makes it easier for European businesses to use Australia as a launchpad into Asia. One that makes it easier for European companies to follow the lead of Aldi, the German retailer which is joining with hundreds of Australian suppliers of food, wine and infant formula to supply the online marketplaces in China and indeed across Asia.
We want an FTA which makes it easier for companies like Siemens which has been in Australia for 145 years and now employs more than 2,200 Australians, across 16 locations. I visited Siemens’ impressive training centre this morning, where young Australian apprentices are being given new skills and insights from the world's leading country in vocational education.
We want to facilitate European defence industry, working with us to develop the industrial base we need in Australia, to pursue the largest re-equipment of our armed forces in peacetime. Two great examples include the contract with Lürssen to design and deliver 12 Offshore Patrol Vessels to be built in Australia, which will create hundreds of jobs. And of course the German defence powerhouse Rheinmetall which my Government has engaged to build our army's new fleet of Boxer Combat Reconnaissance Vehicles. That's a $5 billion program. It will create up to 1,450 highly skilled jobs across Australia.
Now these projects are key investments in our military capability, but they’ll also create export opportunities. Rheinmetall will be able to leverage a new state-of-the-art manufacturing facility in south east Queensland in pursuit of new opportunities in the southeast Asian market.
Security and prosperity and local jobs, going hand in hand.
An Australia-EU free trade agreement will make it easier for more companies to provide better services to Australian consumers and raise our capital and technological base. It will do the same for Australian companies entering the European market. Already there is $165 billion, that’s US dollars, of EU investments in Australia and $105 billion worth of Australian investments in the EU.
But we’d both be better off with a lot more. We realise that standing up for the principles of economic freedom, rejecting populism and protectionism might seem unfashionable in the world right now. But it's absolutely the right thing to do.
Those who want to raise new tariffs and quotas should consider how technology and globalisation is changing the equation. The Australians in the audience today will all remember the book, the great Australian history volume ‘The Tyranny of Distance’ by Geoffrey Blainey. It was written about the consequences of being a European colony on the farthest corner of the planet. Indeed when my forebear John Turnbull arrived in Sydney in 1802, he was met by the Governor of the day, who looked at him and said: “What are you doing here old man? At the other end of the earth, with one foot in the grave and the other out of it?” He was 57, lived for another 30 years or so, well past the impertinent Governor.
[Laughter]
But it gives you an idea of how far away Australia was, in the period that Geoff Blainey was writing about. You know, it was a great book at the time and a great title particularly. But it describes a world that no longer exists. Two years after publication in 1968 Boeing introduced the first jumbo jet, marking the advent of mass travel. Since then the democratisation of travel, commerce and above all information with the arrival of the internet, has continued unabated for 50 years.
You know, it's happened so quickly. I referred earlier to the pace and scale of change. We should not underestimate that. I went to study at Oxford in 1978. That was before the internet and telephone calls were too expensive to even contemplate. Faxes, forget about it. Lucy and I used to write to each other on aerograms that’d take a couple of weeks to arrive. The good thing is, we still have them.
When our son went to study in the United States 23 years later – which is not a very long period of time - the internet had arrived, telephony was so cheap it was free, emails were there. He read all the Australian newspapers if he cared to do so before we got up in the morning. A completely different world.
This has all happened in less than a generation. That is the critical insight.
The tenor of our times is change at a pace and scale without any precedent.
Now you know, in terms of human travel, physical travel, last month QANTAS launched their first nonstop flight from Australia to Europe. Australians can now get to London in 17 hours, when it used to take six months. There used to be a time, Mathias, when Australian prime ministers would get on steamships to go to London and always timed their visits for a Test match of course. Now, we literally fly over trade barriers that were previously insuperable. Technology has annihilated distance. At least longitudinal distance, latitudinal distance faces the barrier of jetlag, which may prove to be insuperable.
Today’s successes of the jumbo, the Airbus A380, are assembled in Toulouse from four million individual parts which are produced by 1,500 companies in 30 countries. So, I pity the customs officer who is tasked with raising tariffs on all of them. Old school protectionism makes no sense in this age of digital information and global supply chains.
So we're strongly backing the Australia-EU FTA, not just because of the market access it will deliver, but because it will enhance the 21st Century rules of the road we need. It will update the rules that govern the digital world and ensure greater transparency and a stronger rule of law in a world which is often short of both.
But like all the bilateral and regional trade agreements we’re pursuing, this one be grounded in the principles that are embedded in the WTO and the broader rules-based system.  It will reinforce that remarkable post-war system of rules and institutions, which requires nations big and small to play by impartial rules and respect each other's sovereignty.
Where might is not right.
Where to quote Lee Kuan Yew – “the big fish don't always eat the little fish, and the little fish, the shrimp.”
A trading system that continues to be governed by institutions and contracts, not the contemporary equivalents of gunboats or iron curtains.
Now, in reading about Adenauer, I was struck most by one quality; he did the right thing even when those around him did not. It's worth digging out the old footage from 1956 when our greatest Prime Minister Robert Menzies travelled to Bonn to meet Chancellor Adenauer at a time when the Soviet Union was using threats and tricks to try to force the abandonment of West Berlin. You can see why the two got along. That's not just because of their regal dispositions and their matching black frock coats and pinstripe pants.
They were fighting for the values of freedom, individual enterprise, individual human dignity.
They were fighting for the Western world to marshal its power and its purpose, when other important players appeared to be very distracted.
As Adenauer told the cameras after their meeting: “I can say without exaggeration that a great accordance of views was achieved in regards to the most pressing problems of our time.”
I know, I'll be able to using same words to describe my meeting this evening with Chancellor Angela Merkel. Adenauer set the precedent for generations of strong and principled German leaders, who have made Germany a powerful force for good in the world. The list begins of course with Chancellor Merkel and also Helmut Kohl who delivered freedom to the people of East Germany. His death last June was such a loss to the German people. It includes President Steinmeier with his powerful warnings that history can take catastrophic turns when we do not guard the rules and institutions which protect our individual freedoms. I welcomed the President to Perth last November and look forward to continuing our discussion tonight. And it extends to the Chairman of this Foundation, Professor Norbert Lammert who was such a tireless defender of democracy during his time as Bundestag President. Indeed the founding mission of the Konrad Adenauer Stiftung, embodies Adenauer’s life work; to teach democracy and the value of civil society to those who suffered under dictatorship.
You've each shown unwavering commitment to the values of the open society, to the values of freedom and mutual respect, underpinned by the rule of law.
These are the values and institutions that enable our security and prosperity.
These are the strengths that will enable a united, democratic and confident Europe - indeed the liberal democratic world - to reclaim its power and its purpose.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]


Prime Minister of the French Republic, his Excellency Édouard Philippe, Madame Genevieve Darrieussecq, Secretary of State to the Minister for the Armed Forces of France, Major General Thierry Coqueblin, Military Governor of Lille General Jacques Hebrard, Commander of the Northern Defensive Zone for the Gendarmerie, Senator the Honourable Marise Payne, Minister for Defence, The Honourable Darren Chester MP, Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin, Chief of the Australian Defence Force, Members of the family of Sir John Monash, the Honourable Warren Snowden, representing the Leader of the Opposition, former Australian Prime Minister, the Honourable Tony Abbott MP, who announced this centre in 2015 and who, to his credit, has always advocated for a greater recognition in our history of the Australian’s deeds, their service and sacrifice, their loss and their triumph here on the fields of France. Deputies, Senators, Members of Parliament, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen, servicemen and women of France and Australia, veterans.
Australians are hardly militaristic - tomorrow, ANZAC Day, does not commemorate a military victory. The Gallipoli campaign was a tragic and costly failure. We honour instead a triumph of the human spirit; courage, solidarity, resilience and above all mateship.
But while we are never triumphalist, we should never forget the triumphs of arms won by the Australian forces in the midst of all the horrors here of the Great War.
And here at the village of Villers-Bretonneux - exactly one century ago - with that ANZAC spirit and the brilliant leadership of John Monash the Australian forces won a momentous victory - the first of many in 1918.
To truly appreciate John Monash, and more than 46,000 Australians who gave their lives for us out here on the Western Front - we need to stretch the boundaries of our imagination and see this landscape as they did.
From the perfect geometry of these freshly-sown fields, and the immaculate lines of cottages in the village, we have to conjure up the smell and sound and fury of what was one of the greatest artillery bombardments in the history of warfare.
German commander, Erich Ludendorff, called his Spring Offensive, the Vernichtungsschlacht - the battle of annihilation - which aimed to punch a hole in the Allied defences before the Americans arrived in force.
We get a sense of it from the letters those young Australians sent home.
This is Thomas Taylor, a 21 year-old wireless operator who had worked at the post office in Moss Vale, this is him recording what he saw here at the break of dawn on ANZAC Day, 1918.
“Here we saw sights that made one’s heart stand still with pity. For all along the road was stretcher bearers in their masks leading out men totally blind and crying with the pain of gas burns. Dozens were stumbling along alone while along the road were numbers sitting down waiting for a shell to put them out of misery.”
Thomas Taylor was lucky.
The long rows of marble headstones here show how many were not.
Listen to the account of John Alexander Raws, an infantryman from Adelaide his name is inscribed on the walls behind us as one of those Australians whose grave has not been found.
“My tunic is rotten with other men’s blood, and partly splattered with a comrade’s brains. It is horrible, but why should you people at home not know? Several of my friends are raving mad. I met three officers out in No Man’s Land the other night, all rambling and mad the poor devils.”
Try to imagine the sons and daughters and wives and mothers and fathers poring over those letters.
Or worse, waiting for letters that were never sent.
This afternoon Lucy and I stopped the cemetery at Amiens station at the grave of Lucy’s great uncle, Roger Forrest Hughes.
Newly married, a young doctor, and a resident, at St Vincent’s Hospital, Roger enlisted in the AIF in 1916.
Within five days of arriving on banks of the River Somme he was hit by a shell while treating a wounded digger.
Roger died at the age of 26 in the arms of his brother, Lucy’s grandfather, the fighter ace Flt Lt Geoffrey Hughes whose squadron was nearby.
Seven weeks later Roger’s wife, Eileen Maher, gave birth to their son who himself was to die serving Australia in the Royal Australian Air Force during the second world war.
By the Spring of 1918 the Bolsheviks had taken Russia out of the war and the German forces on the Western Front were hugely reinforced by re-deployments from the East.
Ludendorff launched a massive Spring Offensive on 21st March to break the allied lines. And one allied defeat and retreat after another followed.
Churchill described the offensive as ‘the mightiest military conception and the most terrific onslaught which the annals of war record’.
On their second attempt the Germans captured Villers-Bretonneux on 24th April, but in an assault which Sir John Monash later described as “the real turning point of the war” the 13th and 15th Australian Brigades recaptured the town in the early hours of ANZAC Day 1918 and ensured the Germans could not achieve their objective, the capture of Amiens and its vital railway hub.
Monash did the meticulous planning, Brigadier General Pompey Elliott worked with instinct and passion, and together they launched the brilliant and ruthless counter attack that broke the German onslaught and helped to turn the tide of Europe’s deadliest war.
From here, it seems there was nothing Monash could not do.
In May 1918 he was given command of the entire Australian Corps - the first time they had been led by an Australian.
Monash was above all a modern man, an engineer, legally trained, a lateral, creative thinker - as literate as he was numerate. Before the War he made a fortune deploying the latest Monier system of reinforced concrete construction.
We see him in his khakis bewhiskered and stern as Generals were, but to think of Monash in our time, think of a man at the cutting edge of technology, pushing the boundaries of imagination and innovation.
Every one of his men knew exactly where they were going, who they would encounter and what they must achieve and he knew everything depended on them, they were his mates, and so he made sure they had hot meals, dry clothes and were rotated out of the front to recuperate as often as possible.
“The main thing is to always have a plan,” he said. “If it is not the best plan, it is at least better than no plan at all.”
He pioneered aerial supply drops, and air reconnaissance in near-real time, he showed how to use the trench-busting power of armoured tanks.
In short, he revolutionised warfare on the Western Front.
On the 4th July 1918, Monash led Australian and American infantry in what was then the most sophisticated joint operation in history involving air drops, artillery and a line of British tanks in the battle of Hamel.
He planned to take the village in 90 minutes - but was famously three minutes late.
That victory put the German army on the defensive right up until Armistice Day.
And from that time on Australians and Americans have fought side by side in every major conflict.
In August, King George V came to the Somme and knighted Monash in the field surrounded by his troops and captured trophies of war.
By the end of the war there was no-one who doubted his battlefield prowess.
Britain’s Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery later judged Monash to be “the best general on the Western Front in Europe”.
Montgomery said “the war might have been won sooner, and certainly with fewer casualties” if Monash had been in command of the British armies as well.
That’s why we are naming this Centre after Sir John Monash - but it is a memorial to all the Australians who served in this terrible war - from the private soldiers like my grandfather Fred Turnbull, to our greatest General.
We need to know the appalling suffering of the Western Front.
Before Monash boarded his transport ship in December 1914 he and 80 other Jewish military men crowded into the St Kilda Synagogue.
Monash opened the ark to bring out the Torah scroll and the young Rabbi, Jacob Danglow, told the congregation:
“Against the shadow of the darkest calamity which has ever befallen this world, there is a just God judging in the world, who will not allow might to crush right, who will not permit militarism to override morality. Never has the patriotism of His Majesty’s Jewish subjects been more wholehearted, never their loyalty more devoted than it is today, at this season of grave national peril.”
They prayed for King and country. But they did so within a framework of universal principles which we recognise today.
Monash expanded and enriched our conception of our nation, in both forceful and subtle ways. 
We must never forget the lives that are honoured here at Villers-Bretonneux.
We must never forget the 11,000 fallen Australians whose bodies were never recovered - their names etched here on the Australian National Memorial.
Brothers, husbands, fathers and sons.
We must stretch our minds to imagine what it was like for the 320,000 Australians who served overseas.
All volunteers. Every one of them. From a population of less than five million.
60,000 never made it home. You see their names on the stone memorials in almost every Australian country town and you can count the brothers, and the fathers and sons.
Prime Minister Philippe and I were talking about this just before we came here and how every small French village there is also there a monument to the fallen.
Prime Minister both our countries lost the finest of their generation in this dreadful conflict fought here for our freedom and the freedom of France.
And the same number again who died before their time from the poison gas and the illness and the trauma known as shell shock before we called it PTSD. 
There was barely a household in Australia that was not deeply and personally affected.
We must remember all of this - especially us, our nation’s leaders - reminding us why we always strive to resolve conflict by peaceful means.
And when we do put our troops in harm’s way, to do so with the resources, the leadership and the considered strategy that best ensures their success and safe return.
This new Centre expresses our gratitude for all our men and women who fought - and continue to  fight - for our values and our interests as the Minister reminded us not too long ago.
Freedom, parliamentary democracy, the rule of law, mutual respect, the equality of men and women and a fair go - the opportunity to get ahead but lend a hand to those who fall behind.
One of the names inscribed at the Memorial is that of Private Leon Turbe. He is one of about 150 Australian Diggers who our National Archives lists as being born in France.
Turbe is also listed on an honour roll at his home town on Île d’Yeu, off the West coast of France, alongside six other men who share the last name. 
That makes seven from the same extended family, in different uniforms, who all died fighting for our common cause.
Tomorrow here in France, at home in Australia, in Baghdad and Kabul, all around the world, thousands of Australians will be gathering in the moments before Dawn on ANZAC Day. Young servicemen and women - today’s ANZACs -  will join the veterans of years past and countless others who know that every freedom we enjoy has been hard won and hard held, in every generation, by the men and women who put their lives on the line, wearing our uniform, under our flag.
And in the midst of the stone, and steel, and glass of this serene monument, we know that the best way to honour the diggers of 1918 is to support the servicemen and women, the veterans and their families of today.
Lest we forget.


PRIME MINISTER: 
Dr Patrick Simon, Mayor of Villers-Bretonneux. Members of the Sadlier, Stokes, McGowan and Bovington families. Mr Guillaume Fournet and students from Ecole Victoria. Mr Franck Bommelaer and students from Houtland College. Mr Christophe Decayeux, Ms Isabelle Galipaud and students from Lycée Sacré Coeur. Ladies and gentlemen.
Today we have been commemorating the brave men and women who risked and lost their lives in the First World War so that we may live today in freedom and in peace.
Today, children, Villers-Bretonneux is full of Australians. 100 years ago, it was also full of Australians but they were fighting hand to hand in the most brutal conflict to free your town and keep France free.
These young soldiers, young men in their teens and twenties, were thousands of miles from home. And some, too many, never returned. They were all volunteers, they came willingly, and they fought ferociously, for freedom and for the freedom of the people of France.
And we honour today among them, Lieutenant Clifford Sadlier and Sergeant Charlie Stokes. Their extraordinary courage and resilience helped their battalion to advance during the battle here in your town on the 25th April 1918, 100 years ago. And that courage and that of their comrades enabled this town to be free.
Their story, as well as those of so many others, is remembered by the Sadlier Stokes Prize, which I am honoured to be awarding today to young French students. We are all proud to see younger generations, both France and Australia, exploring the history of their grandfathers, great-grandfathers, great-great-grandfathers who fought so hard here in the fields and towns around us.
It is also a great honour for us, particularly Lucy and me, to be here today with the descendants of both Clifford Sadlier and Charlie Stokes. Like many Australians every year, they have travelled a long way to pay tribute to their ancestors on the land where they fought.
This presentation is also a celebration of the remarkable friendship between Australia and France and so my warmest thanks go to you Monsieur Le Maire of Villers-Bretonneux, Mr Patrick Simon, all the local representatives and your community for your remarkable welcome.
You vowed that you would never forget Australia, and it brings such comfort and joy to our nation and to the descendants of the men who fought here to know that you have kept your promise.
We will remember them.
Lest we forget.
I now have the pleasure of presenting the 2018 Sadlier Stokes prizes to the laureates.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
His Excellency Emmanuel Macron, President of the French Republic, Mr Philippe Germain, President of the Government of New Caledonia, Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack, and all my Cabinet and ministerial colleagues and French Ministers who are all here with us tonight. NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian, South Australian Premier, Steven Marshall, your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen
Thank you Yvonne for welcoming us here to the land of Gadigal people of the Eora nation.
Welcome Mr President, to Australia and to Sydney.
When you were running for President, you committed yourself to “pick up the thread of our history and the momentum of progress.” Here in this place, the thread of history is very long indeed; the Gadigal people were here on the shores of this harbour nearly 50,000 years before the paintings on the walls of the cave in Lascaux.
Theirs is the oldest and most resilient human civilization. You see our nation, Australia, is both old and new. As old and as new as 65,000 years of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander civilization - creative, dynamic and alive - as the Bangarra dance and the artists who created the Badu Gili waterlight we saw earlier tonight. As new as the baby in the arms of her migrant mother and as old as the cultures she inherits and brings to our remarkable multicultural nation. And right here, Joern Utzon’s extraordinary design for this place was accepted 60 years ago. His opera house was opened 45 years ago and yet it remains always a timeless symbol of Australian optimism and modernity.
Mr President, you have written of how you first took up the thread of France’s history with your grandmother, in your home of Amiens. A century ago Australians were defending Amiens, with courage and sacrifice, writing heroic chapters in our shared history.
Tomorrow, at the ANZAC Memorial in Hyde Park, we will honour, as we did with Prime Minister Edouard Philippe at Villers Bretonneux, the 46,000 Australians who died on the Western Front in The First World War. You will decorate some of our veterans who fought to free France in the Second World War.
More threads of shared history, across the world and in our region as well.
In 1940 it was Prime Minister Robert Menzies who deployed the Australian cruiser HMAS Adelaide, to deliver Governor Henri Sautot to Noumea to rally New Caledonia to General de Gaulle and free France.
You have come to the Elysee at a challenging time, when pessimists and populists, - and they almost go together - would have us turn on each other. You campaigned, as you govern, with positive force. You quoted one of your heroes Malraux, who said: “Le contre n’existe pas.” And you declared: “Je suis un homme du pour”.
You are a man who is “for” not “against”. We might say “always on the front foot”, always “glass half full, not half empty”.
You have condemned the culture which stigmatises failure and marginalises success. To put it in Australian, you’ve urged the French to have a go, and if it doesn't work out, dust yourself and have another go.
You have made innovation, science, technology a mission and so have we. And we are doing it together. Just one example of many, Thales Australia’s Bushmasters are operationally proven and are the best mine-resistant vehicle of their type in the world, saving hundreds of soldiers’ lives.
We’ll be building the most advanced submarines in the world with our partnership with Naval Group and our collaborations in arts and culture, in science, in solar energy and storage, in computing, in medicine, in marine biology, sustainable cities, engineering and so many other fields, continues apace. Your visit will accelerate all of them.
From here, your politics seem shorn of the cramped ideology of the traditional Left and Right, and is focused on maximising the opportunity for each citizen of the Republic of France, to fulfill themselves and realise their dreams.
You’ve stood against the rising tide of protectionism, as we have done, notably by completing the Trans-Pacific Partnership despite the exit of the United States. An ambitious Australia-European Union Free Trade Agreement will add new force - economic and strategic - to our relationship.
What we fought for a century ago continues to unite us.
After all, France’s values are our values; liberte, egalite, fraternite.
Or as we would say, liberte, freedom, fraternite, mateship and egalite, a fair go.
The diggers and the poilus did not speak the same language, but they fought for the same freedom, as their descendants are doing right now around the world in the war against terrorism.
Of course, Australians are enterprising and some of the diggers did pick up a little practical French. My grandfather Fred Turnbull, a private in the Great War, recalled to me when we were fishing his sole recollection of the French language:
Bonjour mademoiselle, voulez vous promener avec moi?
[Laughter]
And of course we share another great national ambition, as Michael Hooper would agree, of beating the All Blacks.
[Laughter]
Mr President, your enthusiasm and positivity is an inspiration to us all. But just as you seek to give new direction to France - to its economy, to its science, to its confidence - so too do you see France as a global force for good. Custodian of a language spoken by 275 million people, a nation with territories around the world, a Pacific nation and thus in New Caledonia one of our closest neighbours.
When we first met in Hamburg and then at the Elysee, as you spoke, I was reminded forcefully of the opening lines of de Gaulle’s memoires “une certaine idee de la France”. “A certain idea of France.” I had not read them for more than 40 years, but I had never forgotten their clear-eyed patriotism, their rejection of mediocrity and their ambition always to excel.
“Bref, à mon sens,” de Gaulle concluded. “La France ne peut être la France sans la grandeur.”
France cannot be France without greatness. France cannot be itself without aspiring to be the very best. Under your leadership Mr President, I am sure that will be so. As I am sure that our friendship, our solidarity, indeed our mateship will be stronger than ever.
Now it is my great pleasure, to propose a toast to the President and the people of the French Republic.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Distinguished guests, veterans, service men and women of today, Ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls, and a special welcome to our visiting students from France.
I acknowledge that we meet on the land of the Gadigal people of the Eora nation, and pay my respect to their elders past, present and emerging. 
We gather to commemorate the sacrifice of our two nations in war.
To honour our fallen, and the shared beliefs for which those men fought and died so heroically.
Last week we were in Villers-Bretonneux. To stand in the fields of the Somme, is to stand on land sacred to Australia and France: two nations that have fought, and bled, and died together.
Brothers in arms, mates, in freedom’s cause. 
So many of our Australian sons lie in French soil, 300,000, more than 300,000 fought there, over 46,000 were killed on the Western Front, 11,000 of their names are recorded on the Australian National Memorial because they have no home grave, 130,000 were wounded, all of them volunteers.
In March 1916, on the deck of the troopship Transylvania bound for France, Second Lieutenant Frank Bethune addressed his men. This is what he said to them:
“We know what we have come for, and we know that it is right. We know that the Germans invaded a peaceful country and brought these horrors into it. We came of our own free will — to say that this sort of thing shall not happen, shall not happen in the world as long as we are in it.”
The deeds and sacrifice of those men, and all who have fought for our freedom since, are at the heart of the free and peaceful lives we enjoy today.
Mr President, last night you spoke with great passion about living in accordance with the lessons of our shared history. 
Australia’s first casualty in the Great War was Lieutenant William Malcolm Chisholm, an old boy of Sydney Grammar School, just across the road from us here today.  My old school in fact. 
He lost his life in the Battle of Le Cateau in Northern France in August 1914, he was serving with the British army.
Now Australia was a nation then of five million. Over 400,000 Australians volunteered. More than 60,000 were killed. Sydney Grammar School is an example of the level of commitment. It was a School of about 600 boys. Around 1,800 former students and teachers volunteered. 308 were killed, made the supreme sacrifice.
And in the memorial there in the school, of course is inscribed the immortal words, of Pericles and his funeral oration: “The whole world is the tomb of famous men”.
In 2018, we mark the centenary of the end of the First World War.
Last week we honoured Anzac Day in ceremonies all around the world.
And next week we will mark the moment 73 years ago when victory in Europe was secured again.
Our brave servicemen and women have borne a heavy load to defend our freedom, and our values: in Korea and Vietnam, in conflicts in South-East Asia and the Middle East, in peacekeeping efforts around the world, and more recently, in Afghanistan and Iraq. I see with us here many veterans of those very long wars.
More than 102,000 Australians have died in defence of our nation.
When our people. French and Australians, met on the Western Front they recognised in each other their unbreakable spirit.
The French saw in our diggers courage and tenacity; their spirit of mateship.
It’s said that when French villagers, fleeing the German advance, saw Australian soldiers heading to the front, they stayed put: ‘vous les tiendrez!’ they said. “You’ll hold them.”
And, in return, our diggers saw the strength of France.
The stoic endurance of its infantry, Le Poilu. The French people’s pride and resilience; their deep love of their country.
So, the Australians fought as if France was their homeland too.
As Georges Clemenceau, the French Prime Minister, told them in July 1918:
“We knew that you would fight a real fight, but we did not know that from the very beginning you would astonish the whole continent.”
Between March 1916 and November 1918 more than 30 battles were fought on the Western Front, involving almost 300,000 Australians.
Some became household names: Fromelles and Pozières, Bullecourt.
In 1918 alone, a series of battles at Hébuterne, Dernancourt, Morlancourt helped stem the German advance. There was the capture of Hamel, and the brilliant seizing of Mont St Quentin and Péronne.
And on one of the few occasions where Australian and French troops fought side by side in the same battle, the defence of Amiens — your hometown, Mr President.
The French people carry in their heart the weight of war’s grief, and yet there is room too for enormous gratitude. And I felt it, as did all of our party, so deeply when we were in France.
Nowhere more evident than in the small village of Villers-Bretonneux, which I visited last week to open the Sir John Monash Centre.
Australia’s diggers were ordered to recapture the village from the Germans.
It was said they had no chance. But on Anzac Day, one hundred years ago, they achieved what General Monash described as “the finest thing yet done in the war by Australians, or any other troops.”
Villers-Bretonneux was saved and today, that sacrifice is honoured with love and gratitude.
The Australian flag flies high. Kangaroos watch over the entrance to the town hall. The main street is called Rue de Melbourne.
And in Victoria School — rebuilt with money raised by schoolchildren in Australia — the story of Australia’s fallen sons is told.
They are France’s sons, too.
As one of the plaques in the Victoria School reads: “May the memory of great sacrifices in a common cause keep France and Australia together forever in bonds of friendship and mutual esteem.”
Today we remember all those who’ve served in war, and all those who serve today.
We honour our Indigenous soldiers. They fought for a nation that did not fully appreciate their culture, or acknowledge their history, and was yet to see the possibility of their future. A nation that offered them few rights. But they fought bravely alongside their fellow Australians and they too, have our lasting gratitude.
We offer our condolences to all who mourn, their lives marked forever by the absence of those Australian and French heroes who are forever young.
And we remember that the best way to honour the diggers, and the poilu of a century ago is by supporting the servicemen and women, the veterans and their families of today.
So let us vow to learn the lessons of war’s destruction; to stand firm with our friends, to open our arms, and our hearts, to our neighbours.
That is how we’ll build a safer world.
Lest we forget.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well, Mr President, Emmanuel, welcome again. You have enjoyed a very warm and very rapturous welcome here in Sydney, I think Australia appeals to you and you appeal to Australia and Australians. So thank you so much.
We’ve had a very good discussion here today at Admiralty House with our colleagues, our Ministers and we’ve recognised, as we have in our previous events and speeches, how our two nations have so much in common.
We’ve talked about and honoured the joint sacrifices on the battlefield. And reflected on the sacrifices in France in the First World War, indeed in the Somme region where you were born and grew up.
Of course, that joint sacrifice marks our history. It defines our history and our remembrance.
It is the foundation but our future now is defined by the opportunities and the shared values, the timeless values of freedom, the rule of law, democracy, the equality of men and women, mutual respect.
These timeless values are never more than timely than they are today. They define our two nations and our two great democracies.
Australia and France are forces for good in the world.
We stand here united, working together to protect and support peace and prosperity. As I said in Villers-Bretonneux last week, the bond which was forged on the Western Front is as strong as ever. Over 100 years later, we continue to stand side by side and act against threats to our security and to our values. We act against terrorism, against those who seek to undermine the integrity of our democratic institutions. Against governments that use chemical weapons against their own people or other nation's people. But our relationship is not defined by what we stand against, rather by what we stand for.
The President said in his book, Revolution, he said that he is a man of “for”. “Je suis un homme du pour.” You are a positive leader and we are positive too. We stand for shared values of freedom, democracy and opportunity. Our support for the international rules-based order which underpins our security and which assures us that might is not right. Critically important, as one of the great leaders in our region, the founder of Singapore – his son of course Lee Hsien Loong is the Prime Minister today – 50 years ago in the 1960s, he said: "We don't want to have a world where the big fish eat the little fish and the little fish eat the shrimp."
And that is what the rule of law does and that is why we stand together to defend it.
We recognise too, that a commitment to free and open trade is also underpinned by the rules of law and forms the bedrock of our shared prosperity.
We've had some very substantive exchanges today. We’ve committed to strengthening our cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, we share the vision of a free, open and prosperous Indo-Pacific and will work closely to realise it. Whether it is closer cooperation on maritime activities, support for our friends in the Pacific through humanitarian and disaster relief, support for infrastructure in the region.
France is a Pacific power. It is a Pacific nation and it’s significant presence in the region can only bring benefits to Australia and to the region more broadly. We welcome that and we’ll continue to work closely with France in our region.
We’ve discussed our joint commitment to the fight against terrorism and we continue to stand shoulder to shoulder in that fight, including through joint action in Iraq against ISIS. We’ve agreed to host the next International Conference on Terrorist Financing, following on from the one President Macron hosted last week in Paris. There must be no money for terror. We have to cut off their finances and by doing so, we reduce and diminish their capability to do us harm.
We both have condemned, in the strongest terms, the use of chemical weapons in Syria. I made clear to the President that Australia strongly supports the action France took with the United Kingdom and the United States in response to the latest chemical attack in Syria. Of course, we’ve discussed and both remained committed to a political solution in that troubled country.
We have discussed our future submarine program, which is laying the groundwork for even deeper collaboration in defence.
We’re building together the world's most advanced non-nuclear submarines for our Navy. This $50 billion program represents the strategic partnership that will last for generations. As the design matures and we start the building phase, Australians will return home from France and pass on the cutting-edge knowledge gained from their counterparts. The establishment of a sovereign defence industry in Australia is a vital national objective of my Government. This is a great national enterprise. Our whole Defence Investment Plan, critically important and Mr President, you are our partners in this great project.
Today, we’re issuing a joint vision statement to set a framework for a shared future of cooperation, joint ambition and innovation, through the Australia-France Initiative or AFiniti. AFiniti will strengthen our collaboration and usher in a new era of Australia-France cooperation.
It’s always been a very cooperative and amicable relationship, a very positive relationship between good friends with shared values. But Mr President, your visit is taking it to new heights. We are accelerating a great partnership and a strong friendship.
We’ve charged our respective Foreign Ministers, Julie Bishop and Jean-Yves Le Drian to take on the task of carrying the project forward.
As a first step, the President and I are announcing a number of ambitious new initiatives. We’ve witnessed a new agreement on mutual logistics support that will enhance operability between our armed forces to respond to common challenges such as humanitarian crises and natural disasters where we already work together, especially in this region.
There will be a new Defence Industry Symposium, to strengthen defence and business cooperation beyond the submarine program. It’ll identify investment opportunities for Australian and French companies and ensure Australian defence industry is equipped with the knowledge and skills to be competitive in the global market.
We’ve signed a letter of intent to enhance cyber cooperation, to improve information sharing and better work together to counter malicious cyber activities, whether by state actors or by their proxies, by criminal networks or terrorist groups.
We both have reaffirmed that the laws that apply offline, should apply online. We have committed to joint action on climate change adaption and environmental protection and agreed to work together on reef resilience, the resilience of coral reefs in the Pacific.
As founding members of the International Solar Alliance we’ll focus on ways to mobilise, finance and develop technologies to harness and deploy solar energy in the region. As I was saying to you Mr President, we’re also in the process of building the biggest battery in the southern hemisphere, Snowy 2.0, which supports renewable energy. I might say Australia has the largest percentage of rooftop solar in the world. So we have certainly embraced the principles of that solar alliance.
Last weekend, we announced the single largest investment ever to ensure the resilience of the Great Barrier Reef, in the face of climate change and other threats. That resilience research that is going on as well is going to be vitally important to every other coral reef.
For the first time, under our National Energy Guarantee, we are integrating, fully, climate and energy policy, ensuring that electricity is affordable, reliable and meets our emissions targets under the Paris Agreement.
I’ve also welcomed the signing of a number of agreements with the President, including memorandums of understanding between Australian and French universities and research institutions on important projects like quantum computing - few more important than that - solar energy and cancer research. Whatever field you can identify, where French and Australian intellects are brought together for the betterment of mankind, we're ensuring that is being done and will be done more so in the future.
We’ve also have talked about free trade. We’ve talked about the importance of an Australia-EU free trade agreement, which will promote further trade between Australia and the EU and of course, Australia and France, which totaled almost $9 billion in 2016-17.
We both understand that free trade and open markets are good for jobs. Good for jobs in France, good for jobs in Australia. So we’ve established a new ministerial dialogue on trade and investment, to broaden and deepen our economic relationship, help drive economic growth and job creation in both countries.
We’ve discussed our deep business relationships across the board, with both Australia and France committed to increased investment and reduced company tax, to drive that investment growth, innovation and jobs.
Mr President, you have here in Australia, great friends. You welcomed Lucy and I so warmly to the Élysée after we had our first encounter in Hamburg.
You are here among friends. Australia welcomes you.
We thank you for your friendship, for your partnership and we look forward to the partnership between Australia and France going to even greater heights under your leadership.
Thank you.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you very much Captain.
Mr. President welcome to Garden Island, for more than a century this has been the home of the Royal Australian Navy and as the captain has described we are here on HMAS Canberra our Navy's flagship.
It is the third HMAS Canberra that has served our nation.
The first was sunk at the Battle of Savo Island in the Second World War.
The second enforced United Nations sanctions in the Red Sea in the early 1990s against Iraq before deploying again to the Persian Gulf a decade later.
And in its short life this ship and its crew have already provided vital humanitarian support, as we were discussing with the defence minister, to the people of Fiji after Cyclone Winston.
So, it's a great privilege to welcome you here at a place of such strategic importance at a time that calls for true leadership in the name of security and in the cause of the security and prosperity of our two nations.
Mr. President last week, while I visited the battlefields of the Somme with your Prime Minister Édouard Philippe, you were addressing the United States Congress and you spoke with clarity and wisdom on the challenges of our time.
You were, you said, responding to the call of history you warned of the perils of isolationism, withdrawal and nationalism. You called for a new breed of multi-lateralism a strong multi-lateralism.
Mr. President we understand that call and we share a commitment to build a global consensus to address the challenges of our time. Our world does face a rising tide of anti-democratic populism. Protectionism, authoritarianism is eroding the foundations or has the risk of eroding the foundations of prosperity and security.
You spoke very wisely Mr. President to the European Parliament a fortnight earlier. You said faced with the authoritarianism which surrounds us on all sides the answer must not be authoritarian democracy but the authority of democracy.
To meet the challenges of our times, the threat to openness, to freedom and to individual humanity, democracies must rediscover the power and the purpose of the ideas that have made and continue to make us who we are. Values, principles and institutions that have built and protected the rules-based order of which we spoke earlier today at Kirribilli House.
We know this very well in Australia, our country like yours has a proud history as a participant, not a passenger in world events. A force for good.
We were a founding member of the United Nations. We played an important role in drafting the UN Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We're strong and consistent advocates for global trade. We fostered the birth of new democracies and when the world has been threatened by extremism. We have acted.
Australians always stand up for what is right. We have a global outlook and we firmly share your view that closing the door to the world will not, in your words, stop its evolution.
And that was my message as I travelled across the United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium and France last week. And it's that reason Mr. President we support your efforts to promote a strong multi-lateralism.
Be it in Syria in response to the chemical weapons attacks in Iran and the case against nuclear weapons or in the domain of free and open trade. You're driving France's place in the world as a global leader with an ambitious policy agenda and in this real world with all its challenges threats and opportunities these noble principles must be backed by strength and sovereignty.
Modern economic and security challenges must be a shared global responsibility. But this begins with sovereignty. Sovereignty to take decisions that safeguard our own security and prosperity because the stronger we are at home the more we can contribute globally.
And that's why we're embarking on one of the greatest engineering projects in our nation's history. Rebuilding and equipping our navy with new patrol vessels, frigates, destroyers and with the help of France, submarines.
This program represents a huge leap forward in the strategic partnership between France and Australia. It increases the exchange of technology and skills between our nations, it creates economic opportunities and jobs in both countries and it bolsters a partnership that will last for generations.
Mr. President together we're facing the challenges of the future. We're acting to protect and preserve the global order that has delivered and secured our peace and prosperity and we're strengthening the deep bonds between France and Australia. It is my great pleasure now to invite you President Macron to address us.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Lucy and I are so, so honoured to be with you.
Congratulations and so much love to all of the survivors.
Well done! Give yourselves a big cheer.
[Applause]
And you know we were just talking to Amanda, a woman a mum, who’s survived breast cancer and she was there with her friends, and she said and they agreed, that she got through it because of their love.
The love that you’re showing this morning, supporting breast cancer research is the love that pulls us through, it pulls people through emotionally and it provides the resources for the research that we need to walk all over breast cancer by 2030. That’s the goal.
[Applause]
We’re backing you. You know we’ve just listed yet another great life saving drug, Kisqali, on the PBS and we’re doing more, making sure the best drugs, the best services, the best science are there to support you.
So on this Mother’s Day, a day of love, support the survivors, put your arms around your mother, your wife whether she’s a mother or a grandmother or great grandmother -not yet we’ve got that to look forward too.
[Laughter]
Whether she’s called mum, or mummy, or granny or nanna or gaga, as Lucy is. That’s the thing, this is all about love.
So have a great walk, and remember we’re committed to walking all over breast cancer.
Congratulations Sarah, where are you? Sarah’s the Chief Executive of the National Breast Cancer Research, and what she’s done, what you’ve done is raise $33 million over 21 years of this walk. And what we want to do is get to $40 million as quickly as possible.
So have a great walk and if you’re not here walking today, just watching this on television. Get online and make a donation.
This is a day to show all of the love you can to your mother, to your grandmother, to all of the mothers in your life. And above all to remember it’s our mission to walk all over breast cancer.
That is the way we support our mothers, our grandmothers, now and in the years ahead.
Lots of love and have a great walk.
[ENDS] 


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well, thank you very much Stacey, it is great to be back in Tasmania, great to be back in Devonport. I want to say, we’ve had a fantastic day, or morning up at Cradle Mountain. It was cold, there is no doubt about that but…
[Laughter]
… the Premier, you know, he’s incredibly tough. He really was wearing nothing more than a business shirt and a pullover, everyone else was dressed up for an arctic expedition, but not the Premier. It’s good to see, he’s young and fit.
[Laughter]
But we survived, didn’t we Premier? So look, Stacey, thank you very much for your warm welcome. Will, it’s great to be here with you again and congratulations on winning another term in government at the last election. It’s good to be here with Senator Richard Colbeck and Senator Steve Martin, where is Steve? I’ve just been hearing all about you from Stacey and boy, you have got a fan there. She’s a great salesman, fantastic.
And of course, a special welcome to Brett Whiteley who is back on the hustings to convince you all, and everyone, that he needs to be the Federal MP for Braddon once again. Let’s give him a round of applause.
[Applause]
We were up at Cradle Mountain announcing the Federal Government’s commitment to a further $30 million for the Cableway Project. That’s alongside the State Government’s contribution of more than $56 million overall to the Cradle Mountain Master Plan. It’s a game-changer. It’s going to deliver 60,000 more visitors, 150 jobs in construction, 50 more jobs ongoing. But as we’ve just been discussing already here today, this is absolutely critical, this is the ultimate tourism destination. It’s “experience tourism” as you were saying Steve, when you talked about it up on top of Cradle Mountain. Richard Colbeck, former Tourism Minister talked about it also and Tasmania can offer that in a way that very few other places can do so.
But you’ve got to build on the great momentum that is driving stronger economic growth and more jobs in Tasmania. You’ve got a great government, led by Will and his Liberal team. You’ve got strong advocates in Canberra, Senators Colbeck, Jono Duniam, David Bushby and Eric Abetz and of course we’re hoping to add Brett once again to that legion of passionate Tasmanians in the federal Parliament.
We know that the objective for the Budget was to deliver on the promises we made in 2016 at the election, with stronger economic growth and more jobs.
And we have delivered on that. You know, ever since the election, our National Economic Plan has been working and we saw last year, 415,000 new jobs created in Australia. That is the largest jobs growth in any calendar year in our nation’s history.
We’re also delivering a clear path to repair of the Budget. We can’t afford to throw a growing mountain of debt onto the shoulders of our children and grandchildren - even if you’ve got four grandchildren like me. But still, we don’t want to do that. We want to bring that debt down.
And you know something? Net debt this year is going to peak. It will peak this year and after this year, it’ll come down every year as a share of GDP. It’s about 18.6 per cent this financial year that’s 2017/18. In ten years’ time, it will be 3.8 per cent of GDP. You don’t have to take my word for it, it’s all in the budget papers. That is the result of bringing the Budget back into balance a year early, a year earlier than we forecast. So it will come back into balance in 2019/20 and then go into surplus after that.
Now critically, what we need to do is to ensure that everything is encouraging stronger economic growth. I know you hear me talk about this a lot but it is the enabler, the great enabler for everything you want to do. Whether it is to provide record funding for infrastructure in Tasmania, whether it is to spend $30 million to support the Cableway Project on Cradle Mountain, whether it is to enable tax relief for businesses – absolutely vital, if you lower business taxes, you get more investment, you get more productivity, you get more jobs, plainly. That’s why we’re so committed to them. Or indeed, to provide tax relief for hardworking Australians on lower and middle incomes. I’ll come back to what we’ve done there in a moment.
All of that requires a stronger economy.
You know, not only do we have record jobs growth in Australia and record levels of employment overall, we have the lowest percentage of Australians of working age on welfare in 25 years.
Now since 2013, we’ve seen 17,000 new jobs here in Tasmania and many of them have come through our big export trade deals. Again, we haven’t swallowed that protectionist claptrap that Bill Shorten has become so keen on in recent times. We pressed ahead with the Trans-Pacific Partnership. We got the free trade deals with China, Korea, Japan, most recently Peru, we’re working on one with Indonesia. We’ve got a new one with Singapore, but the Trans-Pacific Partnership is an 11 country deal. When Donald Trump pulled out of it, a lot of people said – notably Bill Shorten – that we should abandon it. It was “dead”. He said ‘the TTP is dead and the Government is being deluded by pursuing it’.
You know, that is going to offer our exporters huge advantages and opportunities in ten other markets right around the Pacific, that is including of course Japan, the largest country in the TPP.
If you give up on Australian jobs, then you will get the type of economic growth Labor governments are famous for which is; either no, or slow, or negative economic growth.
You need to have a government with a relentless focus on enabling business, because it is business that creates the jobs. Exports are a big part of that.
Now let me go through the contents of the Budget, very briefly.
So from 2018-19, next financial year, more than 10 million low and middle earners will get up to $530 in tax relief each year. In Braddon alone, there are more than 39,200 taxpayers who stand to benefit from that tax relief next year, with around half of them receiving the full $530.
Now that’s a modest measure, I’m not suggesting it’s a huge tax refund, because Australians have made it very clear that budget repair is a priority.
But it’s also affordable, because we’re living within our means. The Government is living within its means and we’re bringing the Budget back into balance.
Now, Stage Two locks in this tax relief for low and middle income earners and it protects middle income Australians from bracket creep, where as we all know, increases in wages are eaten up by moving into higher tax brackets, where the greater taxes, the marginal rate of taxes is higher.
In Stage Three – this is in 2024/25 - we abolish the entire tax bracket, the 37 cent tax bracket, ensuring that 94 per cent of Australians will never face a marginal tax rate higher than 32.5 per cent.
So think about that; what we’re talking about here is that you’ll go into the 32.5 per cent bracket at $41,000 which is obviously higher than it is now. Then, all the way up to $200,000 of income – and by that stage only 6 per cent of taxpayers will be earning more than $200,000 – you’ll pay no more than 32.5 cents in any additional dollar you earn.
What that means, is you’re giving every incentive to people to get ahead, to do some overtime, to seek a promotion, to start a business, to invest in their business. You’re saying that we’re not going to get caught into that sort of spiral of “earn some more, and the government reaches into your pocket even deeper.
What this will do is ensure you get all of those incentives and support for enterprise right.
I just want to say to those people like Bill Shorten, who says it’s unfair, I’ll tell you what’s unfair; robbing grandmothers of their savings. That’s really unfair. Reducing people’s savings, retiree’s savings – I imagine there might be a few here that have done that – and then you suddenly say companies, superannuation funds, people with big portfolios, can access franking credits and use it to reduce their tax on their other sources of income. But you – you who have chosen to put your savings, your modest savings, into a portfolio consisting of Australian blue chip shares, you won’t be able to get those franking credits.
We see in the Australian today, that is how Shorten is trying to fund his alternative tax plan; by robbing people’s grandparents. It’s outrageous. I was sitting next to a woman in her 80s in Queanbeyan last week and I know her husband – he’s well into his 80s so they’re not in a position to go out and start a new business or getting into a new job or anything like that. They are very much retired. It’s a 28 per cent reduction in their income as advised by their accountant. Now how is that fair?
It’s exactly the approach that Shorten has taken on citizenship. He thinks he can get away with it.
He thought he could get away with asserting that Justine Keay and three other members of his were eligible to sit in the Parliament, even though the High Court last October, said they weren’t. He thought he could get away with it until finally it became too much and they had to resign. Now, belatedly, we have these by-elections.
But I want you to understand that the choice here at this coming election and indeed at these by-elections, is a very stark one.
Everything we’re doing, everything we’re doing, is supporting investment and economic growth. We’re supporting investment and jobs and It’s working. The Labor Party has over $200 billion of additional taxes. Whether it is on businesses, companies and trusts, whether it’s on individuals, particularly on higher incomes, whether it is on property, banning negative gearing, they call it a tax loophole, it’s not a tax loophole, it’s been part of the tax system since 1911, it’s a business deduction.
And then of course, this extraordinary attack on retirees and self-funded retirees and their savings. Incredible. So that’s a really stark choice. We’re not in one of those situations where the Labor Party is trying to tack to the centre and pretend that they’re progressive economic managers. They’re not, this is Jeremy Corbyn - Australia style is what Shorten is going for. He is left-wing, anti-business and anti-jobs and it’s a huge risk.
Now because we’ve got a stronger economy, we’re able to provide a guarantee of our essential services. I’ll just run through a couple of the measures here.
We’re providing more help for older Australians to stay in their home, with $1.6 billion funding an extra 14,000 high-level home care places and that’s in addition to the 6,000 high level places we funded last year.
What we’re doing is bringing the funding for residential aged care and home care into essentially the one bucket so that it can meet demand. The truth is there’s less demand for residential aged care and more demand for people to get support while they’re in their own home. That’s a good thing, so we should again meet the requirements and meet the – provide older Australians with the respect they deserve.
We’re increasing the Pension Work Bonus to allow pensioners, aged pensioners to earn an extra $50 a fortnight without reducing their pension. Again, with older people who are on the pension, they want to stay connected to the workforce and that’s good. It’s good for everybody. Good for the economy, good for them, good for their state of mind. So we want to provide that encouragement.
We’re making superannuation more secure — we’re giving the Australian Tax Office the power to reunite 3 million people with – wait for it - $6 billion in lost super, that’s a lot of money. So the ATO will proactively reunite you with your lost super, it will track you down in effect. So that’s going to be restoring billions of dollars to its real owners. We’re going to ban exit fees for members who switch funds, and we’re going to cap fees for low-balance accounts at three per cent. Some of you may have had this experience, you’ve moved on from a job, you’ve got a small amount of money in a superannuation fund, you check in a few years later and there’s nothing left because of all of the fees, so we’re capping that.
Tasmania’s going to receive an additional $373.6 million for public hospitals over 5 years from 2020-21 – and that’s a total of $2.4 billion over that period. So that’s more money for more doctors, more nurses and more services and support for patients, including in the North West and West Coast of Tasmania.
And compare that to Labor’s last full year in office: in 2012-13 the Commonwealth funding for Tasmania's public hospitals was $294 million. This year (2017-18) it is $418.6 million – so that’s up 42 per cent. So just remember the next time the Labor Party says we’re cutting hospital funding. Completely and utterly untrue. It’s increasing every year and here as well in Tasmania.
We have backed our Medicare guarantee with an additional investment of $4.8 billion for Medicare which includes lifting the Medicare indexation freeze, which we inherited from the Labor Party.
We’re prioritising bulk billing: in 2016-17 there were 158,000 more bulk billed GP attendances in Tasmania compared to the last full year of the Labor Party in office. So again, when you hear that we’re undermining Medicare, we’ve guaranteed it. We’ve restored indexation. We’re spending more on it every year, and more people are using it, particularly bulk billing.
So everything you hear from the Labor Party about Medicare is a lie. It is an absolute lie. Guaranteed it, increased it and it’s being used more. You can’t do better than that.
In terms of our Budget for Tasmania, we’ve included $921 million for new investments in Tasmanian infrastructure over the next decade: the Bridgewater Bridge of course, very popular in Hobart, long-term upgrades to the Bass Highway corridor, and the second tranche of the Tasmanian Rail Revitalisation Package.
We’ve committed in total, $2.2 billion to infrastructure around the state, ensuring that everyone can get home sooner and safer.
And of course, I can make a commitment because of our responsible economic management that Labor cannot. Tasmania will not receive one cent less, one cent less as a result of the GST, any changes to the GST that flow from the Productivity Commission Report, and I gave that commitment when I was standing with Will gibbering in the cold up there at Cradle Mountain. In fact I embraced him at the same time.
[Laughter]
I’m not sure whether I was trying to save myself or him, but either way.
[Laughter]
Let’s just talk about schools. We hear the Labor Party says we’re cutting schools. Again I’ll just give you the numbers, you work out whether you think they’re telling the truth.
The Budget shows funding for education rises from $33.7 billion this year to $39.3 billion in 2021-22. Funding for schools alone rises from $18.3 billion to $23.5 billion - every year a record.
With the Gonski reforms that we have actually introduced, Labor used to talk about them, we actually introduced them. We have for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth national, consistent, needs-based, federal funding for schools. So doesn’t matter the school, if the school has got the same needs, it doesn’t matter if it’s in Tasmania or Western Australia, it doesn’t matter whether it’s a Catholic or a Protestant or a Jewish School, it will get the same funding. That’s what everyone has said should be aspired to, we’ve actually delivered it.
So the gap between us and Labor has never been greater. We will, as you know, as Liberals, always look for ways to reduce the burden of tax on families and businesses. And we’re doing that.
And I want to thank Steve, and I want to thank all the Senators, particularly on the crossbench who’ve supported our efforts to do that. Because we know that Australians should be able to retain more of the money that they earn. We shouldn’t take any more of the money they earn than we need to. We’re particularly focused on ensuring that business has every incentive to invest and employ.
Those are our values, and they are values that are delivering for Tasmania. They’re delivering for the nation.
Our opponents on the other hand are diametrically opposed to that. It hasn’t always been the case, just like you can’t trust Shorten’s rolled gold guarantees on citizenship. He’s got twin T problems as Christopher Pyne was saying today. He’s got a problem with one T word, which is trust. You can’t trust him, because everything I just said to you about the importance of lower business taxes Bill Shorten has said. He’s actually said it very eloquently, he said: “lower business taxes result in more investment, higher productivity, more jobs and better paid jobs”. That’s what he said. He was right. Economic orthodoxy, complete reverse today. We’ve heard what he’s said on citizenship, indefensible position he had there. Trying to get away with it for as long as he could. You cannot trust him, the only thing he knows, is that he is coming after you with much higher taxes.
Now if you think that our economy can bear another $200 billion of taxes, well I’d have to beg to differ with you. We know that the energy and enterprise of our economy comes from business. And you’ve got to be prepared to support business. 
Now we believe everyone should pay their tax, we’ve got the toughest multinational tax avoidance legislation we’ve ever had in Australia. And as Scott said on Budget night, over $6 billion has come back in revenue, into the tax net as a result.
So we’re cracking down on tax evasion, whether it’s in a cash economy, or whether it’s from the multinationals. We believe in lower taxes but we believe in everyone paying their taxes. But above all, we believe in you.
So Stacey, thank you very much for your warm introduction, thank you very much for all of you, the energy and the optimism in Devonport is contagious, and I’m delighted to be here with you.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Yanggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngunawal dhawra. Wanggarralijinyin mariny bulan bugarabang.
Welcome. We're here on the land of the Ngunawal People and we acknowledge their elders past and present.
David, I thank you. Thank you and there is a wonderful – as the Canberrans here will know - there is a wonderful Ngunnawal language group here in Canberra that have done so much to recover the Ngunnawal language.
You know there are a lot of things in Canberra that you're not aware of, probably some of them, if they’re political, you’re better to remain unaware of them.
[Laughter]
But one of the most remarkable institutions here is an organisation or an institution called AIATSIS and Michael McDaniel the Chairman of that – is someone there clapping for AIATSIS there? - and it was established in the 60s by Menzies in fact. It has got an enormous collection of important cultural heritage, of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural heritage. But what is most extraordinary is the collection of recordings of language. You know, before European settlement in this country of ours, there were over 350 absolutely distinct Indigenous languages, each of them as different from the other as Hungarian is from French. So you can imagine that extraordinarily rich diversity which is one of the remarkable things about our country.
We are the most successful multicultural society in the world and we are as ancient as human civilization can be. Here in Australia, we have the oldest continuous human civilization on Earth; that of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. So, we're as ancient as you can be. But as a migrant nation, we’re as young as the baby in the arms of her migrant mother, arriving and becoming an Australian citizen.
So, it is a remarkable country and you of course in local government, are the closest to the people. There's no doubt about that. Now I'm sure Warren and Stephen and John would agree with me on this; if you're running for Federal Parliament, you'll encounter lots of people. They will sometimes ask you interesting questions about vertical fiscal imbalance and you know, constitutional issues, but generally they'll say to you, they’ve got a problem. It's almost invariably a local government problem.
Now, if you don't want to get elected, what you should do is give them a lecture on constitutional law and say it's got nothing to do with the federal government. If on the other hand, you do want to get elected - and that has been my mission every time I've stood - what you do is you say: “Thank you very much, I've got that. I'm going to call the mayor right away and get it fixed”. That's how you get elected.
[Laughter]
Now I just want to say how much I admire the work you do. My only achievement in local government is entirely derived from that of my wife Lucy. I am the first man to be the Lady Mayoress of Sydney.
[Laughter]
She was of course the first woman to be Lord Mayor. But I want to talk about what we are doing to engage local government in a way that federal government, the Commonwealth Government, has never done before.
There is no question that we, in years past, have tended to be - federal government, state government local government - somewhat like ships passing in the night. We’ve generally been heading in broadly the same direction. We've always, I hope, been heading with goodwill and the best of intentions. But so often as you know, there has been so little coordination.
So, when I became Prime Minister I was determined to change that. What we have been setting up, one after the other – and over time this will cover the whole country - are City Deals.
Is Albert Van Zetten here from Launceston? He’s not here, well Albert's doing a fantastic job in Launceston ladies and gentlemen reviving the heart of Launceston. The first City Deal we did was with Launceston and what it involved is the state government, the Tasmanian government, federal government and the local government, city government, essentially agreeing on what we wanted to achieve and then committing our respective resources to work in coordination to achieve it. Steven Kennedy who is now the secretary of the Department of Infrastructure - where are you Steven? There he is, right here - Steven Kennedy is a very distinguished senior bureaucrat and he was responsible for the city's policy when I started it in my own Department. Now of course, as Secretary of Infrastructure he's involved with it at a broader level. But what we're doing is working collaboratively.
So the Western Sydney City Deal involved the federal government, it involve the state government led by Gladys Berejiklian and it involved eight local governments in Western Sydney, at least three of whom I know are represented here tonight. Where are you all? Here, there’s three of you here tonight at least. here. Well, what that involves is committing to coordinating our work on a North-South Rail Link between Penrith, to come down to the site - I should say, yes that's right - starting from North St. Mary's in the north, near Penrith, to come down to the new airport at Badgerys Creek, to go to the aerotropolis at north Bringelly. All of that, you can imagine, all of that development that is going to be enabled by that. What is the point of the coordination? The point is that you ensure you're working together and that you start to plan for the infrastructure, before you do the development. Isn't that a great idea? We haven't done enough of that in Australia, for a long time. So coordination; working closely with local government is our goal. But of course, not all local governments are in cities. One of the new approaches that we're taking - and John McVeigh will be responsible for this - is taking the concept of the City Deal and applying it to regions. So that once again you get people together, you work out what you want to achieve and that with that respect and understanding that comes from engagement, you can work together.
So far at the moment we have three City Deals that are agreed and underway. I've mentioned Launceston, Western Sydney and of course Townsville. We've got those three underway and we're working on others, Geelong and Hobart – there he goes, good to hear from Geelong - but we want to do this right across the country. It is very important to get greater engagement and involvement between federal government, state government and local government.
Now let me just conclude with an observation about cities and towns. Again, I recognise some of you. Is Tractor Ferguson here by the way, from Bulloo Shire Council? Tractor by the way, when I was travelling with John in Queensland, looking at some of the challenged drought areas, you know areas have been hit by drought in some cases for seven years, Tractor said - his name is John Ferguson but obviously his nickname is Tractor.
[Laughter]
Tractor said, he said: “It is so dry in Thargomindah, that I am handfeeding my bees.” Because of course everyone was handfeeding their cattle and sheep and so I think most of us thought he was pulling our leg. But he felt - being a very helpful person and like all of you, very committed to explaining the situation in his local government area to his constituents and everyone else - he did some videos showing exactly how you can handfeed bees. So I commend them to you, they’re on my Facebook page and if ever you're confronted with especially dry conditions and you're a beekeeper, you'll know how to feed your bees so they're as healthy as they are in Thargomindah. Needless to say, Bulloo Shire Council is not a large local government area, but it's got challenges and again it's one where we can work more closely together state, federal and local government.
But that is the key; working more closely together, respecting the roles that we have and making sure that we coordinate. Again, we were talking to Steve Edgington from Barkly Shire about the very real and tragic circumstances we've seen with abuse, violence and other challenges in his local government area. I think Steve's showing great leadership there, but again that is an area where the Territory government, the federal government, local government can well operate more closely together. So, coordination is the key. The City Deals, if you like, are the metropolitan part of that strategy. But as John will no doubt have described to you, it's an approach that we can take to more regional areas, to much smaller local government areas.
We have to recognise that improving the amenity and livability of our communities is of vital importance. It is not an optional extra. The livability of our communities is a vital national economic strength. It really is, in a competitive world, ensuring that wherever you are in Australia people can say: “That's a great place to live. That's somewhere I want to stay. It's somewhere I want to work, somewhere I want to build a business.”
That is important. It's a big competitive advantage and you are at the very heart of that exercise.
So, I just want to say thank you for the work you do. I respect it. I admire it. Above all, you are the closest to the people and we are determined to be your partners in doing an even better job to serve the people you represent.
Thank you very much.
[Applause]
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you Lisa and thank you Kaw Doh, for your story and you’re an inspiration. Wonderful to be joined here by Ministers, Minister Tudge and Dutton, the Assistant Minister David Gillespie and of course Melissa who has just introduced me and all of our refugees here today. Thank you Auntie Tina for your very, very warm welcome to country.
Yanggu gulanyin ngalawiri, dhunayi, Ngunawal dhawra. Wanggarralijinyin mariny bulan bugarabang.
Which means in the Ngunawal language, thank you, we acknowledge we’re here on Ngunawal country and honour their elders past and present. It’s wonderful to be here to mark Refugee Week 2018. Australia would be a very different nation and a poorer one, were it not for the contribution of refugees over so many years. All of us benefit, here in this, the most successful multicultural society in the world, from the contribution of every new generation of refugees that arrive on our shores. During this week, we reflect on your courage, your enterprise and strength and your sacrifice. We reflect not just on the often tough journey you’ve had to come here and the very challenging, dangerous environments you’ve fled, the perils that you’ve faced. But also as Kaw Doh was describing, on the great contribution you’re making. Thank you Kaw, you’ve talked about your life in a refugee camp in Thailand after fleeing the civil war in Myanmar. You can to Australia through our humanitarian program in 2005 and you went to Nhill, a cold place compared to Myanmar. But not a cold place in terms of the warmth in the community.
Thank you for the way in which you’ve acknowledged the support, the love, the opening of hearts and homes to you and other Karen refugees who’ve brought life and energy of their own to add to that of all the people there in Nhill. You are a great Australian story. We salute you and we thank you.
I know there are many more stories like that in the room today. There’s Sinan Bayood’s story. He’ll preform for us today I hope, or have we missed Sinan Bayood’s performance. We missed it did we? Oh, can you do a few notes for us maybe?
[Laughter]
Sorry, we had to go and vote! Anyway look, our humanitarian resettlement program began on a large scale in 1947 after the Second World War. Our focus shifted naturally, as the focus of the tragic conflicts and the displacement of persons has changed with circumstances around the world. More recently we’ve resettled thousands of people from Iraq and Syria in that conflict zone. Our approach has always been caring and compassionate, principled and pragmatic. Now, we have one of the most generous permanent refugee programs in the world. It is consistently in the world’s top three. Our offshore intake last financial year was the biggest for three decades, with more than 20,000 visas granted. The important thing is that we decide who comes in on our refugee and humanitarian programs. The reason Australian support our refugee and humanitarian programs, is because they know that their government, which they elect and which is accountable to them, determines who comes here. We do not outsource our refugee program, our migration program, the integrity of our borders, to people smugglers. Our strong border protection policy is the foundation of the security which enables us to be consistently one of the world’s most generous countries in terms of resettling refugees.
As I said at the outset, we are the most successful multicultural society in the world. Peter Dutton is going to speak after me and Peter is joined by the Minister for Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship Alan Tudge.  His Department are really together, with Home Affairs, all of them, are involved in a complex but vitally important nation building task. Because what we’re doing with our migration program and with our humanitarian program, is ensuring that we continue to build and strengthen this remarkable nation of ours. In a time when the world is full of so much conflict and where people of different faiths and different ethnic background and cultural backgrounds, who for generations have been able live together reasonably well, reasonably harmoniously, now apparently cannot – here in Australia we’ve been able to continue to deliver in the midst of all of that diversity, such harmony. That is a great credit to all the people here and so many of millions of others around the nation.
This is a remarkable achievement. It’s not an accident. It’s a combination of strong borders, compassionate and wise humanitarian program and of course, very targeted settlement programs when people come to Australia. There is a lot of thought over generations that has gone into this. As we continue to build and strengthen our remarkable nation, ancient and new, we acknowledge the most ancient human civilization in the world, that of our First Australians. Yet our nation is as new as a baby in the arms of her a migrant mother. So, it’s a remarkable achievement and we couldn’t do it without you. We’re going to keep on ensuring that our migration program, our humanitarian program, combines compassion and a commitment to the values of our multicultural nation.
Thanks very much.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
As Prime Minister, I offer the thanks of the Government and our nation for the life of Laurence Street; a life of service to Australia, beginning as a young man in the Royal Australian Navy in wartime and for so many years in the law, most indelibly as Chief Justice of this state.
As a barrister he was as eloquent as he was erudite, as formidable as he was fashionable. Laurence had movie star good looks, coupled with a charisma, charm and intellect, a humility, a humanity that swept all before him. His lineage as the third of his line to be Chief Justice did not appear to burden him. He wasn't lofty or snobbish. His nickname Lorenzo the Magnificent was well earned.
But he enjoyed ceremony without pomp or at least without pomposity. All of us can remember the admissions days of the Banco Court when a baby would start crying through their mother or father's admission. And as the parent or grandparent failed to quiet the unhappy child and started to leave, Laurence would bid them ‘stay, it's a family occasion’. Of course, regulars started to wonder why there was always a crying baby.
Laurence was a great friend and mentor to me in my youth when I was a young law student and writer of a law column in the Bulletin. It was a sign of his forgiving nature that he wrote a reference for me when I applied for the Rhodes Scholarship. Later as a young lawyer I could always count on him for advice and encouragement, even when my colourful advocacy in those staider times provoked some professional disapprobation.
But above all, looking back over those 40 years, I'm struck by how in the midst of his heavy duties as Chief Justice he was so generous with his counsel and his time to me and so many others.
As he’d helped get me there, I sent him occasional letters from Oxford about my studies and he always replied, and at length. One from the 13th of March 1980 was three closely-typed foolscap pages.
It contained news of several mutual friends of my and Lucy's generation; advice on what I needed to do on returning; the dates and cost, including the late fee of the trust accounts and legal ethics exams were all set out; an extensive discussion of the various sets of chambers - which he urged me not to repeat to anyone else for fear of creating any unhappiness in the Bar - the right time to apply to acquire a room as well as discussion on current political matters ranging from Neville Wran's federal ambitions - or lack of them - to news of, as Laurence wrote, ‘renewed stirrings between the National and Liberal Partners in Queensland’, something unthinkable in current times. And a discussion on one of his early victories as a barrister in 1955 in an economic duress case, Sundell v Yannoulatos, in which he encouraged me to refer to the unreported judgment of the first instance judge which he said was more discursive than the reported decision of the Appeals Court and had a much longer list of cases and discussion on them.
But of course the most important import of this letter to me was to wish me and Lucy, who he described as my new bride, the best for our wedding which was set for the 22nd of March and given we were getting married in England, to lament he would not be able to join us.
And then with a droll and gallant precision, hastened to add, out of an abundance of caution given Lucy was twenty one, "I don't use the word new in contradistinction to any other adjective but rather as an abbreviation for newly acquired".
Nearly 40 years on, Lucy and I thank Laurence as we all do for his magnificent Australian life and doing so with love, console his equally magnificent family who are, among so many achievements, his greatest.
[ENDS]


PRIME MINISTER: 
Well thank you very much Mark. It’s great to be here, back in Brisbane.
I’m delighted to be here as a guest of the Queensland Media Club and I want to acknowledge Opposition Leader, Deb Frecklington and the Lord Mayor Graham Quirk, and all of my parliamentary colleagues who are here with us today.
Before I move onto energy can I just say, as I’ve conveyed to them directly today already, our congratulations, our admiration to the Australian divers, doctors, who played such an important role in rescuing those boys from the cave in Thailand.
[Applause]
It's one of the most heroic and inspiring episodes of our times really.
It's hard to imagine anything more frightening than being trapped underground in the dark, let alone having your children trapped underground in the dark.
And the courage of those men and women who affected that rescue, the Thai Navy SEALs, the British divers, the Australian divers and doctors - of course, we acknowledge Dr Richard Harris from Adelaide who played such an important role - but the whole team from the AFP, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, from the Australian Defence Force. They worked together with their international partners in a way that is an inspiration, an inspiration to all of us.
So I want to thank them on behalf of a very, very grateful nation.
[Applause]
Now, my single clear-eyed focus is to reduce the cost of energy for Australians.
Too much ideology and even idiocy has taken the place of engineering and economics and energy consumers have suffered accordingly.
Corners were cut in the process of injecting competition in what used to be state-run enterprises, undermining the long-term benefits that competition could bring.
Electricity networks were encouraged by government regulation to be gold-plated and so they were, and the consumer had to pay.
Interventions in the national energy market - most significantly force-feeding of renewables into the market without any thought for firming or storage - distorted price signals.
Federal and Queensland Labor governments allowed gas to be exported from the east coast and despite warnings that this would result in gas shortages for domestic customers, did nothing to protect the domestic market.
Retailers created confusing and opaque pricing. Discounts were concocted off inflated standing offers. With one mistake, a pay-on-time discount turned into a punitive, unfair late penalty.
Consumers and businesses suffered.
Now, my approach has been to bring a businessman's hard-headed attitude to problem-solving. And here the problem is clear. Energy is too expensive. And the measure of any proposed solution is equally clear - will it help reduce energy prices?
So the answer is not one fuel type or another, and those who place some sort of moral or magical quality on a particular type of machine miss the point.
The answer does not lie in mandating a wind turbine on every corner, a solar farm in every suburb or a new coal-fired power station in every region tomorrow.
The starting point for lower prices today is a competitive consumer-focused market.
Dispatchable energy, firmed energy, can be delivered by a wider range of technologies than ever before.
Let them compete. And may the cheapest solutions win. As they will if we let the market work.
We want the consumers to win. They must be the winners. That's whose interests we're looking after.
Now, the market will find the most efficient price using the different features of different types of generation - baseload or flexible, centralised or distributed and so on.
We don't have to make a technological choice. We must create the framework to deliver the cheapest mix of power.
Now, prices are starting to fall. Energy companies are having to work harder to attract and retain their customers and the uncertainty over investment is dissipating.
Over the past year there have been a million sessions on the energy-made-easy.gov.au comparator site and through this and our other actions with retailers, over 400,000 families and small businesses have switched plans and saved hundreds of dollars a year.
Last year, I told the story of Christine DaCosta, a single mother with four children living in Brisbane. She used the EnergyMadeEasy website of the federal government, she found a better deal that'll save her $300 a year. 
According to the Australian Energy Markets Commission, a residential customer in Southeast Queensland can knock $504 off their power bill by moving from a median standing offer to the cheapest market offer.
On top of that, here in Queensland, reductions in prices that came into effect from the beginning of the month mean a family takeaway shop owner can now save between $400 and $770 depending on their supplier; a hairdresser between $129 and $243; a real estate agent between $137 and $258.
Now, we’ve acted to increase gas supply, as you know. Some of the gas companies in the room will know, in a fairly heavy handed way – particularly for a Liberal Prime Minister.
But we’ve done that, we’ve helped accelerate gas projects and reform the regulation of pipelines.
Wholesale gas prices have halved over the last eighteen months.
Between 2007 and 17, electricity prices, on the other hand, had a compound annual growth rate of eight per cent - even with the fall in prices after we repealed the carbon tax.
Now, electricity charges are made up chiefly of the cost of generating power from coal, gas, wind, solar, hydro,  also known as wholesale costs, the cost of the poles and wires that deliver electricity across the nation, or network costs, ‘green’ schemes of various types and there are quite a few, and the cost of the retailer who sells the power, the retail costs. The contribution of those drivers differ from state to state.
But according to the ACCC, across the National Electricity Market over the last decade increases in network costs, that's the poles and wires, have contributed 38 per cent to those price increases, followed by wholesale generation costs, another 27 per cent.
And that element was felt most recently with the hasty closure of large baseload generators, particularly Northern in South Australia and Hazelwood in Victoria.
Wholesale prices in 2016-17 increased dramatically with tighter supply.
Reliability suffered, most noticeably in South Australia, where their reckless reliance on renewables without storage or firming capacity left their system vulnerable.
What were they thinking? What was that Labor Government thinking? Had it not occurred to them that the sun doesn't shine all the time and the wind doesn't blow all the time?
Apparently no thought at all, except a long extension cord to the Latrobe Valley.
The sudden exit of large thermal generators heightened the risk of costly blackouts and we saw that on 28 September 2016, where electricity supply in South Australia was lost - for hours in the east of the state and weeks in the west, where strong export industries including fishing, agriculture, mining were left stranded.
And at the heart of the problem was a failure to integrate energy and climate policy - a failure we are correcting with the National Energy Guarantee and, at a ministerial level, for example, by combining energy and environment in the same portfolio. So Josh Frydenberg is the Minister for Energy and Environment.
Now, the structure of the Renewable Energy Target imposed a subsidy separate to the price signals of the energy market. Prices went up but new investments in reliability did not. Labor ignored reliability and the importance of dispatchable power. And so, price volatility drove outcomes. The system was compromised as investment signals were distorted.
There was also an increase in the size of firms that both generated and sold electricity - vertical integration. And to be blunt, some in the sector took advantage of their strong positions using the cover of uncertainty to take advantage of consumers.
Now, last year, as you know, I secured agreement from the energy retailers on measures to put downward pressure on electricity prices including contacting nearly 1.6 million households to offer a better, cheaper deal on their power bills.
Now, as part of this consumer-first approach, putting the customer first, all the business people here in the room will understand the wisdom of that. In March 2017, we commissioned the ACCC to conduct a thorough root and branch review into retail energy markets to examine the behaviour of the sector and find the solutions that would lead to lower prices.
That's what this is all about - lower electricity prices. That's what we're seeking to achieve.
Now, we received the report on June 30, and it's been released today. I want to thank the Chairman, Rod Sims, and his team for their characteristically comprehensive and careful analysis.
Their assessment is blunt - markets have not worked well for consumers. The National Electricity Market needs to be reset, and essential to that reset is the implementation of the National Energy Guarantee.
Unnecessary costs need to be removed; a greater focus is needed on low-income households; competition is needed to combat market concentration, and more direct policing is required to prevent market manipulation.
The National Electricity Market can be restored to an efficient, fair and competitive market that works in the interests of consumers.
The ACCC does recognise there is positive progress in the electricity market leading to lower prices - recognition that our policies are working.
It estimates that if its recommendations are adopted, savings for residential customers could be, by 2020-21, up to an average of 24 per cent and for commercial and industrial customers, 26 per cent. They're savings, they are forecast.
Now, the ACCC finds that while consumers who regularly review or switch plans have benefitted from competition, many have been trapped by a market that is complex, opaque and unfair. Inertia and complexity have worked to advantage the retailers at the expense of their customers.
Discounts, the report says, have become misleading. There is no benchmark for consumers to judge what they're really getting, because retailers set their own inflated standing prices. The ACCC recommends the creation of a new benchmark or default price, set by the Australian Energy Regulator. That would provide a clear reference point for consumers.
Discounts are offered in return for consumer behaviour, such as paying on time. But conditions that see consumers lose all of their discount for a late payment are effectively a brutal late penalty disproportionate to the cost to the retailer and they recommend that practice should change too. 
The ACCC would also like to see more transparency from the private price comparator sites, so that customers know what commissions are paid. Consumers have a right to know. Again putting the customer first.
In wholesale markets, the ACCC finds that vertically integrated companies have been applying an additional internal premium on generation prices of between 26 and 42 per cent on average, which they have passed directly onto their retail prices.
They go on to recommend a cap on further acquisitions and mergers of 20 per cent of generation capacity across any National Electricity Market region; the separation of the two Queensland Government-owned generators into three independently operating competitors; and, greater powers for the Australian Energy Regulator to investigate market manipulation and increased fines.
In gathering evidence, the ACCC found the financing of new generation assets outside the big vertically integrated gen-tailers was inhibited, because either commercial and industrial users were not prepared to enter into sufficiently long-term power purchase agreements, or when they were, banks were not prepared to recognise their credit beyond five years or so.
So the ACCC has made a very interesting suggestion - that where a new firmed or dispatchable generation project, which could obviously consist of several assets, has commercial and industrial customers secured for say the first five years, the Australian government agree to acquire power at a low price - say $45 a megawatt hour - for years 6-15. Now, such a put, to use a financial term, would secure bank finance, and as the ACCC says, and I quote, "Encourage new entry, promote competition and enable commercial and industrial customers to access low cost new generation." Remember, commercial and industrial customers are two thirds of the demand on NEM.
Now we'll look further at this proposal over the coming months as we consult with the Energy Security Board, AEMO, AEMC, other jurisdictions, industry and consumer groups about the ACCC's recommendations. But this recommendation has the distinct advantage of being thoroughly technology-agnostic, and well designed, should serve to support our goal of cheaper and reliable energy.
Now, the National Energy Guarantee brings together energy and climate policy by maintaining system reliability. It requires retailers to purchase a minimum level of electricity generation that can be sent out continually or on demand. And at the same time, meet an emissions intensity that enables us to meet our international commitments.
As John Pierce, the chair of the Australian Energy Markets Commission remarked last year: “We’re not pricing carbon. What we’re pricing is reliability.”
The Guarantee will ensure investment in whatever technology the energy market needs – solar, wind, coal, gas, batteries, pumped hydro and others. It’s not pro-coal or anti-coal, pro-renewables or anti-renewables.
Renewables do not need to be subsidised any longer. The latest long-term contracts are coming in at less than $65 a megawatt hour. It's below the average market price today.
Coal is forecast to remain 60 per cent of our generation mix in 2030. Portraying the future as an either-or is simply wrong.
The National Energy Guarantee, designed by the experts, reinvigorating markets and competition, and already contributing to lower prices by restoring confidence about the future, and is strongly recommended by the ACCC.
Energy Security Board modelling says the Guarantee will deliver savings of $120 on average across the next decade, the cornerstone of an estimated expected reduction of $400. It estimates the wholesale generation price, which is where its impact will most keenly be felt, will be 23 per cent lower.
And its greatest strength is that it's focused on delivering for consumers, not arguing about technologies.
Now, Andrew Richards from the Energy Users' Association of Australia said it very well last month, and I quote him, "We observe that there are those who criticise the Guarantee because it doesn't include explicit support for renewable energy, while others criticise it because it doesn't include explicit support for fossil fuels. It would appear that everyone is seeking a consumer-funded free lunch and because the NEG doesn’t provide it, they're critical. From an energy perspective, we see this as a significant positive of the National Energy Guarantee as it seeks to be technology neutral, ensuring all technologies can both play to their strengths, but also requires them to manage their weaknesses”.
On the other hand, Bill Shorten and Labor have no plan at all, other than higher prices and less reliable energy.
Labor's 50 per cent Renewable Energy Target repeats the mistakes of the past by making technology, rather than price, the focus of policy.
Continuing to force-feed renewables into the market through subsidies guarantees higher prices and less reliable energy.
And you don't have to take my word for it, Just look to South Australia where the households and businesses of that state suffered under a reckless renewable target that delivered blackouts, volatility, and to rub salt into the wound - the most expensive energy in Australia.
Now Bill Shorten has adopted this as Labor's national policy.
So the choice is going to be very clear, at the by-elections and indeed, at the general election next year, lower prices under our technology neutral customer focused National Energy Guarantee, or higher prices under Labor's reckless renewable energy subsidies.
As ACCC Chairman Rod Sims said just this morning, “Only a technology neutral approach will get prices down. Whenever Governments prescribe that the technology should be one thing or another, that’s when you get higher prices.”
Now, repairing the mistakes of the past means, obviously, planning to ensure that renewables are reliable, and clearly that was the huge oversight neglected in South Australia.
Now, Snowy Hydro 2.0 will help lay the foundation for the future of our more flexible energy system, providing a grid scale, 2,000 megawatt battery in the heart of the system; improving reliability and security across the grid; enabling new technologies to be safely integrated.
I've seen criticisms of the Snowy 2.0 project because it's Government owned, coupled with suggestions it's subsidised. Some commentators have discovered that you'll need more energy to pump water uphill than it will generate downhill - you lose about 25 per cent on the round trip. What a revelation.
Snowy Hydro, I hasten to add, has always belonged to government – always - and there are not many places in our flat, dry continent where you have two existing large bodies of water near each other, and 700 metres difference in elevation.
The price of electricity varies from hour-to-hour. For example, it has a very low value in the middle of the night, and a very high value indeed on a hot summer's afternoon. So as it does now, for its existing pumped hydro, Snowy 2.0 will buy when power is abundant and has a low economic value and sell when it is in high demand, and thus more valuable. These trades will reduce volatility and price spikes, and thus, contribute to lower overall energy costs.
The project is financially strong. With conservative assumptions it shows an internal rate of return of at least 8 per cent, and Snowy Hydro expects to fund it from its own operations and borrowings.
Here in Queensland, Genex is finalising its preparations for an expansion of its existing Kidston solar project with the addition of pumped hydro, using the pit of a retired gold mine for water storage. It is a clever combination of 270 megawatts of solar, 150 of wind and 250 of pumped hydro.
And among other places, there is pumped hydro being developed at Cultana in South Australia, as well as enormous opportunities in Tasmania where there is a powerful combination of highly efficient wind assets and a large hydro scheme with 14 sites already identified.
So that's what delivers lower prices - a mix of generation with a mix of qualities in a truly competitive marketplace.
Now, cheap energy goes to the heart of our economic competitiveness. And that's where the simplistic economics of Labor's harsh carbon taxes or trading schemes are laid bare. You cannot adjust to the future if you cannot compete now.
If you listen to our opponents, their view is apparently we have to shutter industries because of their emissions and drive them out of business by raising their energy prices.
Labor has not learned the lessons of the past.
When it rushed to impose the highest economy-wide carbon tax in the world, which drove up prices, as they intended it would. As I said in Paris in 2015, "It is innovation and technology which will drive stronger growth and a cleaner environment, not heavy-handed taxes or the force feeding of one technology or another”.
Now, we promised that we would take action on energy price rises. We promised that we would do everything we could to bring prices down.
We have turned the corner on energy prices.
Now, it is time to lock in that progress with the National Energy Guarantee.
Thank you very much.
Q&amp;A
PRESENTER: 
It's a pretty comprehensive report. All 380 pages, which me and many other people had to pore over this morning to get to. There's a lot of recommendations in there, and I know in your speech you were talking about you've had it for two weeks now and you will look at some and get back to some. There's been a fair bit of pressure for a Royal Commission into electricity prices. This is a pretty comprehensive review. Do you think this does enough to negate the need for a Royal Commission? And secondly, obviously, there's been big reviews or reports in the past like the Henry Tax Review and previous governments have cherry picked what they wanted from them. Do you think that you'll need to cement the majority of the 56 recommendations to take off the pressure of a call for a Royal Commission?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think that the most important thing, as Josh Frydenberg said today, is to read the report of this inquiry before you start talking about the need for another. This is a very comprehensive study. Rod Sims has been able, using the powers of the ACCC, to literally get into the books of all of the energy companies, including the retailers in particular, and has had enormous access and examined all of the issues relating to price. So, I think that this report is very comprehensive piece of work and what we should be doing is getting on with it and work on the very useful and valuable recommendations that have been made.
We received the report on the 30th of June, so we've had it for a bit over a week, seven working days. And Rod has met with and spoken with the state officials today. So, what we need to do now is work with our partners in the COAG Energy Council, or Josh's partners in the COAG Energy Council, obviously get a lot of feedback from industry as we work through the recommendations, but it is a really valuable piece of work. And look, I know you're probably all starting to think that you'll doze off with the thought of reading an ACCC report. Can I really commend it to you. it is very well written. There are parts of it that are highly technical, but most of it is really, very accessible.
It explains a lot about the energy market. You know, it explains what happened, for example, with the way the Queensland generators pushed up, gamed the system, to push up the price of wholesale energy in Queensland, and what the impact was of the changes to the rules and then following pressure from my Government and the ACCC, when the Labor government here, finally, stopped using their generators to fleece their citizens, and actually told them to engage with the market in a more fair way, a more even-handed way, and you saw a very significant reduction in wholesale costs.
So all of that is set out. It's a very, very good piece of work, very comprehensive, and I just want to thank Rod for it again.
PRESENTER:
OK, we'll throw to some questions from my colleagues soon. But obviously, it's a pretty damning report. It would be fair to say that it has shown there to be a colossal failure of the NEM in trying to keep prices down. There's a couple of key recommendations I did want to ask you, too. I know that your Government has done a lot in relation to trying to turn the blowtorch on retail companies and their various smoke and mirrors approach to offering discounts. There is a recommendation there saying that the Australian Energy Regulator should set a default price, scrapping the standing offers that a lot of power companies use, and setting a default price. What are your views on that? Would that be some kind of a re-regulation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, they're not, the ACCC is not saying that the Government should set the price of electricity. What they're saying is that there should be a default price, which is the benchmark from which discounts and deals are quoted. Because the problem is with the companies having different standard offers, you know, your 20 per cent discount may actually be much more expensive than my 10 per cent discount that I'm quoting.
So, it's really designed to put the customer first. I think we'll obviously need to talk with the state jurisdictions about it, and indeed, the industry – but you can see there that he's identified the way in which customers and consumers are not being looked after. And, in fact, as I said earlier – in fact, I'm really quoting the Treasurer Scott Morrison – that complexity and inertia have been the retailers' ally versus the customer because faced with a complex, confusing range of options many people just choose to take no action at all. And that's why the comparator sites and the action we've taken in getting the retailers to remind people of the opportunities to move to better deals has been important. You know, saving $500 on a $2,400 a year electricity bill, for example, is a lot of money. That's a very big saving, and savings of that kind are very available.
PRESENTER: 
Just back to the original question though. Would you support the scrapping of the standing offer and putting in this sort of default price?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think it's a suggestion that has considerable merit, but we are going to review the recommendations carefully and discuss with the jurisdictions. But it's certainly consistent with everything we've done in terms of taking action to protect consumers and deliver for consumers. As I said, the key for every single measure whenever anybody has a bright idea about the energy sector, terrific, my question is, “Will this result in lower energy prices? Will this support lower energy prices?” And that's the key.
You've got to get, they're too high, you’ve got to get the prices down. They're starting to come down, you know, particularly at the wholesale level, it's feeding through to the retail customers, we want to see more action.
Everything we're doing is aimed at that, and there have been a lot of mistakes made in the past and we don't think that we should be remaking them. So, we've got to be focused on the customer. Lower prices, put the customer first – that's my goal.
PRESENTER:
Just on to another key recommendation, talking about the Government underwriting long-term energy supply contracts to encourage the development of new dispatchable power generation. Obviously, if you do support that, would that include support for a new coal-fired power station? Or is that something that's completely off the agenda that if the market is not going to fund, it the Government is not going to be putting any money towards it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it's technology agnostic. So, it certainly wouldn't exclude any fuel source. Again, we've got to stop, we've got to stop focusing on one technology or another. We've got to ask ourselves, “How do we get prices down?” What Rod has identified, and we've heard this from other parts of the industry, is that it is challenging for people who are not part of the big vertically integrated gentailers to get finance for new generation assets. And again, they could be a mix of assets. It could be some renewable, some gas and some hydro. It could be a coal-fired project. It could be gas. It could be biomass or a mixture of all of the above.
And the C&amp;I customers, commercial and industrial, are not generally, so we're told, prepared to sign up for more than five years – and when they do, banks are not prepared to give that the same credit over the long-term.
So, what Rod has suggested is, and this is similar to the reverse auction concept that we've been working on with AEMO. Like all of these things, it's not an entirely new idea, but it's been framed in a very interesting way. So what the Government would do is say - alright, we will be, if you like, the buyer of last resort. We'll take a put but at a low price which would provide some security for a lender, obviously.
You know, if you've got a power project and your business model is based on selling energy at $65 a megawatt hour and you end up selling it for $45, your equity will be gone and you'll be a very unhappy, disappointed investor. But if that enables you to get the bank finance as a bit of a back stop, that will bring on more investment.
The thing we've got to make sure is that as we don't have any more of this phenomenon we saw and we've seen in recent times where older baseload generation goes out because it's old and, you know, it's owners think it's clapped out, for whatever reason. We have got to make sure that we maintain the level of dispatchibility. Now the NEG, by the way, is designed to do just that as well. So these two would have to work together.
But the National Energy Guarantee, you understand, is designed to ensure that we have a sufficient amount of reliable power, that's dispatchable power, so that would mean that a retailer would have to ensure that they had sufficient firming power to back up. They had a lot of wind and solar - terrific, congratulations. But you're going to have to have a specific percentage of firmed generation to be able to back that up so that you can be sure to deliver reliable power.
PRESENTER:
I'm sure my colleagues are going to start throwing bread rolls at me soon. But just finally on the NEG…
PRIME MINISTER:
They could write a question on the bread roll.
PRESENTER:
Exactly, I'll read it out. But there's been a lot of focus and you're talking about the National Energy Guarantee and pushing that through and you're saying it should be technology agnostic, although a lot of your backbench seem to be quite focused, or some would say almost obsessed, on coal fired power. Park that to one side.
PRIME MINISTER:
The thing to be obsessed about in this business is lower energy prices. That should be the obsession. The customers, citizens, businesses, want lower energy prices. That's what we've got to deliver.
PRESENTER:
Obviously, the ACCC has backed the NEG as the way to help solve some of the problems in the National Electricity Market. There's some unrest on your backbench about that. You have got to win over the state and territory governments and a lot of the recommendations from the ACCC report require action by the states and territories so it's a bit of a delicate balance.
Would you be concerned when it came to a parliamentary vote if some of your backbench cross the floor? Or are you more concerned about the end game about the NEG passing? And one final supplementary to that - is there a plan B if the NEG goes down in flames?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, we're focused on putting the customers first and the National Energy Guarantee has overwhelming support. I've never seen an energy policy that has such broad support. From, you know, the National Farmer's Federation and the Minerals Council to social welfare groups and energy users. I read out a quote from the energy users in the course of my speech, it has very widespread support, and I am, I would say, quietly confident, that we will achieve the support for the NEG that we need, because Australians are crying out for an energy policy that is focused on them.
They want politicians to cooperate, to deliver an energy policy that is focused on them, and what that means is it's focused on them paying less for energy. So lower prices. I hope I'm not sounding like a broken record, but believe me. I'm bringing all of my many years of business experience to this task. The job is to get energy prices down. That's what we've got to do.
We've got to maintain reliability. We have got to meet our emission reductions commitments. We can do both of those. That's extremely manageable. But we must bring prices down. And that's where the market has got to start working for its customers. That's what our policies are about, and we are delivering outcomes. I mean, we are making progress. We have turned the corner, but we want to keep the good momentum in the right direction, which as far as prices are concerned, is down.
PRESENTER:
I might throw to some of my colleagues on the media table there. If you could stand up - back straight - announce where you're from and the microphone is yours.
PRIME MINISTER:
No slouching allowed.
JOURNALIST:
Hello, Prime Minister. Thank you for your speech. Amy Remeikis from the Guardian. Just further to Mark's questions there about the NEG, the Nationals now have been quite vocal about what they would like in exchange for their support – which does include coal subsidies, whether that be through a new power plant or through retro fitting existing power plants. And I know it's technology neutral, and I know what is in the report - I just need a yes or no answer - are you going to give the Nationals what they want?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, there's a whole lot of assumptions…
JOURNALIST:
That's not yes or no.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, there's a whole lot of premises in your question and assumptions in the question which I don't agree with.
JOURNALIST:
But they'd agree with it. I mean, they're public about it.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, let me just say to you that every member of our Coalition party room is committed to lower energy prices. I recognise that there's often debates about how you get there, and interesting debates about technologies, but the object of policy is to get prices lower. And the one thing we know is that Government subsidising one technology or another, as Rod Sims said today, is only going to result in higher prices.
We want to be supporting lower prices. So that's what it's all about.
JOURNALIST:
Stefan Armbruster from SBS news. You were just talking about the free market and how it operates. You are about to sign further agreements with the Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea for the cable that was announced in the budget - $136 million from the Australian side. Now, that's going into the Pacific market and the Australian taxpayer’s money that's subsidising that cable in the face of competition in Vanuatu and in other places. At what point do national security interests override your interests in the free market taking care of business in the Pacific, in the place of China? And won't this just encourage other Pacific nations to use the China trigger to get a better aid deal out of Australia?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it's a very practical form of foreign aid. I think it's a great initiative and I look forward to signing that with the Prime Ministers of PNG and Solomon Islands later today before we go to watch the State of Origin.
You know, we spend billions of dollars a year on foreign aid and this is a very practical way of investing in the future economic growth of our neighbours in the Pacific. It's a very good, practical example of foreign aid that's going to encourage economic growth in our region. That's is what it is all about.
JOURNALIST:
Chris O'Brien from the ABC. Just a specific correlation between the report and the NEG. Do you think the ACCC report firms up the case for the National Energy Guarantee?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, it does. And, in fact, they say that one of their recommendations, strong recommendations is that the National Energy Guarantee should be - the development should be - completed and it should be implemented. It is a key part of it. We need to bring together and integrate climate and energy policy.
The Renewable Energy Target, which obviously will be complete, it will be complete by 2020 in the sense that the target will be met and the price of the RECs, renewable energy certificates, will tail off to a very low number if not zero after that.
That target - whatever the arguments for it in the past may have been - was encouraging and subsidising a particular set of technologies without any regard to the need to maintain dispatchability or reliability, for example. So, it was not part of the energy market. It was operating, as I said in my remarks, from outside the energy market.
Now, I'll leave the historians to debate the pros and cons of past energy policies, it's a pretty dispiriting exercise for those who want to undertake it. My concern is from now, from here on, and since I've been Prime Minister, to focus on one thing and one thing alone, which is getting energy prices down. And we are having success in that regard.
Wholesale price of gas, as everyone in this room knows, has come down considerably over the last 18 months because there's more supply. The cost of the wholesale generation has come down. We've seen action taken even by the Queensland Government where they gave a direction to their government-owned generators to stop gaming the system, and, again, the technical details of that are all set out in the report. Prices came down.
We're starting to see it at the retail level. Yesterday, the Australian Energy Regulator reduced the rate of return that the owners of energy transmission assets, poles and wires, should be entitled to receive and that will, again, reduce household bills by an amount, between $30-$40 - a figure I recall being quoted.
But the point is, we've got to just keep that relentless pressure on. I want Australian consumers of electricity, whether they are businesses, whether they are households, whether their families to know that everything I can do, I and my Government are doing to bring downward pressure on energy prices. That’s our goal. That is the test.
So I'm grateful, all suggestions and ideas gratefully received, we welcome them. But the question is, the test is, the litmus test is: will this result in a lower electricity bill? And if it doesn't, then, frankly, we've got to look for some other alternatives so what we're focused on is bringing prices down. The National Energy Guarantee will bring prices down.
That's what we've been advised by the Energy Security Board. The ACCC has endorsed that approach. They have other reforms which can bring down prices. That's the key. Lower electricity prices. That's the object of our policy. That's what it's all about - making sure that we continue the good momentum we've got to lower electricity prices.
JOURNALIST:
Steven Scott from the Courier Mail, Prime Minister. There's a section of the report that's pretty scathing about the ownership structure in electricity generators in Queensland. It suggests that they should be split up and effectively a large portion of them sold off. Is that something that you would like to see the Queensland Government consider?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it's actually LNP policy to split the generators up. And you know, I welcome Deb Frecklington’s leadership there on that issue. But yes, you need to have a more competitive market. You know, people who say that privatisation of energy assets is a bad idea should consider what's happened in Queensland where the greatest pressure to push prices up was coming from state government-owned generators actually gaming the system. So, you know, you need to have I think everywhere a more competitive market. So yes, we would welcome a more competitive market in Queensland.
State government ownership and privatisation is not necessary. That's a matter for the state government to determine, but the critical thing is to ensure that there is real competition and that the generators and participants in the market act responsibly and don't take advantage of the concentration they have and the market power that they have to game the system. And again, I encourage you to have a look at the report.
But what is the focus? What's the objective? Lower prices.
JOURNALIST:
Michael McKenna from the Australian. There's been a lot of talk about methods to bring down power prices over the last couple of years and you've been quite laudatory of this report. Josh Frydenberg said we had to move on it now. Can you give us a time frame as to when you think your Government can act on these recommendations, respond to these recommendations? And is it possible that, if needed, legislation would be introduced into the Parliament in the next session?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Michael, firstly there are 56 recommendations. They don't require, at least for the vast majority, they don't require any federal legislation. Most of it involves changes to the National Electricity Law, which is, as you know, essentially a COAG instrument which actually involves changes to law by the South Australian Parliament, is the way that it operates. But again, that's getting into the arcane business of the National Electricity Market.
We will move swiftly but with due consideration. It's very important to make sure that any further government intervention, if that's the right term, is not counterproductive. I'm very attracted to the put option that Rod has proposed because it works in a similar way to a reverse auction concept that we've been looking at with AEMO, which is another way of essentially calling for the - whereby AEMO would say, for example in New South Wales, the forecast by 2022, a gap in dispatchable power.
One way to resolve that would be for AEMO to say - we want to see bids to fill that gap and then have, in effect, a reverse auction. It's a technique used in many other markets around the world, but it does require that intervention to support the bringing in of new firmed or dispatchable power. When I say firmed or dispatchable power, for everyone's benefit, what we're talking about is energy that's available on demand.
So, that could be many different types. That could be coal, it could be gas, it could be hydro, it could be battery, it could be biomass. There's no doubt others as well.
But as distinct from an intermittent source like solar or wind, which, for all of their enormous attractions, particularly as they get cheaper all the time, you know the solar panel doesn't work when the sun isn't shining and the windmill doesn't work when the wind isn't blowing. So, that’s the difference between firmed or dispatchable power and what we call intermittent power.
So, I think that that is very worthwhile looking at. But the critical thing is to be technology agnostic and just focus, with a laser-like focus, on the customer and getting the prices down for the customer.
JOURNALIST:
There's a summer coming again. It comes every year and it's pretty hot up here.
PRIME MINISTER:
It does.
JOURNALIST:
So there is urgency. There's people businesses, people are going out of business. And there's a real cost of living pressure. So what sort of urgency is this Government bringing to it?
PRIME MINISTER:
We've had the report for seven working days. It's been released and we will be responding to it in collaboration with the States and Territories. Michael, it's very important to understand that the responsibility for energy policy is shared between the various jurisdictions in the National Electricity Market and the Federal Government.
And, of course, Western Australia and the Northern Territory are not even part of the National Electricity Market.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, thank you for your speech. Jackson Williams from Sky News just touching on some of the earlier questions. As we know, the report backs the NEG, which has a guarantee of reliability, but it also says Government money is needed, is necessary, to underwrite baseload power. Does that mean there is not complete faith in the NEG for reliable power to be delivered?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, it doesn't mean that at all. It's a discreet observation by the ACCC about a particular problem they've perceived, and it may be that we don't need – let's assume we were going to go down the route that Rod Sims recommends, it may be we don't have to do a lot of it. Or do it for very long. You know.
We just have to be very focused and very pragmatic about this. This is all about getting results. I mean, again, I came into Parliament at the ripe old age of 50 from a career in business. I'm a practical person. I like to get things done. I want to solve problems, and the problem is, right now, energy in Australia is too expensive. We've got to make sure we get it down, get prices down.
But we've also got to make sure that in our efforts to do so, we don't undertake measures that turn out to be counterproductive. So, the design of all of this will be very critical, but I think the idea of a put at a low price, and it may be that 45 is not the right price, maybe it is 40 or 37.5. But you want to hit that mark that would enable more of that dispatchable power to come, more of that investment to come, forward.
I think the NEG, I'm confident that the NEG will provide those signals in the future, but there is concern about, and Michael McKenna asked about the summer, but there are concerns who say that in the short-term, there are concerns too about medium term gaps in dispatchable power.
As I said, this should not be a debate. We've got to put the ideology and the slogans aside and just focus on getting the outcomes that deliver lower prices. That's the test. So whatever is proposed, my question is, “Will this help to deliver lower prices?” And the answer better be “yes” if people want us to be paying close attention to it.
JOURNALIST:
Thank you for your speech, Stewart Late from AAP. How strongly do you think that the regulators should be shaken up? Given that they allowed the situation to occur in the first place? And if you accept that customers have been gouged, would you consider a levy similar to the bank levy in the power sector?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't want to go beyond the recommendations that are in the report. The word ‘gouging’ is not used anywhere in the report, though I see it referred widely in the media.
The most important thing is that we get genuine competition in the market. That the market works for customers. There are some very practical recommendations made here. What they have recommended is the regulator be given more powers but there's a lot of things that need to change in the electricity market. The rule-making process, for example, is very long and laborious. That's got to be sped up. It needs to become a system that works better for customers, and the object, in case I haven't mentioned it earlier, is lower prices.
JOURNALIST:
Sounds like a slogan, Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it's where the rubber hits the road in this business, I can tell you. That's what it's all about. You know, when I'm out and about, whether it's in western Tasmania or western Queensland, people are talking about energy prices being too high. And that's what they want us to get on with and that's what we're focused on and that's why we've got this big report done by the ACCC with their powers. It's a very good read. I encourage you. I'm not getting a commission from Rod Sims by the way for encouraging it. It's all free. It's all on the Internet.
PRESENTER:
We probably have time for one or two more quick questions.
JOURNALIST:
Felicity Caldwell from the Brisbane Times. The ACCC recommended the governments from Queensland, New South Wales and Tasmania should take steps to remedy their over investment in the network businesses to improve affordability.
But that this would happen with appropriate assistance from the Australian Government. Are you willing to offer some support? And if so, how much money?
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you. Well, again, that's one of those things that we will need to discuss with State Governments. Just so that everyone knows what we're talking about - the largest factor in the increase in energy prices has not been green taxes or the RET or feed-in tariffs, some of which were absurdly generous when you look back with hindsight. It hasn't actually even been the cost of generation. It's been the poles and wires - nearly 40 per cent across the National Electricity Market.
And what happened was that the regulatory regime encouraged the owners of the poles and wires to invest in them because they got a markedly higher return – their regulated return, i.e. what they could charge the customers – than their actual cost of capital.
So, it really encouraged gold plating. And that is what has happened and it's been done by state regulation, and I imagine State Governments will be reluctant to come to terms with that recommendation, but it's certainly something that we're happy to discuss. But it would involve, in effect, moving a cost from energy consumers' shoulders, if you like, on to taxpayers’ shoulders. So again, it's something that we'll have to work through with them. But we really should, we have a lot to reflect on in the way in which this gold plating of network assets was allowed to develop.
And this is why, by the way, we've got to be very careful about mandating one type of investment or another. Because one way or another, if you're a government, either the consumer pays for it or the taxpayer pays for it.
You know, I don't see any politicians offering to personally underwrite infrastructure investments, so you know, one way or another, the customer will pay or the taxpayer will pay. That's why we've got to be, again, focused on getting a result that delivers lower prices.
PRESENTER:
Prime Minister, we probably have time for one last question.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Rob Morrison from Nine News. The ACCC did recommend privatising two of the state-owned energy generators, after it was split into three. You said that privatisation wasn't necessary. Would you change that position if an LNP government won the state election in 2020, given that the words ‘asset sales’ is a fantastic way to lose the election beforehand?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, what I was saying was, a business does not need to be privately owned to operate in a pro-consumer and pro-competitive way. Obviously, from the Liberal side of politics, the LNP side of politics, you know we prefer free enterprise, free markets, more competition and so forth.
Equally, government ownership doesn't mean that a utility will run in the interests of consumers and I give you Stanwell for example, and again, all of the sorry history of that is set out in the ACCC report. You talk about gouging - I mean, that was, that is a good example of gouging. But it was done by Queensland Government-owned generators.
So, this was not some rapacious private company. This was a rapacious government using its monopoly position in the generation business to gouge its customers.
Anyway, we intervened in respect of that conduct. The ACCC called them out and they changed their way, and you saw a significant cut and drop in wholesale energy costs in Queensland. I think that this is very much the privatising or not of assets is very much a matter for State Governments, even if they're state assets, of course, and State Oppositions to debate that.
But the critical thing is to make sure that market behaviour is competitive. So you're right, the ACCC has recommended that the two be split into three and two of them be privatised. At the very least, they should be split into three and be genuinely competitive. That has to be the object because again, what is their job? Their job should be to work to deliver lower energy prices for Queenslanders.
Obviously, they've got to make a margin, they've got to be able to cover their costs and fund new investment and all of those things but they shouldn't be run as, in effect, an arm of the Queensland revenue to gouge money, super profits out of Queensland customers, which is basically what was happening.
PRESENTER:
Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST:
Billy Slater.
PRIME MINISTER:
I was going about to say, are you going to run on tonight?
JOURNALIST:
No, I'm a soccer player. Conservative governments in Canberra have relied in past decades on the generosity of Queensland voters. It's usually about two-thirds of the seats in Queensland are owned by the Liberal Party or the National Party.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, they're not owned. You know, they're owned by the people, by the voters.
JOURNALIST:
That's right. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
The people who expect us to get lower electricity prices.
JOURNALIST:
That's right, well done.
PRIME MINISTER:
That's what you should be focused on!
PRESENTER:
Did you get that?
PRIME MINISTER:
It's very interesting. None of the media questions have asked about lower electricity prices. I don't recall that. You get out of the Press Gallery, you know, you get out to Charleville or Boulia, down to Zeehan in western Tasmania where I was earlier in the week, that's what people are talking about. They're not talking about politics as much as you'd like.
They're talking about what the Government's going to do for me - is it going to lower taxes on my business so I can invest more and give an apprentice a start? They’re talking about getting a new mine going and what the energy prices were.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker...
PRIME MINISTER:
I was at a mine in Zeehan that's going to get started up, have 200 new jobs. What were the owners talking to us about? Energy prices!
JOURNALIST:
Relevance, Mr Speaker!
PRESENTER: 
OK, Mickey, hurry up and ask the political question!
JOURNALIST:
20 or 21 of the 30 seats in Queensland are held by the LNP, and this has gone back decades. Since the last election, our Newspoll results shows that the Conservative Coalition is down nine points on the primary vote. Are you doing something wrong in Queensland since your election? What are you doing wrong? And how can you fix it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, we're focused on delivering for Queenslanders. And one of the things, Michael, we're going to deliver, is lower electricity prices.
PRESENTER: 
You finished?
PRIME MINISTER:
I have.
PRESENTER:
That's the shortest answer we’ve had all day. Congratulations!
We really appreciate you coming up to Queensland yet again. Ladies and gentlemen, please thank the Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much. Thank you.


PRIME MINISTER: 
Thanks Nigel, where’s Ronald? There he is, you were very kind. Ronald was very kind, he said that he thought that my remarks in language at the airport clearly were from a language group ‘distantly connected’ to Warumungu.
[Laughter]
I'm exaggerating, he was very kind. I want to thank your father for his help. I just want to say, this has been a bit of a whirlwind visit today and I know we’ve got a lot more to do tomorrow. But going to the Language Centre was fantastic. Going to the Rehabilitation Centre was fantastic, going to see Karen. You and your brother do an amazing job there and I just want to thank all of the cooks, all of the cooks and the servers. Anita thank you so much. We had a great discussion with you and all your team there.
Look, it’s been a very, very important visit for me. I’m here, as you know with Nigel and Dan Tehan, with the Chief Minister Michael Gunner and Gerry – where’s Michael, he’s here somewhere - and with Dale. The object is to listen, but to listen with respect and with keen attention. That's why I take lots of notes. A lot of very, very important messages have come across. The housing problem in Tennant Creek, or lack of housing, is clearly, that’s the single biggest issue that's been described in every encounter we've had, whether it's in a group or whether it's in a quiet chat one on one. That's a huge priority.
Generally I think there is a big opportunity for us to take the advice from the Cultural Authority Group – and Glenys thank you so much for your address at the outset, very eloquent - to take that advice, which is that we need to work together more effectively.
Now one of the innovations that I've brought in to the Federal Government since I became Prime Minister a few years back, is to set up what we’ve called City Deals. We’ve been rolling them out from one centre to another, Launceston, Townsville, Western Sydney, Geelong will be one, it’s under negotiation, Hobart, we were talking to Michael about Darwin. But the concept doesn't have to be limited. This is what the concept is and this is not just a concept, this is practice, this is actually happening now. Fiona and I, Fiona has gone I think to get the night patrol organised, but we were just talking about how well it's going in Launceston in Tasmania.
What we do is, get, in a given area, get the Federal Government, State Government or Territory Government, local government and other important stakeholders, which will be obviously the Aboriginal corporations here, the Cultural Authority Group for example, in Launceston for example, the University of  Tasmania is a party to that. You sit down and you say; “Right, what is it that we want to do? Let’s work out what our agenda is.” Then you make sure that having agreed on what the plan is - it might relate to housing, it might relate to economic growth or relate to educational issues -  you agree on that and then you make sure that everybody is working together and pulling in the same direction. Because you see all too often that different levels of government have got the same good intentions and they're often generally moving in the same direction, but they can be a bit like ships passing in the night. There's not enough coordination, so that's what the big idea was. It is working successfully where we've set it up.
But you know, amidst all of the challenges and difficulties that Tennant Creek has had, you’ve got some great strengths, strong culture above all. You've got some terrific economic opportunities. You’ve got a great local council, local government and congratulations to the Barkly Shire - is that the right term? The Barkly Regional Council. Your worship, congratulations.
But clearly, I mean you and your team, who we met this morning and we met earlier in Canberra of course, you've got a real vision for the region.  You’ve got an understanding there, you've got a very keen local member of the state parliament, you’ve got Nigel and Jacinta was here earlier. She's headed back to Alice. You've got strong local leadership at every level of government.
I think this is a, you know, Barkly region is an area where we should be looking at – you couldn’t call it a City Deal obviously – but a ‘Regional Deal’ where we actually make sure that we sit down and take the advice, Glenys, that you were giving us on behalf of your Cultural Authority Group, that we have to work together and get everybody involved. That was your punch line of your speech which I took careful note of as you know. So I think that's very good advice.
Anyway I'm looking forward to discussing that further while I'm here and later, but think about that. How we can work, really, more seamlessly together, agree on what we want to achieve. When I say that, it’s ultimately a decision that will have to be taken by local people. But in other words, you work out what you want to achieve, we work out how we can support it and then make sure that the three levels of government work together. It does oblige you, it obliges everyone to focus on what their priorities are, because we obviously can't do everything. But I think having done that, it's a great opportunity for further cooperation.
So thank you very much, I just thank you very much for dinner again. I know we're going to go out with the night patrol shortly, but I really want to thank you for the very, very warm welcome and thank you also for sharing some of for your culture and your language with me, I am fascinated by language and languages. I’ve got my textbook. Now the first word of your Centre, that means ‘house’ doesn't it? Does that mean ‘house’? Yeah, good, see? I picked up another word, I figured that out, good.
But thank you so much. I look forward to learning some more Warumungu and next time I’m here maybe it’ll be more recognisable as a part of the language, as opposed to a ‘variation’.
So thank you all very much, it’s been wonderful to be here. Thank you for the warm welcome you’ve shown to me and all of the party that have been travelling with us for these couple of days.
[Applause]
[ENDS]


I want to thank you so much for the very warm welcome and thank you for sharing your language with me. It is one of the greatest treasures of all of humanity. The extraordinary diversity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander languages right across our country.
I want to acknowledge the past and present traditional owners of this land. I want to thank you the Warumungu people. It's a great privilege to be standing here on your country.
I want to acknowledge my colleague Nigel Scullion the Minister of Indigenous Affairs and Dan Tehan, Minister for Social Services. The Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, Michael Gunner, I want to thank him for joining us here. Also Gerry McCarthy the Member for Barkly and the Northern Territory Minister for Housing and Community Development. Also Steve Edgington the Mayor of the Barkly Regional Council and Steve Moore, the CEO of the Barkly Regional Council and of course Jacinta our LNP – CLP, I should say, candidate. Wonderful to be here with you.
When the delegation from the Barkly Regional Council came to see me in Canberra, we discussed the need for a positive social and economic plan to build a better future for local residents. To make this a reality all three levels of government need to come together. And I'm pleased the Chief Minister has been able to join us on this trip.
We have to map the pathways to reduce harm to children and to set the framework for greater economic development for the Barkly region. The Territory Government has primary responsibility for the support services on the ground including Operation Haven. It is important to see what further work needs to be done better to coordinate services.
So my trip here is about listening to people's experiences, taking lots of notes as you know I do to inform a path forward. In partnership with this community, the Territory government and of course local government.
It is great to be here today. I know Tennant Creek has had its challenges in recent times and I know that you’re facing these challenges head on with great courage, leadership and collaboration and that working together with three levels of government and working together with the Warumungu people and all the Indigenous people here in Tennant Creek in this region is what we need to do.
We have to be working with First Australians, you have to be doing things with First Australians rather than doing things to them. It's a fundamental change and that's why I am here to listen.
So I am looking forward to hearing your vision for the future of Tennant Creek and the Barkly region sharing with you, your ideas and aspirations for making this a thriving community.
It's our job to listen to you and ensure that we can help you achieve your dreams. Thank you very much for the very warm welcome.
[ENDS]


Well thank you very much Dwayne, it’s great to be here with you all. Great to be here with Brett Whiteley, the only candidate who can deliver for Braddon.
It’s good to be here with Richard Colbeck and Guy Barnett and so many leaders with a real sense of confidence and drive, optimism and enthusiasm here in the North West.
As you know, my Government is building a stronger economy with more jobs and more investment. And we can only do that thanks to your hard work and your spirit of enterprise.
This is a crucial time here in the North West and a big choice on Saturday - a vote for Brett Whiteley is a vote for a stronger economy and more jobs. It’s a vote for lower taxes, it’s a vote for more opportunity.
A vote for any other candidate is a vote for higher taxes, fewer jobs and a weaker economy and only a strong economy can deliver the revenues to government to enable us to bring the budget back into balance a year earlier and only a stronger economy can deliver the revenues to enable us to spend more on essential services like hospitals, healthcare, education and infrastructure.
Now Brett will be a member of the Government if he’s elected – he’ll be able to get things done from the very word go. He’ll be able to deliver for Braddon and for Tasmania in a way that no other candidate can.
You know you’ve got strong jobs growth here at the moment, it’s terrific. I’ve been coming to Tasmania for well over 30 years and I have never seen as much optimism as there is at the moment. It’s something, it’s a momentum that is being delivered by strong Liberal leadership at the state level by Will Hodgman and his team including Guy of course, it’s being supported by us in Canberra and what that means if you’ve got business responding by doing what it does best, investing and employing.
There were 2,100 new jobs were created in Tasmania in the month of June, and we want that to continue. It was actually the strongest in percentage terms in the whole nation last month.
Now two years ago, you were facing low commodity prices and uncertain times. But the resilience of miners should never be underestimated. You have to be very optimistic to be in the mining business as I know.
Tasmania is the quiet achiever of mining exports. You have one of the most highly and diversely mineralised areas in the world, with significant mineral deposits in tin, tungsten, zinc, copper, gold, silver, silica, lead and iron.
Mining and metals processing is the State’s largest goods export industry worth $1.8 billion. Your exports over the past year grew 26 per cent and exports of non-iron metals grew almost 50 per cent last year with the two biggest exports being processed zinc and aluminium.
And vitally for the people of Tasmania, particularly here in the north-west, there are over 4,000 direct and 10,000 indirect jobs associated with mining.
I had the pleasure of seeing that resilience up in Zeehan earlier this month where the Avebury nickel mine was restarted, that will deliver 200 more jobs including new apprentices and Brett and I met with Will a number of those new apprentices there.
So to borrow the theme of your conference: that is what good looks like.
Now miners are renowned for your independent streak. Miners are famous for that, famous for the optimism and resilience because as we all know and I’ve been involved in the mining business myself in the past, you’re never entirely sure what an ore body looks like or what it’s going to turn out like until you’ve actually mined it.
So, you have to be prepared to take on challenging circumstances and unexpected environments. But above all you get on with the job.
My job as Prime Minister is to provide policies that let you get on with doing what you do best. That’s why we are providing tax relief for business and for individual taxpayers.
We’ve already delivered the biggest personal income tax reforms in a generation in the last sittings of the Parliament and we’ve already delivered corporate tax relief for businesses with turnovers up to $50 million and we want to make all of our businesses in Australia competitive with the lower tax rates that are applying around the world.
Let’s look at what we’ve done already.
8,723 small and medium businesses in Braddon are paying less tax thanks to our policies – 48,000 across Tasmania. They’re family businesses overwhelmingly. Labor wants them to pay more tax. Every single one of them.
There are 39,300 individual taxpayers in Braddon who will receive our personal income tax relief this year, this current financial year - with around 14,600 receiving the full $530. And as you know, over the whole stretch of our personal income tax reform when it’s fully rolled out by 2024, there will be a situation where 94 per cent of Australians do not have to pay more than 32.5 cents in any extra dollar they earn.
Now that is a massive reform, that is providing a real incentive that’s ensuring, as I said 94 per cent of Australians will not pay more than 32.5 cents in any extra dollar they earn. That’s a massive reform, that’s the type of reform that people have called for for years and we’re able to deliver it and at the same time bring the budget back into balance a year earlier because of a strong economy.
That’s the big difference between the government I lead and the Labor party under Bill Shorten who is waging a war on business. He’s waging a war on enterprise, which is why his recipe is one of higher taxes, less investment, fewer jobs and lower wages.
Now as I noted at the Avebury mine, overall trade has increased across the whole nation by just under 15 per cent as in exports. Now that's strong growth. Now why is that?
Most of that trade growth is going to the countries with which our Government has signed free trade agreements: in the last few years, China, Korea, Japan, obviously the United States in years past under John Howard’s leadership.
And we’ve committed to delivering more free trade deals. That's why we got the Trans-Pacific Partnership done.
Now you may remember the Trans-Pacific Partnership was a huge, 12 nation free trade deal that had been led in large part by the US under President Obama. And when President Trump was elected he said he decided to pull out.  Well a lot of people thought the deal was dead. A lot did. I would say the overwhelming majority. Now John Key then the Prime Minister of New Zealand and I are not quitters. We were not going to give up on a deal that would create jobs in Australia or in his case in New Zealand.
Some people said we were flogging a dead horse. Well we thought, well if the horse is dead it won’t mind the flogging so we might as well get on with it.
Now one of the people who wanted me to give up was Bill Shorten. Can you believe that? Supposed to be the worker’s friend and the worker’s defender. He accused me of engaging in a vanity project. He said I was delusional and he that I should give it away. Why would you ever give up on Australian jobs? I will never give up on Australian jobs. I will never give up on the chance to expand the export opportunities for Australian business and the employment opportunities, the business opportunities for Australians. So, we didn’t give up and we’ve got the TPP-11 signed.
And at some point in the future we hope the US re-enters as indeed many businesspeople around the US agree.
So we’re relentless in pursuing those trade opportunities, providing incentives to exporters alongside the benefits that come from our business tax cuts.
We know that business needs to be able to reinvest its earnings. Because that is how businesses – small, medium or large – grow and create the jobs.
So our investments in lower energy prices and energy security are equally important. Harnessing this state’s enormous potential in wind and hydro power.
Tasmania truly can become the battery for the nation. There is so much opportunity for further investment in hydro electricity. I am an enthusiast in this area as you all know. Not only can Tasmania become a battery to keep the lights on in mainland Australia and keep electricity prices down. But the opportunity to create more jobs and more industry and more affordable power in Tasmanians is enormous.
Will and I have had many, many discussions about this and we are on a real unity ticket.
With a Liberal Government in Tasmania and a Liberal National Coalition Government in Canberra, working together, we’ll make this a reality.
Growing hydro power will ensure reliable and affordable energy, create new job opportunities for Tasmanians and a stronger economy for the state. And it will bring power bills down.
Through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency and with Hydro Tasmania, we have identified 14 sites across eight lakes with 'high potential' and a potential combined capacity of 4,800 megawatts. Early modelling shows, if developed, the construction of the pumped hydro sites would create up to $5 billion of investment and around 3,000 jobs in regional Tasmania over 10 to 15 years. Community consultation has already begun around those sites as planning work continues.
In addition a $5 million full feasibility study to assess the viability to expand Tarraleah from 104 megawatts to 220 megawatts is underway.
And TasNetworks and ARENA are developing the feasibility study into a business case for a second interconnector that builds on the work by Hydro Tasmania.
Our National Energy Guarantee, designed by the independent and expert Energy Security Board, is forecast to reduce wholesale prices over the decade 2020-2030 by more than 20 per cent and contribute $150 to more than $550 reduction of average household power bills in that period.
Now the Guarantee is geared to ensure emissions reduce by at least 26 per cent in accordance with our Paris commitments. Critics in the Labor and the Greens have said that it should have a higher emissions reduction target - in other words force the introduction of more renewables. But in the same breath they say renewables are cheaper - and there is plenty of evidence to support that contention.
But if renewables are cheaper than coal or gas, a technology-agnostic, level-playing field, which is focussed on delivering cheaper energy, will see more renewables - and you know what - the cheaper the renewables are, the more of them there will be.
So the renewables fans should have the courage of their convictions, we do not need, any longer, to subsidise one technology generation over another, let’s focus laser like on the customer, whether it is a business customer or a family and deliver cheaper electricity. That’s what our goal is, cheaper electricity.
We’ve already seen big reductions in wholesale generation costs as a consequence of our policies. We’re starting to see retail prices coming down but there’s a lot further to go and as you can see from the work of the Energy Security Board or indeed the work from the ACCC released a couple of weeks ago, there is real potential with the right policy settings to bring energy prices down.
That is my goal, cheaper electricity.
And for those who say my Government is anti-renewables - well I have spoken about hydro in Tasmanian, but in addition Snowy Hydro 2.0 in New South Wales which is our project, our plan, our investment is the single largest renewable project in the country and will itself make reliable thousands of megawatts of intermittent wind and solar.
So, we are not pro or anti any technology. We’re not. We are pro customer, we are pro Australian families and Australian businesses. We are pro lower prices, that’s what all this is about, cheaper electricity and all of the analysis shows that’s what our policies are delivering now and into the future.
Now you know better than most how important it is for government to invest in infrastructure.
That’s why in our most recent budget, we made available $400 million for a Tasmanian Roads Package through our Roads of Strategic Importance.
$60 million of that funding will be spent on the Bass Highway between Wynyard and Marrawah which as you know is a very important section of that highway. In conjunction with the $40 million contribution from Will Hodgman’s Liberal Government, that means a total of $100 million will be invested on that section of the road.
And just to be clear, this is not a promise, it is not an election pledge – it is real money, it’s committed.
We are also going to upgrade the Murchison Highway, with a $10 million dollar investment.
As you know how important the Murchison Highway is particular in this room, key freight and passenger route connecting the West and North-West regions of Tasmania and is critical for the movement of mining product to Burnie Port for export, as well as other locations within Tasmania.
You have seen the leadership that Will has provided here in Tasmania, working with our Government in Canberra. That is why, we’re working so hard to get Brett Whiteley back to Canberra to keep delivering for this region.
Our opponents have no plan for Tasmania - no plan for jobs or a strong economy. In fact - they are running around making spending promises they simply can’t deliver because they are in opposition.
The gap between us and the Labor party has never been greater.
Labor has become a party of grievance. Anti-business party of grievance. We are the party of aspiration. We are the party that supports more jobs, higher wages, more investment, more export opportunities and a stronger economy that flows from all that which of course means you have the revenues to spend more money on health, schools, roads and national security.
Everything is made possible by a stronger economy.
So we want everyone, we encourage everyone here in Braddon to support Brett Whiteley so we can keep fighting to make Tasmania even stronger an even better place to live.
Brett is the only candidate that can deliver for Braddon.
We’re a great team, our government and Will Hodgman’s government.
Coupled with your enterprise, your optimism your commitment we can keep building a stronger economy here in Tasmania a stronger economy right around the nation. Thank you for your hard work and your optimism I wish you all the best for this conference and for all your endeavours.


PRIME MINISTER:
Welcome everybody. It's great to see so many industry leaders here alongside the Government's cyber security advisers. It’s good to be here with my parliamentary colleagues, Gai Brodtmann was acknowledged but of course the Minister for Home Affairs, the Minister for Defence, the Minister for Law Enforcement and Cyber Security.
The number one priority for my government and indeed for every government is the safety and security of the nation. In 2016, I committed to improve Australia's cyber resilience and make all Australians safer online. And we're doing that through our landmark Cyber Security Strategy.
Today's opening of the Australian Cyber Security Centre in this custom-built, custom-designed building, with a classified and unclassified section, is designed to enable the Cyber Security Centre to reach out to and engage with the private sector, with industry. Critically important, it’s a milestone in the implementation of our strategy.
It represents our commitment to the online safety of all Australian families and businesses. And it fulfils the core principle of our strategy; genuine government and industry collaboration. By working together, government, law enforcement and industry partners strengthen our nation's cyber resilience right across our economy. It’s critical in a world where new threats are always emerging.
Since the release of the 2016 Cyber Security Strategy, the cyber threat landscape has shifted and evolved dramatically. I want to take this opportunity today to update and inform all Australians on the magnitude of the threat we face and the Government's response.
Criminal networks and malicious foreign actors are using increasingly sophisticated technology to steal our intellectual property and interfere with our institutions. Attempted attacks are occurring every day. Billions of cyber events orchestrated by criminal, and indeed nation state actors are aiming at the very heart of the Australian Government, business and our public life. It is a global threat. Nation states are among the worst and most consistent offenders, persistently targeting Australian institutions across government and business.
Since 2016, ransomware attacks like WannaCry have targeted critical infrastructure systems, including hospitals.
Thirty three Australian universities were targeted by an Iran-based spear-phishing campaign as part of a sophisticated attempt to steal intellectual property and academic research.
Russian-backed hackers successfully infiltrated western political institutions in a bid to influence elections.
And cyber criminals continue to target the bank balances and personal data of some of the most vulnerable members of our community.
Now the impacts of this hostile cyber activity are reported almost daily. Recent estimates suggest the global cost of cybercrime is around $600 billion this year. In Australia, the estimated cost to business and individuals is $7 billion.
At the same time there has been a rapid growth in the number of connected devices in our homes and businesses.
As I said when I launched our Cyber Strategy two years ago, the Internet is the most transformative piece of infrastructure ever created. It has changed the world, it has changed history and indeed, it's changed us. You only have to walk down a street and see people glued to their smartphone and you can see that everyone is becoming part machine because of the ubiquitous nature of the Internet. It’s transformed the way we learn, it’s transformed the way we remember and it also raises the question of how will we forget?
The average Australian household now has over 17 devices connected to the Internet and download volume has increased by around 43 percent between 2016 and 2017.
Now, at its genesis the internet was built as an open system and security was very much an afterthought.
The challenge we face is this; the same qualities that enable us to freely harness cyber space for our prosperity, education and commerce, can also provide an avenue for those who wish to do us harm.
The Internet of Things - this is where every device is connected to the Internet, where so much of our lives will be determined and protected by sensors – this Internet of Things has the potential to bring enormous economic opportunity. But it also means that cyber criminals have more ways to attack us where we are most vulnerable. Those vulnerabilities are compounded by a lack of cyber awareness across a range of industries and even government agencies, on the importance of implementing basic cyber-hygiene practices.
Things have improved somewhat, but I remember when we founded Ozemail many years ago, which was the first probably, or the first big Internet service provider in Australia, and we constantly tried to remind our customers of the importance of security. You’d be amazed how many people’s passwords were “password”, or “computer” or “Internet”.
[Laughter]
Some of the more sophisticated ones nominated their dog’s names. Dogs have very common names.
It’s amazing how many devices connected to the Internet have a username of “admin” and a password of “0000”. In other words, the default has not been changed. So there's a lot of really basic hygiene and I want to acknowledge the Australian Signals Directorate and the great work they’ve done, together with the Cyber Security Centre, in really reminding people of very basic things they can do to make their systems safer.
Now all of this, increasing cyber attacks, has the hallmarks of, you could say, a perfect cyber storm. But we must not and will not wait for a catastrophic cyber incident before we act to prevent future attacks.
The warnings from our agencies on the threat are very stark. We have to strengthen our defences. We must strengthen our cooperation, which is why we're all here today. We can and we do successfully repel many of the phishing, malware and denial of service attacks against government and business. But we don't stop them all.
Our investment here today is a signal of our intent. There is no room for ‘set and forget’ when it comes to our national security. And as the threats evolve, so must our response.
One successful cyber attack is one too many. We have to present a strong and united forward defence and malicious cyber criminals and foreign actors, states, foreign states, must know that there will be consequences for targeting Australia. They should think again.
We will always work with our allies and partners to shine a light on malicious activities and call them out publicly. We will always deliver the reform and the investment required to ensure that our agencies are working in lockstep with business and the community.
Now we've already established the Department of Home Affairs to strengthen our domestic national security.
We passed legislation to make the Australian Signals Directorate an independent agency.
We've launched the joint Cyber Security Centres in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth to protect critical infrastructure against malicious cyber activity.
And this dedicated Cyber Security Centre will lead and coordinate responses to serious cyber incidents.
Just two nights ago at 3:00am, we saw a great example of the centre's ability to deliver early warning at speed. The team received information about a risk to computer chips manufactured by Intel, the world’s largest chip manufacturer. A new rapid response capability swung into action, providing organisations with the information they needed to prevent their systems being compromised. Within ten minutes the Australian Cyber Security Centre had notified government agencies and critical infrastructure providers around the country. Indeed, this type of rapid response is a regular occurrence for this ACSC. 
Since I put in place the National Cyber Security Strategy the ACSC has responded to over 14,000 incidents at a rate of more than 16 a day. So the new centre here brings together our Government’s operational cyber security capabilities in one location, to share threat information and expertise to combat expanding cyber security threats.
The ACSC will also develop a new digital platform - cyber.gov.au - giving Australians a coordinated end-to-end advice reporting and response capability. This trusted source of cyber security will be more interactive than current sites, particularly when lodging reports of an incident or a scam.
Cyber.gov.au will consolidate existing incident reporting mechanisms for businesses and individuals and provide actionable intelligence for responders. The Centre will be constantly alert, monitoring the online environment as we were just shown, 24 hours a day. Critically for the first time, our intelligence and law enforcement agencies will be co-located with industry partners in this shared state of the art facility.
My vision for this Centre is to see programmers, cyber analysts, business advisors, policy officials from states and territories working side by side towards a common goal; cyber resilience across the country. The Centre will help us to collaborate and find joint solutions to the most complex cyber security challenges now and into the future.
Gone are the days of information silos, ignoring threats and withholding news of system compromises from the people it affects.
We - and by that I mean government and industry - have a shared responsibility to build resilience, transparency and trust into our online systems. We have to work together if we’re to shift the dial against malicious cyber activity towards zero, or to at least become resilient to them.
So I want to commend those organisations which are already committed to this shared responsibility particularly through the Notifiable Data Breach Scheme. Since the Scheme began in February, we've received over 300 data breach notifications with more than half of those breaches resulting from malicious or criminal cyber activity. The scheme encourages a stronger standard of personal information security in Australia, which is a cornerstone of trust in our online systems.
Trust in the systems that underpin our digital economy are the key to future innovation. So this new facility will drive cyber resilience - absolutely critical - so that we can realise all of the promise of prosperity and opportunity in the digital age.
The cyber sphere cannot be a lawless zone. The rule of law must apply there, as it does offline. We must ensure that we use all of our ingenuity, all of our innovation, all of our ability to collaborate with others to ensure that we keep Australians safe online and this Centre is a very bold step towards achieving that goal.
Thank you very much.


